=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sanghyun Kim
CreationDate: D:20240624172924+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.2.20857
ModDate: D:20240624172924+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.2.20857
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
15 – 18 July 2024
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea
Provisional agenda item 10 24 June 2024
Consideration of funding proposals -
Addendum X
Funding proposal package for FP235
Summary
This addendum contains the following seven parts:
a) A funding proposal titled “Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community
Partnerships for Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador”;
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
’
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
’
d) Secretariats assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panels assessment;
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 3
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 100
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 102
Secretariat’s assessment 106
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 121
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 128
assessment
Gender documentation 131

=== PAGE 3 ===
Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community
Project/Programme title:
Partnerships for Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador
Country(ies): Ecuador
Accredited Entity: Conservation International Foundation
Date of first submission: 2023/05/01
Date of current submission 2024/06/05
Version number V.12

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMMESUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
 | Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template | 
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4. |  | 

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AAE Asesoramiento Ambiental Estratégico
AGB Aboveground biomass
ASC Aquaculture Stewardship Council
ASOTEP Asociación de Terminales Portuarios Privados del Ecuador (Association of
Private Port Terminals of Ecuador)
AUSCEM Acuerdos para el Uso Sostenible y Custodia del Manglar (Agreements for
Sustainable Use and Custody of the Mangrove Ecosystem)
BGB Belowground biomass
BUR Biennial Update Report
CAF Corporación Andina de Fomento (Andean Development Corporation)
CBD Convention on Biological Diversity
CI Conservation International Foundation
CI-E Conservation International’s Ecuador country program
CIIFEN Centro Internacional para la Investigación del Fenómeno de El Niño
(International Research Centre for El Niño Phenomenon)
CITES Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora
CLIRSEN Centro de Levantamientos Integrados de Recursos Naturales por
Sensores Remotos (Center for Integrated Survey of Natural Resources by
Remote Sensing)
COA Código Orgánico del Ambiente (Organic Environmental Code)
CSS Climate Smart Shrimp
dbh Diameter at Breast Height
DW Deadwood
EFU Estuary Field Unit
ENF Evaluación Nacional Forestal (National Forest Inventory)
ENSO El Niño-Southern Oscillation
ERU Emissions Reductions Unit
ESL Extreme Sea Level
FIAS Fondo de Inversión Ambiental Sostenible (Sustainable Environmental
Investment Fund)
FPIC Free, Prior and Informed Consent
FREL Forest Reference Emissions Level

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
AAE | Asesoramiento Ambiental Estratégico
AGB | Aboveground biomass
ASC | Aquaculture Stewardship Council
ASOTEP | Asociación de Terminales Portuarios Privados del Ecuador (Association of
Private Port Terminals of Ecuador)
AUSCEM | Acuerdos para el Uso Sostenible y Custodia del Manglar (Agreements for
Sustainable Use and Custody of the Mangrove Ecosystem)
BGB | Belowground biomass
BUR | Biennial Update Report
CAF | Corporación Andina de Fomento (Andean Development Corporation)
CBD | Convention on Biological Diversity
CI | Conservation International Foundation
CI-E | Conservation International’s Ecuador country program
CIIFEN | Centro Internacional para la Investigación del Fenómeno de El Niño
(International Research Centre for El Niño Phenomenon)
CITES | Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora
CLIRSEN | Centro de Levantamientos Integrados de Recursos Naturales por
Sensores Remotos (Center for Integrated Survey of Natural Resources by
Remote Sensing)
COA | Código Orgánico del Ambiente (Organic Environmental Code)
CSS | Climate Smart Shrimp
dbh | Diameter at Breast Height
DW | Deadwood
EFU | Estuary Field Unit
ENF | Evaluación Nacional Forestal (National Forest Inventory)
ENSO | El Niño-Southern Oscillation
ERU | Emissions Reductions Unit
ESL | Extreme Sea Level
FIAS | Fondo de Inversión Ambiental Sostenible (Sustainable Environmental
Investment Fund)
FPIC | Free, Prior and Informed Consent
FREL | Forest Reference Emissions Level

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0
GAD Gobierno Autónomo Descentralizado (Autonomous Decentralized
Government)
GAP Gender Action Plan
GCF Green Climate Fund
GEF Global Environment Facility
GHG Greenhouse gas
GMA Global Mangrove Alliance
INEC Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (National Institute for Statistics
and Census)
INOCAR Instituto Oceanográfico y Antártico de la Armada (Oceanographic Institute
of the Navy)
ITCZ Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone
IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature
KPI Key Performance Indicator
MAATE Ministerio del Ambiente, Agua y Tansición del Ecuador (Ministry of
Environment, Water and Transition of Ecuador)
MTOP Ministerio de Transporte y Obras Públicas (Ministry of Transport and
Public Works)
MRV Monitoring, Reporting and Verification
NAP National Adaptation Plan
NCA National Chamber of Aquaculture
NDA Nationally Designated Authority
NDC Nationally Determined Contributions
NRT Near Real-Time
PA Protected Area(s)
Project Management Unit Project Management Unit
PAN-Manglares Ecuador National Action Plan for the Conservation of the Mangroves of Continental
Ecuador
PAR-Manglares Regional Action Plan for the Conservation of Mangroves in the Southeast
Pacific
PDOT Plan de Desarrollo y Ordenamiento Territorial (Development and Land
Use Plan)
PECC Programa Ecuador Carbono Cero (Ecuador Zero Carbon Program)
PUCESE Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador Sede Esmeraldas (Pontifical
Catholic University of Ecuador Esmeraldas Extension)
RBP Results Based Program

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
GAD | Gobierno Autónomo Descentralizado (Autonomous Decentralized
Government)
GAP | Gender Action Plan
GCF | Green Climate Fund
GEF | Global Environment Facility
GHG | Greenhouse gas
GMA | Global Mangrove Alliance
INEC | Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (National Institute for Statistics
and Census)
INOCAR | Instituto Oceanográfico y Antártico de la Armada (Oceanographic Institute
of the Navy)
ITCZ | Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone
IUCN | International Union for Conservation of Nature
KPI | Key Performance Indicator
MAATE | Ministerio del Ambiente, Agua y Tansición del Ecuador (Ministry of
Environment, Water and Transition of Ecuador)
MTOP | Ministerio de Transporte y Obras Públicas (Ministry of Transport and
Public Works)
MRV | Monitoring, Reporting and Verification
NAP | National Adaptation Plan
NCA | National Chamber of Aquaculture
NDA | Nationally Designated Authority
NDC | Nationally Determined Contributions
NRT | Near Real-Time
PA | Protected Area(s)
Project Management Unit | Project Management Unit
PAN-Manglares Ecuador | National Action Plan for the Conservation of the Mangroves of Continental
Ecuador
PAR-Manglares | Regional Action Plan for the Conservation of Mangroves in the Southeast
Pacific
PDOT | Plan de Desarrollo y Ordenamiento Territorial (Development and Land
Use Plan)
PECC | Programa Ecuador Carbono Cero (Ecuador Zero Carbon Program)
PUCESE | Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador Sede Esmeraldas (Pontifical
Catholic University of Ecuador Esmeraldas Extension)
RBP | Results Based Program

--- Table 2 on Page 6 ---
Ministerio de Transporte y Obras Públicas (Ministry of Transport and
Public Works)

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0
RCP Representative Concentration Pathway
RE Reserva Ecológica (Ecological Reserve)
REM REDD Early Movers
RPF Reserva de Producción de Flora y Fauna (Flora and Fauna Production
Reserve)
RVS Reserva de Vida Silvestre (Wildlife Refuge)
REDD+ Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and
fostering conservation, sustainable management of forests, and
enhancement of forest carbon stocks
SATA Sistema de Alerta Temprana Ambiental
SBP Programa Socio Bosque (Forest Partner Incentive Program)
SC Steering Committee
SDG Sustainable Development Goals
SGMC Subsecretaría de Gestión Marina y Costera (Undersecretariat of Marine
and Coastal Management)
SLR Sea Level Rise
SM Socio Manglar (Mangrove Partner)
SNGR Servicio Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos y Emergencias (National Service
for Risk Management and Emergencies)
SOC Soil Organic Carbon
SOF Althelia Sustainable Ocean Fund
SPA South Pacific Anticyclone
SSP Sustainable Shrimp Partnership
SUIA Sistema Único de Información Ambiental (Unique Environmental
Information System)
TULSMA Texto Unificado de Legislación Secundaria Ambiental (Unified Text of
Secondary Enviornmental Legislation)
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UOCV Unidades Operativas de Control y Vigilancia (Operational Units for Control
and Surveillance)
VMAP Viceministerio de Acuacultura y Pesca (Viceministry for Aquaculture and
Fisheries)
WB World Bank
WRI World Resources Institute

--- Table 1 on Page 7 ---
RCP | Representative Concentration Pathway
RE | Reserva Ecológica (Ecological Reserve)
REM | REDD Early Movers
RPF | Reserva de Producción de Flora y Fauna (Flora and Fauna Production
Reserve)
RVS | Reserva de Vida Silvestre (Wildlife Refuge)
REDD+ | Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and
fostering conservation, sustainable management of forests, and
enhancement of forest carbon stocks
SATA | Sistema de Alerta Temprana Ambiental
SBP | Programa Socio Bosque (Forest Partner Incentive Program)
SC | Steering Committee
SDG | Sustainable Development Goals
SGMC | Subsecretaría de Gestión Marina y Costera (Undersecretariat of Marine
and Coastal Management)
SLR | Sea Level Rise
SM | Socio Manglar (Mangrove Partner)
SNGR | Servicio Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos y Emergencias (National Service
for Risk Management and Emergencies)
SOC | Soil Organic Carbon
SOF | Althelia Sustainable Ocean Fund
SPA | South Pacific Anticyclone
SSP | Sustainable Shrimp Partnership
SUIA | Sistema Único de Información Ambiental (Unique Environmental
Information System)
TULSMA | Texto Unificado de Legislación Secundaria Ambiental (Unified Text of
Secondary Enviornmental Legislation)
UNCCD | United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNDP | United Nations Development Programme
UNFCCC | United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UOCV | Unidades Operativas de Control y Vigilancia (Operational Units for Control
and Surveillance)
VMAP | Viceministerio de Acuacultura y Pesca (Viceministry for Aquaculture and
Fisheries)
WB | World Bank
WRI | World Resources Institute

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1
A
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.1. Project or A.2. Public or
Project Public
programme private sector
A.3. Request for
Not applicable
Proposals (RFP)
GCF Co-financers’
contribution contribution1
Mitigation total
☐
Energy generation and access
Low-emission transport
A.4. Result area(s) ☐
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances
☐
☒ Forestry and land use 41 % 100 %
Adaptation total
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities 29.5 %
Health and well-being, and food and water security
☐
Infrastructure and built environment
☐
☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services 29.5 %
Indicate total number of direct and
indirect beneficiaries
A.6. Expected
A ou .5 t . c E om xp e e cted mitigation o 4 v , e 6 r 0 9 2 , 0 4 - 7 y 0 e a t r C p O r 2 o e j ect a o d u a tc p o ta m ti e o n 8 b 9 e , n 6 e 0 f 0 ic i d a i r r i e e c s t 3 i b n . e d 4 n i r m e e f c i ic l t li i o a n ri es
(Core indicator 1: GHG
lifespan2; 732,111 tCO
2
e
emissions reduced, avoided or by the end of the (Core indicator 2: 1.8% of 44.7% of coastal
implementation period. direct and indirect population of
removed / sequestered) provinces; 20.1%
beneficiaries reached) coastal
Ecuador’s
provinces; 0.6 %
population
of Ecuador’s
population
A.7. Total financing (GCF
$45.9 million USD
+ co-finance3)
A.9. Project size Small (Upto USD 50 million)
A.8. Total GCF funding $36.4 million USD
requested
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF
contribution (i.e., GCF financial resourc es requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the
funding proposal.
2 The total lifespan of the project/programme is defined as the maximum number of years over which the outcomes of the investment are
expected to be effective. This is different from the project/programme implementation period.
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

--- Table 1 on Page 8 ---
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or
programme | Project | A.2. Public or
private sector | Public | 
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP) | Not applicable |  |  | 
A.4. Result area(s) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | GCF
contribution | Co-financers’
contribution1
 | Mitigation total |  |  | 
 | ☐
Energy generation and access |  |  | 
 | Low-emission transport
☐ |  |  | 
 | Buildings, cities, industries and appliances
☐ |  |  | 
 | ☒
Forestry and land use |  | 41 % | 100 %
 | Adaptation total |  |  | 
 | ☒
Most vulnerable people and communities |  | 29.5 % | 
 | Health and well-being, and food and water security
☐ |  |  | 
 | Infrastructure and built environment
☐ |  |  | 
 | ☒
Ecosystems and ecosystem services |  | 29.5 % | 
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome
(Core indicator 1: GHG
emissions reduced, avoided or
removed / sequestered) | 4,609,470 tCO e
2
over 20-year project
lifespan2; 732,111 tCO e
2
by the end of the
implementation period. | A.6. Expected
adaptation
outcome
(Core indicator 2:
direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached) | Indicate total number of direct and
indirect beneficiaries | 
 |  |  | 89,600 direct
beneficiaries | 3.4 million
indirect
beneficiaries
 |  |  | 1.8% of
population of
coastal
provinces; 0.6 %
of Ecuador’s
population | 44.7% of coastal
provinces; 20.1%
Ecuador’s
population
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance3) | $45.9 million USD | A.9. Project size | Small (Upto USD 50 million) | 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested | $36.4 million USD |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 8 ---
A.1. Project or
programme

--- Table 3 on Page 8 ---
A.2. Public or
private sector

--- Table 4 on Page 8 ---
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)

--- Table 5 on Page 8 ---
A.6. Expected
adaptation
outcome

(Core indicator 2:
direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached)

--- Table 6 on Page 8 ---
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome

(Core indicator 1: GHG
emissions reduced, avoided or
removed / sequestered)

--- Table 7 on Page 8 ---
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance3)

--- Table 8 on Page 8 ---
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2
A
A.10. Financial ☒
Grant 36.4 million USD
☐
instrument(s) requested Equity
☐
Loan
for the GCF funding
Results-based payment
☐ ☐
Guarantee
A.11. Implementation A.12. Total
6.5 years 20 years
period lifespan
A.13. Expected date of 12/31/2023 A.14. ESS B
AE internal approval category
A.16. Has
A.15. Has this FP been Yes ☒ No Readiness or PPF
☐
submitted as a CN The CN was included within support been Yes ☒ No ☐
before? the application for PPF-009 used to prepare
this FP?
A.18. Is this FP
A.17. Is this FP included
included in the
in the entity work Yes ☒ No Yes 4 No
☐ country
programme?
programme?
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence Yes ☒ No ☐
A.20. Executing Entity
Conservation International Foundation (CI)
information
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
4 Ecuador has not yet prepared a GCF Country Programme, but does have a pipeline of expected projects, in which this project is included.

--- Table 1 on Page 9 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding | ☒
Grant 36.4 million USD
☐
Equity
☐
Loan
Results-based payment
☐ ☐
Guarantee |  | 
A.11. Implementation
period | 6.5 years | A.12. Total
lifespan | 20 years
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval | 12/31/2023 | A.14. ESS
category | B
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before? | Yes ☒ No
☐
The CN was included within
the application for PPF-009 | A.16. Has
Readiness or PPF
support been
used to prepare
this FP? | Yes ☒ No
☐
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme? | Yes ☒ No
☐ | A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country
programme? | Yes 4 No
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  | 
A.20. Executing Entity
information | Conservation International Foundation (CI) |  | 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 9 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding

--- Table 3 on Page 9 ---
A.11. Implementation
period

--- Table 4 on Page 9 ---
A.12. Total
lifespan

--- Table 5 on Page 9 ---
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval

--- Table 6 on Page 9 ---
12/31/2023


--- Table 7 on Page 9 ---
A.14. ESS
category

--- Table 8 on Page 9 ---
A.16. Has
Readiness or PPF
support been
used to prepare
this FP?

--- Table 9 on Page 9 ---
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before?

--- Table 10 on Page 9 ---
Yes ☒ No
☐
The CN was included within
the application for PPF-009

--- Table 11 on Page 9 ---
A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country
programme?

--- Table 12 on Page 9 ---
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme?

--- Table 13 on Page 9 ---
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence

--- Table 14 on Page 9 ---
A.20. Executing Entity
information

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3
A
Impacts of climate change5
Climate change is projected to create unprecedented changes in conditions along Ecuador´s coast, including
increases in sea level, extreme El Niño-Southern Oscillation events, higher intensity and variability of precipitation,
and increased atmospheric temperatures. The combination of these changes is expected to cause significant and
more frequent coastal flooding, which will damage local communities and economic activity. Recent flood events
have caused death, homelessness, increased disease risk and over US$1 billion of damages and economic losses
(EM-DAT, 2021)6. Mangroves serve as natural structural barriers that reduce coastal erosion and provide important
flood-control functions, by dissipating wave energy and storm damage. Current mangrove cover directly provides
flood protection for coastal populations and is estimated to prevent approximately US$250 million in losses annually
from flooding in Ecuador’s coastal region. Conversely, ongoing deforestation of mangroves in proximity to coastal
populations magnifies exposure to climate-related flood risks and other climate impacts. Nearly 25% of Ecuador’s
mangroves have been deforested since 1969 with conversion to shrimp farms as the largest driver. As of 2018,
there were 156,633 hectares (ha) of mangrove remaining in mainland Ecuador, with an average of 990 ha of primary
mangrove forests lost each year.
There are opportunities to consolidate recent mangrove conservation successes and for mangrove restoration that
would strengthen natural flood protection while also providing other ecosystem service co-benefits (especially
supporting artisanal fisheries). Ecuador’s mangroves have been identified as part of the world’s irrecoverable
carbon stock – stores of carbon in nature that are vulnerable to release from human activity but, if lost, could not
be restored by 2050 when the world must reach net-zero emissions to avoid the worst impacts of climate change
(Noon et al., 2021). Protecting these carbon stocks and harnessing the long-term ability of mangroves to sequester
carbon will provide important global climate change mitigation benefits.
Despite recent stabilization of net mangrove coverage, in large part due to one-off restoration efforts during 2008-
2012 and community-based mangrove management, mangrove areas are expected to be a net source of emissions
from lost biomass and soil carbon for decades to come (see Annex 2). This project aims to transform the situation
by coordinating public sector, private sector and community efforts to protect and restore mangroves, thereby
reducing mangrove loss, resulting in a reduction of 4.6 M tCO2e of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions7, and
accelerating Ecuador’s mangrove recovery to maintain and enhance flood protection for 89,600 people8 from
annual flooding risk and enhance the livelihoods of 41,500 people to increase their resiliency.
Proposed interventions
The current paradigm underestimates climate risks and undervalues the ecosystem services provided by
mangroves, augmenting both exposure to climate risk and greenhouse gas emissions. By fully valuing the
adaptation and mitigation benefits of mangrove ecosystems and integrating these into governance and economic
frameworks across Ecuador’s coastal region, the project will shift this paradigm with an innovative approach that
will create public, private and community partnerships to reduce GHG emissions and improve the livelihoods of
some of the country's most vulnerable people.
If local communities are provided with knowledge and resources for mangrove management and livelihoods
development, and if the private sector and government actively collaborate on mangrove protection and restoration,
and the enabling environment for mangrove protection is strengthened, then coverage and quality of mangrove
ecosystems will be increased, resulting in reduced climate change impacts on vulnerable coastal populations,
increased economic resilience, and reduced GHG emissions because healthy and more extensive mangroves
reduce flood impacts and sequester carbon.
By integrating the participation of local communities, private sector businesses, Ministry of Environment, Water and
Ecological Transition (MAATE) and subnational governments, the project will deliver mutually reinforcing, multi-
scale actions across the three project components to address key barriers.
Component 1. Mangrove areas under effective and climate-adapted management increased, including
through community-based management (AUSCEMs) and protected areas (PAs) implementing climate
adaptation plans. This component focuses on engaging local communities to strengthen community management
of mangroves, restore mangroves, increase the area of mangroves under protection by local community
stakeholders, and improve community economic sustainability.
Component 2. The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions
and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for
other coastal populations. This component focuses on engaging the private sector, particularly shrimp
aquaculture, to become transformational agents for change, reversing their previous role as an agent of mangrove

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4
A
loss, by integrating climate-smart production practices to increase climate resilience, reduce pressures for
mangrove deforestation, and restore mangrove ecosystems, as well as catalyzing new sources of financing for
long-term sustainability of mangrove conservation. An endowment of US$4 million is requested from GCF to build
up a dedicated financial mechanism (the recently created Socio Manglar subaccount of the Socio Bosque Fund9)
to provide long-term support to communities managing mangroves through the Agreements for Sustainable Use
and Custody of the Mangrove Ecosystem (AUSCEM) model. The US$4 million will be held in an interest-bearing
account and the interest used to fund community incentive payments. Alongside this, CI and MAATE will seek
additional financial contributions to build up the capital of the investment account of the Socio Manglar subaccount.
These additional contributions for community management of mangroves will be sought from the private sector
during the project as part of innovative Government of Ecuador programs to encourage private investment in climate
and nature conservation initiatives10. The project will promote more sustainable shrimp production methods but will
not invest directly in shrimp farms. Investment on shrimp farms to implement more sustainable production methods
will be financed by the private sector and will not use GCF funds.
Component 3. Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation and
increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies,
coastal management policies, and legal enforcement. This component focuses on creating the enabling
conditions to increase adaptation and mitigation, through improved governance and the generation of timely,
targeted information, which are the scaffolding supporting mangrove conservation, planning, and regulation.
The project will contribute to achieving the GCF’s Strategic Plan (2024-2027) through its impact on the following
four GCF ‘targeted results’ for climate mitigation and adaptation efforts.
1. T1 Readiness (GCF Strategic Priority on Country Programming): National Climate Plan implementation.
Ecuador will be directly supported to advance implementation of its Nationally Determined Contribution
(NDC) as set out in the national NDC implementation plan (which also currently serves as the
implementation plan for the new (2023) National Adaptation Plan regarding adaptation interventions). The
project will support Ecuador’s conditional GHG reduction goals and adaptation goals to increase the cover
of mangrove and expand the use of community-based management of mangroves through AUSCEM. The
project is expected to reduce national GHG emissions by 730,000 tCO2e over the project implementation
period and 4.6 MtCO2e over the project lifespan. The project will strengthen management of 70,000 ha of
mangroves under community management through establishing new areas under management and
strengthening existing ones as part of the Socio Bosque program (SBP)11. Ecuador’s current NDC goal is
to increase the forest area in the SBP by 127,500 ha, including mangroves. As part of strengthening
mangrove management, the project will establish an additional 10 community-held AUSCEMs covering
mangroves, in addition to strengthening the existing 59 community associations with AUSCEM
agreements. (Ecuador’s current NDC goal is to establish 30 new AUSCEM agreements covering mangrove
areas.)
2. T4 Food (GCF Strategic Priority on Food). Mangroves provide a range of ecosystem services that directly
and indirectly contribute to the livelihoods and food security of local people. In addition to the flood
protection services that provide important climate change adaptation benefits, mangroves serve as
important nurseries and breeding grounds for species of fish, shrimp, crabs and clams that support artisanal
and commercial/industrial fisheries. 41,500 people are expected to benefit from low-emission, climate
resilient fisheries management practices that underpin their livelihoods.
3. T5 Ecosystems (GCF Strategic Priority on Ecosystems). The project will contribute to the protection and
sustainable management of 156,633 ha of mangrove ecosystems. This will be achieved through a
combination of increasing the area under community management, strengthening PA planning to integrate
climate change adaptation, improved coastal land-use planning and strengthening the capacity of
government agencies and local government to enforce existing regulations designed to protect mangroves.
5 This section summarizes key information presented in more detail, along with references, in Chapter 2 of Annex 2, the Feasibility Study.
6 Full references for citations in the Fundi ng Proposal Document can be found in Annex 2, the Feasibility Study
7 The 4.6 M tCO2e emissions reductions are projected over the 20-year lifespan of the project. A total of 732,000 tCO2e are projected to be
achieved during the 7-year implementation period.
8 This is the number of people expected to benefit annually from reduced flooding risk due to project interventions (see Annex 25)
9 The Socio Manglar subaccount of the existing Socio Bosque Fund will be used to provide incentive payments to AUSCEM associations
who are part of the Soco Manglar program, which is an extension of the existing Socio Bosque program to promote long-term management
of mangrove areas.
10 Specifically, we are referring to the government’s “Program Zero”/PECC (https://www.ambiente.gob.ec/programa-carbono-cero-se-pone-
en-marcha-en-el-ecuador/) and the “Doble Deducibilidad” Program (https://www.ambiente.gob.ec/beneficio-de-la-doble-deducibilidad/)
11 the project will support the Socio Manglar program, which is the part of the Socio Bosque program focused on mangroves.

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5
A
4. T6 Infrastructure (GCF Strategic Priority infrastructure target). The project adopts a nature-based
solutions approach to infrastructure because mangroves are expected to provide flood protection benefits
that reduce risks of coastal flooding and related damage. The maintenance and improvement of 156,633
ha of mangrove ecosystems will be through conservation, sustainable use and restoration activities.
5. T9 Adaptation and locally-led action (GCF Strategic Priority on Adaptation proposals). The project will
promote locally led adaptation action through community management of mangroves and action by the
private sector to reduce deforestation and support mangrove restoration. The project will also support
locally-led adaptation through the support to land-use planning processes included in Component 3 of the
project.
In addition to the project’s contributions towards advancing national climate change adaption and mitigation plans,
the project will also contribute to the aims of the Global Mangrove Alliance (GMA)12, which brings together a global
community of practitioners to halt mangrove loss, restore lost mangroves and secure mangrove protection. CI is a
founding member along with other international organizations and the project will contribute in two ways to the
GMA’s work:
1. The project will contribute to knowledge sharing through the GMA, especially related to mangrove
restoration and “blue carbon” information. One of the functions of GMA is as a knowledge hub to share
information between practitioners engaged in mangrove conservation and restoration. The mangrove
restoration approach is informed by GMA toolkits and best practice guides. Data collected under activity
3.1.1 will also be shared with the GMA as a matter of course (through the Mangrove Restoration Tracker
Tool and Global Mangrove Watch).
2. The project itself makes an important contribution to the ‘Mangrove Breakthrough’, an initiative launched
by the GMA and the UN Climate Change high level Champions during the UNFCCC COP27. This high-
level initiative aims to secure the future of 15 million ha of mangroves globally (through conservation,
restoration and securing long-term financing of mangrove protection). This project alone represents about
1% of this goal.
12 https://www.mangrovealliance.org/

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6
B
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
B.1.1 Overview of Ecuador’s Coast (further detail and full references for citations are provided in Annex 2, the
Feasibility Study)
1. Ecuador’s complex coastal geography comprises 3,631 km of coastline, which is home to seven million people
and Ecuador’s largest city, Guayaquil. Mangroves extend along 36% of Ecuador’s continental coastlines and
play a central role in sustaining both export-oriented industries and local livelihoods by providing habitat to
commercial fish species and maintaining healthy coastal zones. The coast is where a significant portion of the
nation’s economic output is concentrated, much of which is directly dependent on coastal and marine resources,
especially shrimp and small-scale fisheries.
Figure 1. Ecuador’s coastal region: 5 provinces (with 35 municipalities) and main urban centers and
mangrove areas (in 2018). Data sources: Towns from IGM (2018), provinces boundaries from CONALI
(2016), mangroves from MAAE (2018).

--- Table 1 on Page 13 ---
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
B.1.1 Overview of Ecuador’s Coast (further detail and full references for citations are provided in Annex 2, the
Feasibility Study)
1. Ecuador’s complex coastal geography comprises 3,631 km of coastline, which is home to seven million people
and Ecuador’s largest city, Guayaquil. Mangroves extend along 36% of Ecuador’s continental coastlines and
play a central role in sustaining both export-oriented industries and local livelihoods by providing habitat to
commercial fish species and maintaining healthy coastal zones. The coast is where a significant portion of the
nation’s economic output is concentrated, much of which is directly dependent on coastal and marine resources,
especially shrimp and small-scale fisheries.
Figure 1. Ecuador’s coastal region: 5 provinces (with 35 municipalities) and main urban centers and
mangrove areas (in 2018). Data sources: Towns from IGM (2018), provinces boundaries from CONALI
(2016), mangroves from MAAE (2018).

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7
B
2. Shrimp: Ecuador is the world's second largest exporter of farmed shrimp, with approximately 174,000 ha of
shrimp ponds and annual exports of 1,060,000 MT worth US$6.653 billion (Cámara Nacional de Acuacultura,
2022)13. The volume of exports has more than doubled in the past 10 years. Production is dominated by small
and medium producers who constitute 97% of farms and 76% of the total area (GPS, 2020). Ecuador is
recognized in the market for slightly higher quality shrimp, due in part to lower production intensities, but there
is still substantial room for intensification and modernization. Demand for certified shrimp is strong in the North
American and European markets – while price premiums are not always present, environmental certification is
often seen as a requirement to access these markets.
3. Small scale fisheries: Based on the most detailed national data, there are 28,399 artisanal fishers in Ecuador,
organized into 420 associations (Vice Ministry of Aquaculture and Fisheries (VMAP), 2013), with an estimated
113,596 people directly or indirectly dependent on artisanal fishing14. These fishers have low incomes; in the
Gulf of Guayaquil, 74% of fishers and gatherers earn less than US$400 per month, and 37% have monthly
incomes less than US$200 (Herrera et al., 2017).
B.1.2 Current and projected climate change impacts in the coast of Ecuador (see Annex 2, Feasibility Study
for more information)
4. In the continental coastal region of Ecuador, the climate is strongly influenced by the ocean. During the rainy
season from December to May, the air temperatures are slightly higher due to the warming of the sea
(intensification of the Panama current). The dry season coincides with the intensification of the South Pacific
Anticyclone, which in turn strengthens the Humboldt Current and the cold waters in the region. In the north-
central region, rainfall exceeds 2,000 mm annually, and air temperatures are between 25°C and 39°C. Further
south, the coastal zone is under the influence of the Humboldt Current, so its precipitation values are between
300 and 1,000 mm per year, and the average temperatures are between 24°C and 26°C.
5. Climate change is projected to create significant changes in local environmental conditions along Ecuador's
coast including increases in sea level, increased intensity of El Niño-Southern Oscillation events,
increased intensity and variability of precipitation, and atmospheric temperatures, all of which will affect
Ecuador’s vulnerable populations and economy.
6. By 2100, mean sea level is projected to rise an additional 49-64 cm on Ecuador's coast15. An increase in mean
sea level will also be compounded by increased frequency of extreme sea level (ESL) events (storm surge and
tidal flooding), which are expected to occur annually by mid-century in low-lying coastal areas (IPCC, 2019).
Increases in sea level rise (SLR) and ESL are expected to increase the risks of coastal flooding and
consequently impact rural and urban populations, and aquaculture in coastal areas, especially when
compounded by periodic El Niño events.
7. El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is a phase of a large-scale, recurring climate pattern associated with
above average sea surface temperatures in the eastern Pacific, which contributes to increased sea levels and
extreme rainfall events in Ecuador. El Niño events have already led to observed ocean warming and dramatic
SLR due to seawater expansion (Cai et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2019). During the 1997-98 season, sea surface
temperatures off the coast of Ecuador increased by 5°C above normal and sea level increased up to 42 cm
(CAF, 2000). In the equatorial Pacific region, sea levels can deviate from the global mean sea level by as much
as 40 cm because of El Niño (Walsh et al., 2012). ENSO may be considered a natural climatic driver, and the
effect of climate change on future ENSO dynamics is unclear although rainfall variability is very likely to increase
over the east-central tropical Pacific (IPCC, 2014; 2021). There are indications that extreme El Niño events may
increase in frequency due to climate change (McPhaden et al., 2020).
8. Between 1960 and2016, the average annual precipitation for the coast of Ecuador increased 33% (INAMHI,
from Ministerio del Ambiente del Ecuador, 2017). Some models project significant increases in annual
precipitation for coastal Ecuador (9-10% under RCP 4.5 by 2071-2100). Analysis focused on the Santa Elena
peninsula by García-Garizábal et al. (2017) documented increasing temperatures (0.038ºC/year) and
precipitation (0.196 mm/year) for the period 1982-2011 with modeling (ECHOG A2) predicting increases in
temperature (+2.7ºC) and precipitation (+8,2%) by 2100. Other analyses indicate that while total annual rainfall
is not expected to increase significantly, greater variability is projected, with heavier localized rains (up to 15
more days per year of extreme rainfall events) and periodic dry spells expected to increase (Ministerio del
13 See Annex 2 (Feasibility Study) for references
14 Assuming family size of four people.
15 https://sealevel.nasa.gov/ipcc-ar6-sea-level-projection-tool The SLR range cited is based on projections for scenario SSP2-4.5 (lower
estimate) and SSP3-7.0 (higher estimate).

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8
B
Ambiente de Ecuador, 2019; UNDP, 2013), increasing the risk of flooding and drought (Ministerio del Ambiente
del Ecuador, 2012).
9. From 1960-2016, average temperature for Ecuador´s coast increased 0.6°C, and an increase in atmospheric
temperature of 2.2°C-2.9°C is expected by 2100 under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5, respectively. Though outside the
scope of this project, these temperature increases may affect livelihoods from agricultural activities and increase
health risks in project areas adjacent to or outside of mangroves. This variable is included for reference
purposes but is not directly expected to impact flood risks, which are the climate change adaptation focus of
this project.
10. Analyses conducted for this project by the International Research Center on El Niño (CIIFEN) indicate that
dissolved oxygen, primary production and chlorophyll would have reductions in their values under projected
climate change scenarios (RCP 4.5 and 8.5). The hydrogen potential off the coast of Ecuador would be reduced,
showing signs of possible ocean acidification, which could impact fisheries and associated livelihoods.
Climate-related flooding events in Ecuador
11. Flood risks are a significant concern for Ecuador's coast and in the last 45 years, the coastal provinces have
suffered the highest degree of flooding in the country. Guayas has been the most affected, with more than 100
floods occurring where water levels exceeded the drainage canals designed to convey stormwater runoff and
thus inundated adjacent lands (Secretaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos (SNGR), 2018). Augmented sea
level, coupled with the exceptionally high precipitation and associated with El Niño in coastal Ecuador, limits
the discharge of river systems into the ocean, leading to inland flooding. This results in impacts to drainage
throughout the coastal zone, which are not fully captured in existing coastal and river flooding models. Under
current assessments, 39% of areas within 5 km of Ecuador’s coastline are already at high risk of annual flooding
(SNGR, 2018).
12. Flooding events registered since 1965 on the coast of Ecuador have affected over 1.8 million people and caused
over US$1.5 billion in damages and economic losses, of which 96% occurred during El Niño events (EM-DAT,
2021). During those flooding events, 97,031 people became homeless and 836 people were killed (EM-DAT,
2021; see Figure 6). Those numbers, even if considered the best available, are underestimated as only events
that have impacted more than 100 people, and have killed more than 10 people, are recorded.
13. Historical El Niño events provide a reference point for the scale of future climate-related damages for Ecuador’s
coast. The El Niño event in 2015 generated damage to infrastructure and economic activities associated with
agricultural production. Ecuador’s agricultural losses were estimated at US$3.5 million, with more than 2,000
small- and medium-sized enterprises and 27,000 people affected by landslides and flooding (CIIFEN, 2017).
Limited government preparation and response to previous El Niño events, in areas such as land-use planning,
management, and decision making, are indicative of inadequate adaptive capacity in the face of climate change.
14. Extreme El Niño events, related precipitation variability on regional scales and increases in sea level will likely
intensify (Pachauri et al., 2015). Combined with the expected increase in SLR due to climate change but
unrelated to ENSO events, flooding of coastal areas is expected to increase. Future El Niño events may become
more frequent and more intense (Magrin et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2019; McPhaden et al, 2020), but even an
El Niño of similar magnitude to historical events will affect larger areas and more people as its flooding impacts
are compounded by SLR. These conclusions are based on several models that project flood risks under diverse
future scenarios and assumptions (see Section B 1.6 below).
B.1.3 Mangroves in Ecuador
Mangrove Ecosystem
15. Ninety-eight percent (98%) of Ecuador’s mangroves are concentrated along the shores of four main estuaries
- Cayapas Mataje, Muisne Cojimíes, Guayas and Jambelí (Figure 2), which spread across eight municipalities
within the project area, with over 1,000 ha of mangrove each, in three provinces16. These municipalities are
19 Mangrove management associations (AUSCEM), with 4,556 registered members, are almost exclusively dedicated to fisheries activities
in mangrove areas (Ministerio del Ambien te del Ecuador, 2020). These management associations cover approximately 43% of Ecuador’s
mangroves and do not include unaffiliated ‘independent’ fishers who are not part of these associations, implying that the actual number of
people fishing and gathering shellfish from mangroves is likely more than double the number of registered members in associations
(Zambrano, N. pers. comm.). Total estimated beneficiary numbers are based on 4.04 family members dependent on each of these fishers
(INEC 2010).

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9
B
home to approximately 3.4 million people, with very high rates of poverty17 (see Table 1). Of this total population,
over 2.18 million people live within 5 km of mangroves (Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos - INEC,
202218), with significant vulnerable populations living in poverty (49% of urban population, 95% of rural).
Figure 2. Principal Mangrove Areas of Ecuador. Data sources: Provincial boundaries from CONALI (2016),
mangroves from MAAE (2018).
Table 1. Municipalities of Coastal Ecuador with >1,000 hectares of Mangrove
Province Municipality Estuary Population1 % Poverty2 Mangrove Area 2018 (ha)3
El Oro El Guabo Jambelí 59,536 74% 1,377
El Oro Machala Jambelí 306,309 56% 3,434
El Oro Santa Rosa Jambelí 80,299 56% 10,164
Esmeraldas Eloy Alfaro Cayapas Mataje 46,305 94% 10,454
Esmeraldas Muisne Muisne Cojimíes 36,426 98% 1,507
19 Mangrove management associations (AUSCEM), with 4,556 registered members, are almost exclusively dedicated to fisheries activities
in mangrove areas (Ministerio del Ambien te del Ecuador, 2020). These management associations cover approximately 43% of Ecuador’s
mangroves and do not include unaffiliated ‘independent’ fishers who are not part of these associations, implying that the actual number of
people fishing and gathering shellfish from mangroves is likely more than double the number of registered members in associations
(Zambrano, N. pers. comm.). Total estimated beneficiary numbers are based on 4.04 family members dependent on each of these fishers
(INEC 2010).
19 Mangrove management associations (AUSCEM), with 4,556 registered members, are almost exclusively dedicated to fisheries activities
in mangrove areas (Ministerio del Ambiente del Ecuador, 2020). These management associations cover approximately 43% of Ecuador’s
mangroves and do not include unaffiliated ‘independent’ fishers who are not part of these associations, implying that the actual number of
people fishing and gathering shellfish from mangroves is likely more than double the number of registered members in associations
(Zambrano, N. pers. comm.). Total estimated beneficiary numbers are based on 4.04 family members dependent on each of these fishers
(INEC 2010).

--- Table 1 on Page 16 ---
 | Province |  |  | Municipality |  |  | Estuary |  |  | Population1 |  |  | % Poverty2 |  |  | Mangrove Area 2018 (ha)3 | 
El Oro |  |  | El Guabo |  |  | Jambelí |  |  | 59,536 |  |  | 74% |  |  | 1,377 |  | 
El Oro |  |  | Machala |  |  | Jambelí |  |  | 306,309 |  |  | 56% |  |  | 3,434 |  | 
El Oro |  |  | Santa Rosa |  |  | Jambelí |  |  | 80,299 |  |  | 56% |  |  | 10,164 |  | 
Esmeraldas |  |  | Eloy Alfaro |  |  | Cayapas Mataje |  |  | 46,305 |  |  | 94% |  |  | 10,454 |  | 
Esmeraldas |  |  | Muisne |  |  | Muisne Cojimíes |  |  | 36,426 |  |  | 98% |  |  | 1,507 |  | 

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10
B
Esmeraldas San Lorenzo Cayapas Mataje 48,391 84% 10,296
Guayas Guayaquil Guayas 2,746,403 47% 90,059
Guayas Naranjal Guayas 83,691 74% 22,774
Total 3,407,360 150,065
Sources: 1Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos - INEC. 2022; 2 Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos -
INEC. 2010 3Ministerio del Ambiente del Ecuador 2020
Importance of mangroves for livelihoods of Ecuador’s coastal populations
16. Mangroves provide many valuable ecosystem services that contribute to human well-being, including provision
of timber and fuelwood, breeding and nursery grounds for fisheries and protection from coastal flooding and
erosion. People in these mangrove areas, including both urban and rural dwellers, are highly reliant on fishing
and gathering shellfish. The total population dependent on mangrove fisheries is approximately 42,000 people,
most of whom live in the project area19. This number does not include the larger coastal open-water fisheries
and associated economic activity, which are indirectly dependent on mangroves´ ecological function as critical
nurseries for a variety of economically important fish species. It is estimated that the national market for fish
and seafood products generated by small-scale fisheries is approximately US$200 million per year (Monnier et
al., 2020).
Historical changes to the area of mangrove land cover
17. Mangroves have experienced significant losses in Ecuador, which has resulted in GHG emissions from the
trees’ lost biomass and through the release of soil carbon. The most extensive losses have been linked to the
conversion of the intertidal land to shrimp aquaculture, an industry that was first introduced in 1968 and quickly
led to large scale deforestation. This trend has been consistent over time, and shrimp farms continue to be the
prominent driver of mangrove loss, with shrimp ponds during 2008-2018 accounting for 51% of mangrove loss20
(CIIFEN-MAE, 2020). As of 2018 (the date of the last national forest cover assessment) there were 156,633 ha
of mangrove remaining in the four key estuaries of mainland Ecuador21.
18. Recent years have seen growth in new mangrove areas replacing other land uses, with a total net gain in
mangrove area of 15,258 ha from 2008-2018. Despite gross gains of 15,161 ha in mangrove coverage, there
is also significant ongoing gross loss of mangroves, totaling an area of 9,903 ha lost during 2008-2018, resulting
in the overall 5,258 ha net gain. The ongoing loss of mangroves in these areas is the result of illegal logging of
mangroves (mostly for shrimp ponds but also for agriculture and building), which continues to occur due to weak
application of environmental regulations and poor territorial planning for mangrove conservation by local
governments. Mangroves are one of the nine forest strata included in the Forest Reference Emission Level
(FREL) and referenced in the REDD+ Action Plan.
Community-based management of mangroves and effectiveness for mangrove conservation and
restoration
19. Strengthening community management of mangroves has been an important pillar of Ecuador’s approach to
mangrove conservation for twenty years. Strengthening the capacity of local mangrove users as a strategy for
climate change adaptation has been highlighted by local studies and is an important priority in Ecuador’s climate
change strategies (see D.5).
20. While coastal mangroves are legally public lands, AUSCEM22, first established in 2000, grant traditional
community users formal rights linked to conservation commitments, allowing them to benefit from improved
livelihoods activities and living conditions. These agreements grant use rights and stewardship responsibilities
19 Mangrove management associations (AUSCEM), with 4,556 registered members, are almost exclusively dedicated to fisheries activities
in mangrove areas (Ministerio del Ambien te del Ecuador, 2020). These management associations cover approximately 43% of Ecuador’s
mangroves and do not include unaffiliated ‘independent’ fishers who are not part of these associations, implying that the actual number of
people fishing and gathering shellfish from mangroves is likely more than double the number of registered members in associations
(Zambrano, N. pers. comm.). Total estimated beneficiary numbers are based on 4.04 family members dependent on each of these fishers
(INEC 2010).
20 Data from the more recent 2014-2018 period also allows for classification of post-deforestation land use: an additional 13% was
converted to other agricultural use, 22% converted to open water (due to natural dynamics of estuarine areas), with the remainder
transformed for infrastructure, scrub and other vegetation, and land without vegetation (e.g. beaches and mud flats).
21 And 1,730 ha in fragments outside these estuaries and on coastal islands.
22 Acuerdos de Uso Sostenible y Costodia del Ecosistema Manglar

--- Table 1 on Page 17 ---
Esmeraldas | San Lorenzo | Cayapas Mataje | 48,391 | 84% | 10,296
Guayas | Guayaquil | Guayas | 2,746,403 | 47% | 90,059
Guayas | Naranjal | Guayas | 83,691 | 74% | 22,774
Total |  |  | 3,407,360 |  | 150,065

--- Table 2 on Page 17 ---
20 Data from the more recent 2014-2018 period also allows for classification of post-deforestation land use: an additional 13% was
converted to other agricultural use, 22% converted to open water (due to natural dynamics of estuarine areas), with the remainder
transformed for infrastructure, scrub and other vegetation, and land without vegetation (e.g. beaches and mud flats).

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11
B
to organized groups of traditional mangrove users to restrict open access and overuse, reduce deforestation
and illegal extraction, and increase the ability of local users to realize economic benefits from conservation
actions. Community control and participation in conservation of mangrove areas, as well as national PAs, have
proven effective tools for mangrove protection. Gross deforestation rates under AUSCEMs and PAs are 86%
lower than areas without these protections; while mangrove areas without community stewardship or PA status
(totaling 36,186 ha or 23% of total mangrove area) account for 69% of all recent mangrove deforestation. The
coverage of mangrove areas under community-based management is, however, still insufficient. AUSCEMs
currently only cover 60,217 ha of mangroves (Figure 3 and Table 2), this means that significant mangrove areas
and their traditional users are not covered by active AUSCEMS, leaving them at risk of encroachment and
uncontrolled resource exploitation.
21. In addition, approximately one quarter of the areas under AUSCEM have lapsed due to lack of support and
technical assistance for legal proceedings and management activities, leaving these mangrove areas without
effective protection. Furthermore, despite most mangrove residents, being highly dependent on natural
resources and ecosystems, they have limited awareness of climate change. Training, participatory planning
and strengthening of livelihoods alternatives in mangrove areas can therefore contribute to enhancing climate
change resilience.
Table 2. Area and deforestation rates of mangroves by land-tenure and use category
Total Total % National
Gross Gross Net Net
Mangrove Mangrove total
Category Loss Gain Change Change
Area Area 2018 mangrove
(ha) (ha) (ha) (%)
(2008) (ha) area (2018)
Protected Areas (PAs)1 62,339 64,916 41% 1,733 4,309 2,577 4.13%
AUSCEM, active June
56,522 60,217 38% 1,389 5,084 3,695 6.54%
20202
No Protection3 36,956 36,186 23% 6,868 6,099 -770 -2.08%
Overlap AUSCEM and
-4,441 -4,686 -3%
PAs
Total 151,376 156,633 100%
1 Includes 4,441 ha (2008) and 4,686 ha (2018) of mangrove in AUSCEM overlapping with PAs. 2018 data includes 10,589 ha of
mangrove in AUSCEM, inactive/pending renewal as of June 2020.
2 Includes 4,441 ha (2008) and 4,686 ha (2018) of mangrove in AUSCEM overlapping with PAs.
3 Includes 3,307 ha (2008) and 3,640 ha (2018) of mangrove in AUSCEM, inactive/pending renewal as of June 2020.
22. The Socio Manglar program (meaning “Mangrove Partner”) builds on AUSCEMs and was established by
Ministerial Decree No. 198 on July 9, 2014, by the Ministry of the Environment, as part of the Socio Bosque
program (SBP) of conservation incentives, which has been transformative within Ecuador as a mechanism for
engaging local communities in the stewardship of native forests23. The Socio Manglar program is designed to
provide direct economic payments to beneficiary AUSCEM groups to support the conservation of mangroves
and supplement communities’ income. The objective of the Socio Manglar program is to complement and
consolidate the results achieved through the AUSCEMs granted to communities and ancestral groups of users,
to guarantee the conservation of mangroves while improving the living conditions of the population dependent
on fisheries resources. (Note: Socio Manglar payments are only used in the protection of mangroves, it is not
financial support for shrimp cultivation.)
23. In 2020, Socio Manglar payments by the MAATE to AUSCEMs totaled US$379,563. Current Socio Manglar
payments come from MAATE’s core budget and contributions from the REDD Early Movers program supported
by the German government (see Annex 2, Appendix 12) Currently only 33,467 ha of mangroves under 25
AUSCEMs receive Socio Manglar incentive payment agreements, leaving significant scope for expansion within
.
remaining active AUSCEMs (26,750 ha) as well as in potential new AUSCEM areas.
24. Expanding the coverage of AUSCEMs, Socio Manglar incentives and enhancing the economic viability of
sustainable community enterprises have been identified by stakeholders as interventions that would contribute
to further reducing deforestation and strengthening of mangrove stewardship. The Socio Manglar subaccount,
23 https://sociobosque.ambiente.gob.ec/

--- Table 1 on Page 18 ---
Category |  | Total |  |  | Total |  |  | % National |  | Gross
Loss
(ha) | Gross
Gain
(ha) | Net
Change
(ha) | Net
Change
(%)
 |  | Mangrove |  |  | Mangrove |  |  | total |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Area |  |  | Area 2018 |  |  | mangrove |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | (2008) |  |  | (ha) |  |  | area (2018) |  |  |  |  | 
Protected Areas (PAs)1 | 62,339 |  |  | 64,916 |  |  | 41% |  |  | 1,733 | 4,309 | 2,577 | 4.13%
AUSCEM, active June
20202 | 56,522 |  |  | 60,217 |  |  | 38% |  |  | 1,389 | 5,084 | 3,695 | 6.54%
No Protection3 | 36,956 |  |  | 36,186 |  |  | 23% |  |  | 6,868 | 6,099 | -770 | -2.08%
Overlap AUSCEM and
PAs | -4,441 |  |  | -4,686 |  |  | -3% |  |  |  |  |  | 
Total | 151,376 |  |  | 156,633 |  |  | 100% |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 18 ---
Gross
Loss
(ha)

--- Table 3 on Page 18 ---
Gross
Gain
(ha)

--- Table 4 on Page 18 ---
Net
Change
(ha)

--- Table 5 on Page 18 ---
Net
Change
(%)

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12
B
a subaccount of the existing Socio Bosque Fund, has been established in preparation for this project and as a
mechanism for developing the long-term financial sustainability of the Socio Manglar Program. The Socio
Manglar subaccount is managed as part of the Socio Bosque Fund with the intent that it operates as an
endowment, with the interest and investment income from its investments used to pay for incentives to
AUSCEMs. Component 2 of the project includes a request for $4 million from GCF to help capitalize the Socio
Manglar subaccount. The GCF funds will be kept separately from the other Socio Manglar subaccount funds in
an interest-bearing account, while other funds will be kept in an investment account and invested according to
the investment strategy of the fund manager, Fondo de Inversion Ambiental Sostenible (FIAS), which is
Ecuador’s Environmental and Sustainable Investing Fund. Additional contributions will be sought for the Socio
Manglar subaccount from private sector companies operating in Ecuador as part of project activities in
Component 2.
25. While there have not yet been evaluations of the Socio Manglar program, due to its recent establishment,
several evaluations of the SBP highlight that deforestation rates are lower on land included within the SBP and
that communities gain important monetary and non-monetary benefits (Arriaga et al. 2018, Perafán and Pabón,
2019). The most important impacts identified by the evaluations were increased land and rights-use, security,
economic development, and organizational support. Communities also reported non-monetary benefits due to
collective decision making and social cohesion from working together to achieve a common goal. However, the
evaluations noted the need to strengthen financial sustainability of the program and the need to address
conflicts that can arise if some communities receive incentive benefits while others do not (Etchart et al., 2020).
In the case of mangrove areas, there is a stronger possibility to monetize the traditional economies because
the economic value of non-timber products (i.e., from fisheries) is much higher than for terrestrial forests.
Figure 3. Coverage of current AUSCEMs and Mangroves in Ecuador, indicating significant scope for
expansion to mangrove areas currently outside active AUSCEMs Source of data: Mangrove cover from
MAAE (2018), AUSCEMs areas from MAAE (2020).

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13
B
26. This project will scale and expand the results and lessons learned from previous initiatives, including
complementarity with GEF projects. As included in table 25 of Annex 2, five GEF projects have contributed to
the creation of capacities and field experience on marine protected areas (MPA), enforcing local associations,
local planning and financial sustainability. Conservation International – Ecuador (CI-E) is also currently
implementing a project with the GMA that seeks to create networks among organizations working with mangrove
ecosystems and support AUSCEMs in the management of fisheries.
National Protected Areas
27. Forty-one percent of all mangroves of mainland Ecuador lie within the boundaries of nine PAs, making these
an important strategy for mangrove management and conservation. These nine PAs cover three different
categories of PAs: i) Ecological Reserves (Reserva Ecológica – RE); ii) Flora and Fauna Production Reserves
(Reserva de Producción de Flora y Fauna – RPF); and iii) Wildlife Refuges (Reserva de Vida Silvestre – RVS).
28. Four PAs, prioritized for inclusion in the project contain 94.6% of mangroves in PAs:
● Reserva Ecológica Manglares Cayapas Mataje (includes 20,012 ha of mangrove)
● Reserva Ecológica Manglares Churute (includes 28,467 ha of mangrove)
● Reserva de Producción de Flora y Fauna Manglares El Salado (includes 11,659 ha of mangrove)
● Reserva de Vida Silvestre Manglares Estuario del Rio Muisne (includes 1,295 ha of mangrove)
Mangrove reforestation and restoration
29. Ecuador has established and executed successful mangrove reforestation efforts. Techniques for mangrove
reforestation are well-proven in Ecuador, and from other sites around the world (see Annex 2, Feasibility
Study). An effective policy intervention that led to an increase in mangrove cover was Executive Decree 1391
in 2008, which required many shrimp farms that had been illegally established in public coastal areas, to restore
significant areas of mangrove on or adjacent to their farms, and allowed a three-year grace period for
registration and starting reforestation activities, before legalization of the shrimp farms. This resulted in a surge
in mangrove restoration (totaling 3,110 ha) immediately following its issue. Unfortunately, since the policy
ended, no new areas are being registered and reforested under this mechanism. Sustaining or increasing the
rate of mangrove recovery now depends on other regulatory instruments and on voluntary actions, which are
the principal focus of this project.
30. Conservation International (CI) has identified over 10,000 ha of land in the four estuaries appropriate for
potential reforestation based on criteria including size, form, connection with remaining mangroves, and
vulnerability of populations. Of these areas, 4,850 ha will be restored as part of the GCF project (see Annex 2
for further details of the prioritization and restoration methods) to provide long-term flood protection benefits,
carbon sequestration and ecosystem service co-benefits in the form of improved fisheries for vulnerable people.
B.1.4 Governance
Planning and zoning
31. Local governments are known as Decentralized Autonomous Governments (GADs24) in Ecuador and include
subnational entities at the provincial, municipal (or cantonal) and parish levels with a degree of administrative
and regulatory autonomy. GADs need to play an important role in climate governance and, in coordination with
the national government, collaborate on integrated coastal management. A fundamental instrument for planning
and investment of the GADs are Development and Land Use Plans (Planes de Desarrollo y Ordenamiento
Territorial - PDOT). PDOTs are a key tool to ensure that decision-making processes are based on information
collected at the territorial level, and the implementation of measures that reduce the impact of climate threats
on planned programs or projects is considered. PDOTs also provide the opportunity to ensure a strong marine
and coastal spatial planning approach in the mangrove zone of the coastal region of Ecuador. These PDOTs
can be complemented, under Ecuadorian law (Organic Code for the Environment – CODA), by Management
Plans for Beaches and the Coastal Strip addressing the specific needs and characteristics within and across
multiple GADs. Three municipalities have so far established such plans. Mangrove areas and climate change
vulnerabilities are generally not currently adequately addressed in PDOTs.
Enforcement
32. Legal enforcement has faced a series of setbacks when trying to enforce mangrove conservation measures
with shrimp farm owners who expanded shrimp farms without prior authorization from the National
24 Gobiernos Autónomos Descentralizados

--- Table 1 on Page 20 ---
 | Of these areas, 4,850 | ha | will be restored as part of the GCF project (see Annex 2
for further details of the prioritization and restoration methods) to provide long-term flood protection benefits, |  |  | 
carbon sequestration and ecosystem service co-benefits in the form of improved fisheries for vulnerable people. |  |  | 

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14
B
Environmental Authority. Although regulatory frameworks are in place, enforcement is inadequate for protection
and restoration of mangroves by public, private and community-based actors.
33. Operational Control and Surveillance Units (UOCVs – Unidades Operativas de Control y Vigilancia) were piloted
for detection and law enforcement of illegal activities affecting mangroves as part of the Program for the
Management of Coastal Resources project. As a joint effort between the Navy, MAATE, Vice-ministry of
Aquaculture and Fisheries (VMAP), NGOs and the National Chamber of Aquaculture (NCA), the UOCVs’ main
goal was to avoid and control the clear-cutting of mangrove forest areas through the cooperation of public,
private and NGO entities involved in this environmental issue.
34. The application of sanctions for environmental crimes under the Organic Code for Criminal Processes (Código
Orgánico Procesal Penal) is also limited by gaps in knowledge about regulations, including administrative
procedures and fines. When environmental crimes and sanctions are taken up by the courts, there is frequently
a lack of knowledge on the part of prosecutors and judges regarding marine and coastal laws and regulations,
and a lack of coordination and collaboration between prosecutors and the MAATE.
B.1.5 Private sector initiatives: Shrimp aquaculture
35. Shrimp farming has historically been the single biggest driver of mangrove deforestation in Ecuador and
continues to account for around half of anthropogenic mangrove loss. In 2020, there were 3,933 registered
shrimp farms in Ecuador operating on 216,000 ha (Seafood Watch, 2021). Effectively engaging with the shrimp
aquaculture sector, through better enforcement and through voluntary action, is an important element of
effective mangrove conservation and restoration.
36. Shrimp aquaculture in Ecuador is recognized for using low stocking density production (extensive production)
to decrease disease risks, although the sector remains GHG intensive. The low stocking density strategy, widely
adopted after disease outbreaks in the 1990s severely impacted national production but does produce a high-
quality product with lower environmental impacts. Overall growth of the sector has increased from about 50,000
Mt in 2000 to 700,000 Mt in 2020 (Chase, 2021). Shrimp production intensity averages 1.92 t/ha/y in Ecuador,
which is significantly lower than intensive production seen in Thailand (18.2 t/ha/y) and below production
intensity averages of China, India, and Indonesia (4.5 t/ha/y, 3.6 t/ha/y, and 3.3 t/ha/y, respectively) (CEA
Consulting, 2018).
Opportunities for engagement with the private sector
37. The shrimp aquaculture industry has had limited engagement with mangrove conservation, despite the role of
mangroves in protecting their vulnerable coastal infrastructure, regulatory requirements for reforestation, and
increasing market demand for sustainable production. Increasing private-sector participation is constrained
mainly by lack of information about the benefits of mangroves, limited technical capacity to identify and adopt
practices that restore or conserve mangroves, and in the case of small shrimp farmers, limited access to
affordable finance for all aspects of their operations. However, previous efforts by aquaculture companies to
restore mangroves following Decree 1391 were generally successful and survival rates of mangrove seedlings
were high despite localized problems (Pesante & Rosero, 2020). These previous experiences of mangrove
restoration in Ecuador mean there is capacity to expand restoration efforts.
Beyond the need for legal compliance, market opportunities and barriers are also driving a shift within Ecuador’s
shrimp aquaculture sector. Voluntary, market-facing certification and labeling schemes are drawing increasing
38. attention as a way to differentiate Ecuadorian shrimp as sustainable, healthy and good for the environment.
Depending on the retailer, certification is seen as: i)a requirement for sourcing (without additional pricing), or
ii) a value-added product that retailers and consumers concerned with environmental sustainability and social
responsibility are willing to pay more for on a per k ilogram basis. While there has been growing interest in
sustainable practices in the shrimp aquaculture sector, less than 1% of all shrimp farms in Ecuador currently
operate under certification schemes that align with climate resilience and emissions reductions. Several
complementary initiatives are underway that present an opportunity for scaling and improving practices,
including Aquaculture Stewardship Council (ASC) certification and the Sustainable Shrimp Partnership (SSP).
39. ASC provides a certification standard to minimize unintended social and environmental impacts of aquaculture
production around the world. ASC certified shrimp farms must minimize impacts on their neighboring ecosystem
in several ways, such as the partial restoration of lost mangrove forest, the development and implementation of
a biodiversity-focused environmental impact assessment (B-EIA) and ensuring farms are not sited in critical
habitats. Furthermore, since shrimp farming often occurs along coastal areas, a permanent coastal barrier must
be in place between the farm and the coastline. Ecuador has one of the largest areas of shrimp farms certified
under ASC; approximately 15% of production is certified, with a total volume (including shrimp and tilapia) of

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15
B
75,000 Mt sold in 2020. Currently, 15 companies are participating in ASC with 28 certified farms (49 sites) in
Ecuador. Products from ASC-certified farms and chains of custody can display the ASC logo to improve market
access and the perceived value to consumers of their products.
40. The NCA has also been working on the development and implementation of the national SPP initiative to create
a brand to differentiate the Ecuadorian product in the global seafood market. The SSP is an industry led initiative
that builds on the ASC criteria adding additional criteria, including a neutral impact on water25.. With
approximately 3,000 shrimp farms in Ecuador, there is significant scope for growth for both the ASC and SSP,
leveraging market access and differentiation to achieve environmental outcomes, including carbon neutrality
and mangrove restoration and protection; with their requirements to eliminate mangrove deforestation, the ASC
and SSP can contribute directly to reducing emissions from mangrove conversion if widely adopted (see Annex
2 Feasibility Study for further details).
41. CI’s Climate-Smart Shrimp (CSS) initiative provides a model for climate change adaptation within the sector.
CSS is complementary to the ASC and SSP standards and is a novel set of practices that prevent deforestation
and incentivize mangrove restoration while also increasing the amount of shrimp a farm can produce. CSS
involves working with shrimp pond farmers to sustainably intensify shrimp production, construct treatment
wetlands, and restore coastal ecosystems, while securing buyers for the ‘CSS’ produced (Figure 4). For small
and medium farmers, the primary incentives to participate are access to capital and technical assistance, while
for larger farmers, who often already have access to capital and expertise, the incentive is connections to
sustainability-oriented buyers in North American and European markets who preferentially source responsibly
produced shrimp. The CSS approach can realize climate change resilience and adaptation benefits while also
increasing production and profitability to meet development goals.
Establishing the shrimp industry as a partner in mangrove restoration will increase funding for restoration and
expand the number and diversity of stakeholders conserving, protecting, and rebuilding natural infrastructure at
42. scale, and eliminate pressures for deforestation. The project includes activities with Ecuadorian shrimp
producers to expand the use of ASC/SPP certification, directly restore mangroves and generate additional
financial contributions for the Socio Manglar Program that will support community-based mangrove
conservation and management beyond the implementation period of the project.
Figure 4. A visual comparison of the “gray” alternative to intensification (middle) versus applying a green-
gray climate adaptation approach to sustainably intensify shrimp production using the CSS model (right).
Conditions for private sector engagement
43. To promote CSS or any type of certification, a key element is ensuring that adequate and accessible financing
exists to address the needs of shrimp farmers. An important barrier to access finance is the lack of technical
25 https://www.sustainableshrimppartnership.org/

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16
B
knowledge within financial institutions about the industry and its sustainability pathways. Establishing
partnerships that allow access to information, training and implementation of demonstration cases facilitates
the learning curve so that the shrimp sector becomes more attractive and less risky for financial institutions.
This is the approach of the eco.business Fund26, a US$390 million fund that provides financial services to
financial intermediaries in the Latin America region, in support of green economy transformation. The fund has
ambitious targets for the aquaculture sector in Ecuador; and helps financial institutions develop tools, skills and
demonstration cases for key investments. Alliances with key stakeholders, including CI and its model of CSS,
ASC and SPP, are critical to strengthening the content and scientific approach and influencing the target
audience for those trainings.
44. Besides lack of knowledge, there are other important barriers to access finance, such as early-stage companies
with unstable cash flows or lack of collateral to access traditional funding sources like the banking system.
Investment funds fill some of these gaps with a diversity of instruments such as debt and equity that can adapt
to specific needs and business stages. To further fill this gap, CI is developing a fund with a specific focus on
supporting adoption of the CSS approach. The Climate Smart Shrimp Fund (CSSF)27 will provide loan
packages, supported by a technical assistance facility, that will enable shrimp farmers to transition to more
sustainable and efficient production systems while simultaneously restoring mangrove ecosystems. The initial
objective is to create a US$100 million fund28 with a focus on supporting CSS in Indonesia, Ecuador and the
Philippines. Pilot testing of the CSSF is currently underway with a company in Ecuador.
Other opportunities to work with the private sector
45. In addition to Ecuador’s shrimp sector, there may be opportunities to work with international companies whose
interest in investing in mangrove conservation and restoration is driven by their own Environmental, Social,
Governance strategies. CI will seek out such opportunities to build long term support for community-based
conservation and forest restoration (see project activity 2.2.1).
B 1.6 The impacts of coastal flooding events in the project area
46. Based on review of local data sets and a series of models that were applied to Ecuador´s coast (see Appendix
6 of Annex 2, Feasibility Study), the project will reduce flood risk for at least 89,600 people:
• In coastal mangrove areas, approximately 198,000 people are exposed annually to high flood risks from
either coastal or riparian flooding (SNGR, 2018). Of those, approximately 22,400 are estimated to have
an annual risk of flooding from coastal storm surges even with current mangrove cover (based on the
methodology of Menéndez et al., 2020; see below and Annex 25 for more details).
• Without the protective functions of the current mangrove cover, an additional 86,200 people would have
an annual risk of flooding29 due to coastal storm surge events (based on the methodology of Menéndez
2020; see Annex 25 for more details of calculations). These 86,200 people will benefit from the project
since it will strengthen the protection of existing mangroves and therefore ensure that the flood protection
continues.
• By ensuring that current mangrove areas are conserved, deforestation due to shrimp farming is reduced
by 50% and mangrove coverage is expanded by 4,850 ha through restoration, the project will benefit an
estimated 3,40030 of the 22,400 people currently exposed to annual flood risk (see Annex 25). The figure
of 3,400 is based on a calculation of the average number of people that derive flood protection benefit
from one hectare of mangroves in Ecuador. The project will therefore provide improved flood protection
to 89,600 people (assumed to be 50% female, 50% male).
Demography of the population in the project area (See Annex 2, Feasibility Study for further detail on the
demographics in the project area and the Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Annex 8) for specific gendered
uses and management of mangroves.)
47. Three million, four hundred thousand people live in the municipalities of the estuaries targeted by the project.
The sex ratio is 50.9% males; 49.1% females. The population is 83% urban, due to the inclusion of some urban
26 https://www.ecobusiness.fund/en/
27 https://www.climatefinancelab.org/idea s/climate-smart-shrimp-fund/
28 The CSS Fund is being developed as a blended finance vehicle, with approximately 30% concessional finance and 70% commercial
finance. The fund's long-term goal is to make the case to local financial institutions that they can/should make CSS loans. The purpose of
the CSS Fund is to create a track record of successful CSS loans (as defined by loan repayment at commercial rates, farm profitability, and
mangrove restoration) that show the attractiveness of making CSS loans to commercial investors (including local financial institutions).
29 For the Menendez model, the term “people impacted by flooding” refers to people who live in areas where the water height is estimated to
reach higher than 0.5m above the land height.
30 The exact figure from the calculation is 3,465 but has been rounded down to 3.400.

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17
B
areas of Guayaquil and smaller towns in the project area. Poverty levels average 72%. Unstructured, rapid
urbanization in Ecuador’s coastal towns and cities have pushed poor urban dwellers into low-lying areas around
waterways that are the most prone to flooding, leaving them highly vulnerable to climate change. Across all
project sites, women and men depend on the natural resources they obtain from the mangroves, including fish
and shellfish such as crabs and mollusks (especially black clam). In exceptional circumstances, such as during
the closed fishing season, men find they need to earn an income outside the home. Further information on
specific gendered uses and management of mangroves is detailed in the Gender Assessment and Action
Plan (Annex 8).
The impacts of flooding events on local communities and key economic sectors
48. The hazard level of coastal flooding in all areas of the project is classified as the highest hazard level, by the
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), meaning that potentially damaging waves are
expected to flood the coast at least once in the next ten years31. The southern coastal region of Ecuador (the
region of the two southern estuaries included in the project) has been identified as the location with the highest
coastal risk in the Latin America and Caribbean region due to a combination of coastal hazards, geographic
exposure, and socio-economic vulnerability (Calil et al., 2017).
49. Flooding events have become more frequent over the last 30 years; and are particularly acute during El Niño
events in which rainfall can rise as high as 3,500 mm per year. The Borbor-Cordova et al. (2020) study
recommends that coastal cities in Ecuador must recognize that they are part of larger scale ecosystems and
that they need to integrate coastal ecosystem services from mangroves and other wetlands into urban and
landscape design.
50. In a global assessment, Ecuador’s shrimp production has been highlighted as having the highest vulnerability
to climate change of the world´s brackish aquaculture producers, based on exposure (temperature, water
balance, population density, precipitation change, flood risk, drought risk and cyclone risk), adaptive capacity
and sensitivity (Handisyde et al., 2017). Eighty-two percent of shrimp farms along Ecuador’s coast are sited in
areas classified as high flood risk under current conditions (MAP, 2018; SNGR, 2018), risks which will increase
dramatically with increased sea level and intensified precipitation projected due to climate change. During the
1997-98 El Niño event, flooding, disruption of supply chains and damage to transport infrastructure affected the
shrimp aquaculture sector; around 4,500 ha of ponds were severely damaged (CAF, 2000). Heavy rains and
flooding can also affect the harvest cycle, causing shrimp to molt early, resulting in up to a 20% drop in yields
per pond (Sackton, 2016), while severe weather events can cause partial or total loss of harvest. These
damages have direct consequences in the form of loss of income. The shrimp aquaculture sector should
therefore have an incentive to support measures and adopt practices that help reduce current and future flood
risk.
Table 3. Project populations at risk of flood and other climate-change related impacts in the project area
(see detailed explanation and calculations in Annexes 22 and 25).
Description Number of Flood and other climate change-
people related impacts
Fishers Fishers and families ~41,500 Loss of income and food insecurity
directly dependent on due to disrupted logistics, changes
mangrove resources in fish populations and distribution
Property loss due to flood damage
Displacement and disruptions to
transport
Increased risk of infectious disease
31 https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/73-ecuador/CF , accessed February 2022.

--- Table 1 on Page 24 ---
 |  | around 4,500 ha of ponds were severely damaged (CAF, 2000). Heavy rains and
flooding can also affect the harvest cycle, causing shrimp to molt early, resulting in up to a 20% drop in yields |  | 
per pond | (Sackton, 2016), | while severe weather events can cause partial or total loss of harvest. These
damages have direct consequences in the form of loss of income. The shrimp aquaculture sector should |  | 
therefore have an incentive to support measures and adopt practices that help reduce current and future flood |  | 
risk. |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 24 ---
 | Description |  | Number of |  |  | Flood and other climate change- | 
 |  |  | people |  |  | related impacts | 
Fishers | Fishers and families
directly dependent on
mangrove resources | ~41,500 |  |  | Loss of income and food insecurity
due to disrupted logistics, changes
in fish populations and distribution
Property loss due to flood damage
Displacement and disruptions to
transport
Increased risk of infectious disease |  | 

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18
B
Populations Populations in flood- Loss of food security and income
directly at risk of prone areas currently from fisheries, agriculture and
108,600 in areas
annual flooding at high risk of annual tourism
where mangroves
during storm surge flooding events
reduce flood risk
events in (people with annual
(22,400 already at
mangrove coastal expected risk of
Property loss due to flood damage
annual risk and
zone flooding as defined by
86,200 at risk
Menendez et al.,
without current
2020; see below and
Annex 25) mangrove cover) Displacement and disruptions to
transport
Increased risk of infectious disease
B 1.7 Importance of mangroves in providing coastal protection benefits against flooding and climate
change
51. While mangroves provide a diversity of ecosystem services, their value for coastal protection and the reduction
of flood risks is particularly well documented and relevant for Ecuador’s coast. The use of "green infrastructure"
in the form of natural ecosystems to reduce the effects of climate change hazards, for example to dissipate
wave energy and reduce the intensity of storm surges, has been well documented (see additional detail in
Annex 2). For example, mangrove species have dense roots to reduce wave energy and height (Figure 5) such
that wave height is decreased as the waves travel through the mangroves. Several studies highlight the
importance of re-establishing wide and intact tracts of mangrove to maximize their coastal flood protection
benefit. Storm surges can raise water levels on the coast for long periods (hours or days), compared to waves
that come from normal winds or tides and that last for shorter times (seconds or minutes). This further highlights
the importance of having wide tracts of mangroves to reduce storm surges.
Figure 5. Key factors contributing to wave attenuation. Source: McIvor et al., 2012b
Modelling the flood protection benefits of mangroves
52. To model the flood protection benefits of mangroves we applied the ‘avoided damage’ valuation approach
described by Menéndez et al. (2020), which uses the cost of damages prevented by mangroves to estimate
their value. (see Appendix 6 of Annex 2). The ‘avoided damage’ analysis using the Menéndez model does not
evaluate future climate scenarios, nor does it directly estimate benefits of adding mangroves, only the damage
caused if existing mangroves are removed. However, it does provide per hectare estimates of the value of
mangroves in terms of annual expected risk of flooding and reduced damage, which has been used in the
preparation of this project to estimate the benefits of increasing mangrove cover.

--- Table 1 on Page 25 ---
Populations
directly at risk of
annual flooding
during storm surge
events in
mangrove coastal
zone | Populations in flood-
prone areas currently
at high risk of annual
flooding events
(people with annual
expected risk of
flooding as defined by
Menendez et al.,
2020; see below and
Annex 25) | 108,600 in areas
where mangroves
reduce flood risk
(22,400 already at
annual risk and
86,200 at risk
without current
mangrove cover) | Loss of food security and income
from fisheries, agriculture and
tourism
Property loss due to flood damage
Displacement and disruptions to
transport
Increased risk of infectious disease

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19
B
Figure 6. Projected flooding in Ecuador with (in blue) and without (in red) mangroves for a 1 in 25-year
storm event based on the methodology of Menéndez et al. (2020).
53. The Menéndez model analysis concludes that based on current conditions, 22,400 people have an annual
expected risk of coastal flooding caused by storm surge (16,900 in urban areas and 5,500 in rural areas). Under
these current climate conditions, but without the protections that mangroves provide, approximately 86,200
more people would be at annual risk of coastal flooding in the project area. The analysis also shows that the
mangroves prevent approximately US$250 million of property loss from flooding annually. Based upon
mangrove coverage in Ecuador from 2018 (approximately 156,633 ha), every hectare of mangrove prevents
approximately US$1,600 of property loss from coastal flooding every year in Ecuador. Property loss in this case
includes both industrial and residential stock where damage and property loss values increase with increasing
flood depth. Based on these figures, approximately one person has reduced annual expected flood risk for each
two hectares of mangrove in Ecuador32. As noted above, currently urban areas account for most of the people
at risk and therefore concentrating mangrove protection and restoration efforts between the sea and urban
areas will have the most impact. This is particularly the case in the Gulf of Guayaquil, where most urban
inhabitants reside.
32 Or, more precisely 1 hectare of mangrove provides protection for 0.58 people on average.

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20
B
54. In preparation of the project, an alternative modelling approach has also been used (using the Aqueduct Flood
model, which does include future climate change related flooding risk) and is presented in Annex 2, Feasibility
Study. This alternative model concurs with the Menéndez et al. (2020) in projecting that most people and
property impacted by annual coastal floods in Ecuador live in Guayas. The important conclusion from this model
is that with climate change, the relative value of mangroves to reduce coastal flooding increases. The two
modelling approaches used also converge on a similar number of people being currently affected by coastal
flooding during storm surges. Neither of the models includes potential changes in population due to migration
patterns, which would include an additional large degree of uncertainty in the estimates for the future population
at risk of flooding. We have therefore assumed for the purposes of this project, that the figure of 89,600 people
with reduced annual expected risk from coastal surge flooding is a conservative estimate of the number of
people benefitting from the additional coastal flood protection that the project will achieve by reducing forest
loss and increasing mangrove cover through restoration.
Summary of Climate Ch ange H azards and Ri sk/Impacts
Hazard: 1. Increase in flooding
Coastal Ecuador is already exposed to frequent flooding from both riparian floods due to high rainfall
and coastal surges associated with storms. The frequency of coastal surges will increase as sea
level rise increases (see Hazard 2 below) and extreme El Niño events (see Hazard 3 below)
exacerbate the impacts of storms.
Risk/ In coastal mangrove areas, approximately 198,000 people are currently exposed annually to high
Impact33: flood risks from either coastal or riparian flooding (SNGR, 2018).
By ensuring that current mangrove areas are conserved, deforestation due to human pressures
(mostly shrimp farming) is reduced by 50% and restoration expanding mangrove coverage by 4,850
ha, the project will benefit at least 89,600 by protecting them from flood risk from coastal surges
(see Annex 25).
Hallegatte et al. (2013) estimated the relative risk of vulnerability to flooding (economic average
annual losses/city’s GDP) in 136 coastal port cities, by assessing city-level flood risk and a database
of urban coastal protection in 2005 and showed that the city of Guayaquil (which is protected by the
mangroves included in the project) is ranked number four globally for flood risk. When future socio-
economic changes are included, as well as a modest sea level rise scenario (20 cm increase), the
assumption of adaptation measures by 2050, the increase in the economic average losses
increases by 13%, putting the city of Guayaquil within the top 14 of flooding-related economic losses
expected between 2005 and 2050 (Hallegatte et al., 2013)
Ecuador’s shrimp production has been highlighted as having the highest vulnerability to climate
change of the world´s brackish aquaculture producers in a global assessment, based on exposure
(temperature, water balance, population density, precipitation change, flood risk, drought risk and
cyclone risk), adaptive capacity and sensitivity (Handisyde et al., 2017). Eighty-two percent of
shrimp farms along Ecuador’s coast are sited in areas classified as high flood risk under current
conditions (Ministerio de Acuacultura y Pesca, 2018; Secretaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos,
2018), risks which will increase with increased sea level and intensified precipitation projected due
to climate change. During the 1997-98 El Niño, flooding, disruption of supply chains and damage to
transport infrastructure affected the shrimp aquaculture sector and around 4,500 ha of ponds were
severely damaged34 (CAF, 2000). Heavy rains and flooding can also affect the harvest cycle,
causing shrimp to molt early, resulting in up to a 20% drop in yields per pond (Sackton, 2016). These
damages have direct consequences for the more than 60,000 people employed (approximately 0.45
jobs/ha of shrimp farm) in shrimp aquaculture farming and processing (Yahira Piedrahita, 2018) 35.
33 Assess the impact, that is the effects on natural and human systems of extreme weather and climate change events. Impacts generally
refer to effects on lives, livelihoods, healt h, ecosystems, economies, societies, cultures, services, and infrastructure due to the interaction of
climate changes or hazardous climate change events occurring within a specific time period and the vulnerability of an exposed society or
system.
34 Clark Labs data estimates the presence of 1,571,298 km2 of aquaculture ponds in Ecuador in 1999 (source:
http://www.aquaculture.earth/coastal/index.html)
35 Other estimates for the shrimp industry reference 100,000 - 220,000 directly or indirectly employed.

--- Table 1 on Page 27 ---
54. In preparation of the project, an alternative modelling approach has also been used (using the Aqueduct Flood
model, which does include future climate change related flooding risk) and is presented in Annex 2, Feasibility
Study. This alternative model concurs with the Menéndez et al. (2020) in projecting that most people and
property impacted by annual coastal floods in Ecuador live in Guayas. The important conclusion from this model
is that with climate change, the relative value of mangroves to reduce coastal flooding increases. The two
modelling approaches used also converge on a similar number of people being currently affected by coastal
flooding during storm surges. Neither of the models includes potential changes in population due to migration
patterns, which would include an additional large degree of uncertainty in the estimates for the future population
at risk of flooding. We have therefore assumed for the purposes of this project, that the figure of 89,600 people
with reduced annual expected risk from coastal surge flooding is a conservative estimate of the number of
people benefitting from the additional coastal flood protection that the project will achieve by reducing forest
loss and increasing mangrove cover through restoration.
Summary of Climate Ch ange H azards and Ri sk/Impacts
Hazard: 1. Increase in flooding
Coastal Ecuador is already exposed to frequent flooding from both riparian floods due to high rainfall
and coastal surges associated with storms. The frequency of coastal surges will increase as sea
level rise increases (see Hazard 2 below) and extreme El Niño events (see Hazard 3 below)
exacerbate the impacts of storms.
Risk/ In coastal mangrove areas, approximately 198,000 people are currently exposed annually to high
Impact33: flood risks from either coastal or riparian flooding (SNGR, 2018).
By ensuring that current mangrove areas are conserved, deforestation due to human pressures
(mostly shrimp farming) is reduced by 50% and restoration expanding mangrove coverage by 4,850
ha, the project will benefit at least 89,600 by protecting them from flood risk from coastal surges
(see Annex 25).
Hallegatte et al. (2013) estimated the relative risk of vulnerability to flooding (economic average
annual losses/city’s GDP) in 136 coastal port cities, by assessing city-level flood risk and a database
of urban coastal protection in 2005 and showed that the city of Guayaquil (which is protected by the
mangroves included in the project) is ranked number four globally for flood risk. When future socio-
economic changes are included, as well as a modest sea level rise scenario (20 cm increase), the
assumption of adaptation measures by 2050, the increase in the economic average losses
increases by 13%, putting the city of Guayaquil within the top 14 of flooding-related economic losses
expected between 2005 and 2050 (Hallegatte et al., 2013)
Ecuador’s shrimp production has been highlighted as having the highest vulnerability to climate
change of the world´s brackish aquaculture producers in a global assessment, based on exposure
(temperature, water balance, population density, precipitation change, flood risk, drought risk and
cyclone risk), adaptive capacity and sensitivity (Handisyde et al., 2017). Eighty-two percent of
shrimp farms along Ecuador’s coast are sited in areas classified as high flood risk under current
conditions (Ministerio de Acuacultura y Pesca, 2018; Secretaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos,
2018), risks which will increase with increased sea level and intensified precipitation projected due
to climate change. During the 1997-98 El Niño, flooding, disruption of supply chains and damage to
transport infrastructure affected the shrimp aquaculture sector and around 4,500 ha of ponds were
severely damaged34 (CAF, 2000). Heavy rains and flooding can also affect the harvest cycle,
causing shrimp to molt early, resulting in up to a 20% drop in yields per pond (Sackton, 2016). These
damages have direct consequences for the more than 60,000 people employed (approximately 0.45
jobs/ha of shrimp farm) in shrimp aquaculture farming and processing (Yahira Piedrahita, 2018) 35. |  | 
 | Summary of Climate Ch ange H azards and Ri sk/Impacts | 
 | Hazard: | 1. Increase in flooding
Coastal Ecuador is already exposed to frequent flooding from both riparian floods due to high rainfall
and coastal surges associated with storms. The frequency of coastal surges will increase as sea
level rise increases (see Hazard 2 below) and extreme El Niño events (see Hazard 3 below)
exacerbate the impacts of storms.
 | Risk/
Impact33: | In coastal mangrove areas, approximately 198,000 people are currently exposed annually to high
flood risks from either coastal or riparian flooding (SNGR, 2018).
By ensuring that current mangrove areas are conserved, deforestation due to human pressures
(mostly shrimp farming) is reduced by 50% and restoration expanding mangrove coverage by 4,850
ha, the project will benefit at least 89,600 by protecting them from flood risk from coastal surges
(see Annex 25).
Hallegatte et al. (2013) estimated the relative risk of vulnerability to flooding (economic average
annual losses/city’s GDP) in 136 coastal port cities, by assessing city-level flood risk and a database
of urban coastal protection in 2005 and showed that the city of Guayaquil (which is protected by the
mangroves included in the project) is ranked number four globally for flood risk. When future socio-
economic changes are included, as well as a modest sea level rise scenario (20 cm increase), the
assumption of adaptation measures by 2050, the increase in the economic average losses
increases by 13%, putting the city of Guayaquil within the top 14 of flooding-related economic losses
expected between 2005 and 2050 (Hallegatte et al., 2013)
Ecuador’s shrimp production has been highlighted as having the highest vulnerability to climate
change of the world´s brackish aquaculture producers in a global assessment, based on exposure
(temperature, water balance, population density, precipitation change, flood risk, drought risk and
cyclone risk), adaptive capacity and sensitivity (Handisyde et al., 2017). Eighty-two percent of
shrimp farms along Ecuador’s coast are sited in areas classified as high flood risk under current
conditions (Ministerio de Acuacultura y Pesca, 2018; Secretaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos,
2018), risks which will increase with increased sea level and intensified precipitation projected due
to climate change. During the 1997-98 El Niño, flooding, disruption of supply chains and damage to
transport infrastructure affected the shrimp aquaculture sector and around 4,500 ha of ponds were
severely damaged34 (CAF, 2000). Heavy rains and flooding can also affect the harvest cycle,
causing shrimp to molt early, resulting in up to a 20% drop in yields per pond (Sackton, 2016). These
damages have direct consequences for the more than 60,000 people employed (approximately 0.45
jobs/ha of shrimp farm) in shrimp aquaculture farming and processing (Yahira Piedrahita, 2018) 35.

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21
B
Direct consequences include loss of income from lower production or when severe weather events
cause partial or total loss of harvest.
See section 2.2.3 “Communities at H ighest Risk from Flooding” in Annex 2: Feasibility Study for
more details.
Hazard: 2. Sea Level rise
Sea Level Rise (SLR) will have significant direct impacts on Ecuador’s coast and its increase is a
climate-change driven phenomenon. By 2100, mean sea level is projected to rise an additional 49-
64 cm on Ecuador's coast36 depending on the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) scenario
(see Table 6; Annex 2: Feasibility Study). Measured mean sea level increased at an average
annual rate of approximately 0.8 cm (1990-2009) based on the tide gauge of La Libertad (Alavera
& Nath, 2013), implying that these projections are conservative (Figure 7; Annex 2: Feasibility
study).
An increase in mean sea level will also be compounded by increased frequency of extreme sea
level (ESL) events (storm surge and tidal flooding), which will become common by the end of the
century and occur annually mid-century in low-lying coastal areas (IPCC, 2019).
Risk/ Increases in SLR and ESL are expected to increase the risks of coastal flooding and consequently
Impact: impact rural and urban populations, and aquaculture in coastal areas, especially when compounded
by periodic El Niño events. Celemin (2018), in an analysis of Ecuador´s northern coastal province
of Esmeraldas, posited extensive damage related to a 5 m increase in mean sea level, though this
extreme scenario is outside the range of most other projections.
Hazard: 3. Extreme El Niño Events
El Niño events have already led to observed ocean warming and dramatic rises in sea level due to
seawater expansion (Cai et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2019). During the 1997-98 season, sea surface
temperatures off the coast of Ecuador increased by 5°C above normal, and sea level increased up
to 42 cm (CAF, 2000). In the equatorial Pacific region, sea levels can deviate from the global mean
sea level by as much as 40 cm because of El Nino (Walsh et al., 2012).
ENSO is a natural climatic driver, and it is very likely that rainfall variability related to ENSO will be
amplified by the second half of the 21st century under the SSP 2-4.5, SSP 3-7.0 and SSP 5-8.5
scenarios (IPCC, 2021). There are indications that extreme El Niño events may increase in
frequency due to climate change (McPhaden et al., 2020). Future El Niño events are likely to
become more frequent and more intense (Magrin et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2019), but even an El
Niño of similar magnitude to historical events, will affect larger areas and more people as its flooding
impacts are compounded by sea level rise.
Risk/ Historical El Niño events provide a reference point for the scale of future climate-related damages
Impact: for Ecuador’s coast. The Dartmouth Flood Observatory registered 22 major flooding events since
1987, with over 506,000 people displaced (DFO, 2020). Flooding events were particularly severe
during El Niño events of 1972/73, 1982/83, 1997/98, as well as in 2008 and 2012, with 184,000-
222,000 ha flooded (Ocles Padilla, 2018). Flooding events registered since 1965 on the coast of
Ecuador have affected over 1,822,704 people, who required immediate assistance during those
events, with 68% of those occurring during El Nino years. During those flooding events, 97,031
people became homeless. Flooding events recorded since 1965 have killed 836 people, with 622
of those occurring during El Nino years (Em-DAT, 2021). Those flooding events led to over US$ 1.5
billion in damages and economic losses, of which 96% occurred during years when El Niño events
occurred (EM-DAT, 2021). Furthermore, one quarter of the total coastal population was exposed to
increased health risks in the form of infectious diseases such as malaria, diarrhea and cholera,
which are associated with floods and damages to sanitary infrastructure caused by the 1997/98 El
Niño event (Vos et al., 1999).
36 https://sealevel.nasa.gov/ipcc-ar6-sea-level-projection-tool The SLR range cited is based on projections for scenario SSP2-4.5 (lower
estimate) and SSP3-7.0 (higher estimate ).

--- Table 1 on Page 28 ---
 | Direct consequences include loss of income from lower production or when severe weather events
cause partial or total loss of harvest.
See section 2.2.3 “Communities at H ighest Risk from Flooding” in Annex 2: Feasibility Study for
more details.
Hazard: | 2. Sea Level rise
Sea Level Rise (SLR) will have significant direct impacts on Ecuador’s coast and its increase is a
climate-change driven phenomenon. By 2100, mean sea level is projected to rise an additional 49-
64 cm on Ecuador's coast36 depending on the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) scenario
(see Table 6; Annex 2: Feasibility Study). Measured mean sea level increased at an average
annual rate of approximately 0.8 cm (1990-2009) based on the tide gauge of La Libertad (Alavera
& Nath, 2013), implying that these projections are conservative (Figure 7; Annex 2: Feasibility
study).
An increase in mean sea level will also be compounded by increased frequency of extreme sea
level (ESL) events (storm surge and tidal flooding), which will become common by the end of the
century and occur annually mid-century in low-lying coastal areas (IPCC, 2019).
Risk/
Impact: | Increases in SLR and ESL are expected to increase the risks of coastal flooding and consequently
impact rural and urban populations, and aquaculture in coastal areas, especially when compounded
by periodic El Niño events. Celemin (2018), in an analysis of Ecuador´s northern coastal province
of Esmeraldas, posited extensive damage related to a 5 m increase in mean sea level, though this
extreme scenario is outside the range of most other projections.
Hazard: | 3. Extreme El Niño Events
El Niño events have already led to observed ocean warming and dramatic rises in sea level due to
seawater expansion (Cai et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2019). During the 1997-98 season, sea surface
temperatures off the coast of Ecuador increased by 5°C above normal, and sea level increased up
to 42 cm (CAF, 2000). In the equatorial Pacific region, sea levels can deviate from the global mean
sea level by as much as 40 cm because of El Nino (Walsh et al., 2012).
ENSO is a natural climatic driver, and it is very likely that rainfall variability related to ENSO will be
amplified by the second half of the 21st century under the SSP 2-4.5, SSP 3-7.0 and SSP 5-8.5
scenarios (IPCC, 2021). There are indications that extreme El Niño events may increase in
frequency due to climate change (McPhaden et al., 2020). Future El Niño events are likely to
become more frequent and more intense (Magrin et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2019), but even an El
Niño of similar magnitude to historical events, will affect larger areas and more people as its flooding
impacts are compounded by sea level rise.
Risk/
Impact: | Historical El Niño events provide a reference point for the scale of future climate-related damages
for Ecuador’s coast. The Dartmouth Flood Observatory registered 22 major flooding events since
1987, with over 506,000 people displaced (DFO, 2020). Flooding events were particularly severe
during El Niño events of 1972/73, 1982/83, 1997/98, as well as in 2008 and 2012, with 184,000-
222,000 ha flooded (Ocles Padilla, 2018). Flooding events registered since 1965 on the coast of
Ecuador have affected over 1,822,704 people, who required immediate assistance during those
events, with 68% of those occurring during El Nino years. During those flooding events, 97,031
people became homeless. Flooding events recorded since 1965 have killed 836 people, with 622
of those occurring during El Nino years (Em-DAT, 2021). Those flooding events led to over US$ 1.5
billion in damages and economic losses, of which 96% occurred during years when El Niño events
occurred (EM-DAT, 2021). Furthermore, one quarter of the total coastal population was exposed to
increased health risks in the form of infectious diseases such as malaria, diarrhea and cholera,
which are associated with floods and damages to sanitary infrastructure caused by the 1997/98 El
Niño event (Vos et al., 1999).

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22
B
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)
Current Conditions and Trends
55. Current trends and drivers of emissions and vulnerability are described in greater detail in section B1 and Annex
2, but key points for the Theory of Change are summarized here for clarity.
56. Sea level rise (~12 cm by 2040 and 49-64 cm by 2100)37, increased impacts of El Niño events, and augmented
intensity and variability of precipitation due to climate change are projected to increase flood frequency, intensity
and damages, thereby threatening coastal infrastructure, settlements and economic activities.
57. Flood impacts are concentrated in recurring El Niño events and other extreme sea level events. SLR will magnify
El Niño damages.
58. In addition to maintaining biodiversity and many ecosystem services, mangroves play a dual role, both in
reducing climate change vulnerability of coastal communities to flooding events, and in increasing carbon
storage. Although mangrove areas are slowly recovering and increasing (+0.35% per year)38, an average of
990 ha of primary mangrove forests are still lost each year. Areas under community management and PAs are
gaining mangrove coverage while unprotected areas continue to have net loss of mangrove.
59. Nearly 96% of all mangrove areas are concentrated in a subset of eight municipalities providing important flood
protection for people and assets. With measures to protect and restore mangroves, the current flood protection
benefits will be secured for the future and 89,600 people are expected to benefit annually by the end of the
project (see Annex 25). The project is also expected to provide more resilient livelihoods for 41,500 climate-
vulnerable direct beneficiaries. CI conservatively assumes that all these 41,500 people will be included within
the 89,600 direct beneficiaries and therefore, to avoid double counting, estimates the overall number of direct
beneficiaries of the project to be 89,600.
60. Shrimp aquaculture, which accounted for half of mangrove loss this past decade, also accounted for US$6.2
billion in exports in 2022 (MercoPress, 2023). Increasing recognition of the threats that climate change poses
to the sector and growing demand for sustainably produced shrimp have created an opportunity for shrimp
aquaculture operations to play a pivotal role in protecting and restoring mangroves. Other private sector actors,
including investors and companies seeking to become ‘carbon-neutral’, create additional opportunities for
private sector finance for mangroves.
37 https://sealevel.nasa.gov/ipcc-ar6-sea-level-projection-tool with 2100 range calculated based on the SSP2-4.5 and SSP3-7.0 scenarios.
38 The recovery is in part due to short-live d regulatory measures adopted in 2008 that no longer apply.

--- Table 1 on Page 29 ---
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)
Current Conditions and Trends
55. Current trends and drivers of emissions and vulnerability are described in greater detail in section B1 and Annex
2, but key points for the Theory of Change are summarized here for clarity.
56. Sea level rise (~12 cm by 2040 and 49-64 cm by 2100)37, increased impacts of El Niño events, and augmented
intensity and variability of precipitation due to climate change are projected to increase flood frequency, intensity
and damages, thereby threatening coastal infrastructure, settlements and economic activities.
57. Flood impacts are concentrated in recurring El Niño events and other extreme sea level events. SLR will magnify
El Niño damages.
58. In addition to maintaining biodiversity and many ecosystem services, mangroves play a dual role, both in
reducing climate change vulnerability of coastal communities to flooding events, and in increasing carbon
storage. Although mangrove areas are slowly recovering and increasing (+0.35% per year)38, an average of
990 ha of primary mangrove forests are still lost each year. Areas under community management and PAs are
gaining mangrove coverage while unprotected areas continue to have net loss of mangrove.
59. Nearly 96% of all mangrove areas are concentrated in a subset of eight municipalities providing important flood
protection for people and assets. With measures to protect and restore mangroves, the current flood protection
benefits will be secured for the future and 89,600 people are expected to benefit annually by the end of the
project (see Annex 25). The project is also expected to provide more resilient livelihoods for 41,500 climate-
vulnerable direct beneficiaries. CI conservatively assumes that all these 41,500 people will be included within
the 89,600 direct beneficiaries and therefore, to avoid double counting, estimates the overall number of direct
beneficiaries of the project to be 89,600.
60. Shrimp aquaculture, which accounted for half of mangrove loss this past decade, also accounted for US$6.2
billion in exports in 2022 (MercoPress, 2023). Increasing recognition of the threats that climate change poses
to the sector and growing demand for sustainably produced shrimp have created an opportunity for shrimp
aquaculture operations to play a pivotal role in protecting and restoring mangroves. Other private sector actors,
including investors and companies seeking to become ‘carbon-neutral’, create additional opportunities for
private sector finance for mangroves.

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23
B
Figure 7. Carbon storage in healthy and degraded mangroves showing that carbon is sequestered in both
woody biomass and into the soil.
Barriers
61. Accelerating the rate of mangrove recovery at a pace commensurate with growing climate risk, after decades
of deforestation, requires a coordinated multi-pronged approach, involving diverse instruments and
stakeholders, to overcome key barriers.
Barrier 1: Communities lack legal rights, capacity and economic alternatives for effective mangrove conservation
and management, potentially hindering their engagement.
62. There are gaps in coverage, legal recognition, and organizational capacity to ensure that proven community-
based management strategies and PAs continue to sustain, conserve and restore mangroves. While community
-based management and PAs, have proven effective tools for mangrove protection, their coverage is still
insufficient. Although there has been mangrove recovery in unprotected areas, there was a total net loss of 770
ha in these areas between 2008 and 2018. Furthermore, many AUSCEMS are constrained by limited
management capacities and lack of economic alternatives that reinforce mangrove conservation and
management, leaving these mangrove areas without effective protection.
Barrier 2: Insufficient incentives and investments for practices by communities and businesses that enhance climate
resilience and reduce emissions. Activities in Component 1 address this barrier.
63. The GCF exists because nations recognized this barrier to climate change resilience and mitigation. Other
programs that will also address this barrier in Ecuador’s mangrove areas are still quite young (e.g. the Socio
Manglar Program) and are not yet able to provide the level of incentives and investment needed to truly abate
and mitigate climate change. Although some local financial institutions cater for businesses, high transaction
costs to access loans and loan rates can be prohibitive for small businesses and climate resilient business
models are often novel and therefore perceived as higher risk. There are very few opportunities for early-stage
community initiatives that address climate resilience beyond ad hoc projects.
Barrier 3: Insufficient long-term, stable financing to support community mangrove conservation efforts. Activities in
Components 1 and 2 address this barrier.

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24
B
64. The current conservation payments incentive program, currently covers only 44% of active AUSCEMs and
longer-term financing mechanisms are needed to sustain the Socio Manglar program. There is also insufficient
access to financial incentives, both public and market-based, to incentivize communities’ continued commitment
and private-sector action, particularly in shrimp aquaculture, to decisively drive a model of economic
development that reinforces mangrove conservation and recovery.
Barrier 4: Businesses, communities and local governments lack information or access to technical support needed
to adopt practices to reduce emissions and/or exposure to climate risks. Activities in Component 2 address this
barrier.
65. Weaknesses in governance, including gaps in knowledge of legal and regulatory instruments, limited
institutional capacity, poor inter-institutional coordination and lack of articulated stakeholder engagement, allow
for the continued illegal destruction of mangroves and hinder proactive planning, enforcement and policy
formation.
Barrier 5: Insufficient finance targeted at sustainable aquaculture production methods due to lack of knowledge
among financial institutions and demand from producers. Activities in Component 2 address this barrier.
66. Prior to the development of this project, significant resources from the private sector, most notably the shrimp
aquaculture industry had not yet been mobilized to support mangrove conservation and restoration Although
there has been growing interest in sustainable practices in the shrimp aquaculture sector, less than 1% of all
shrimp farms in Ecuador currently operate under certification schemes that include actions leading to climate
resilience of coastal communities and emissions reductions objectives. As part of the project, the NCA will work
with CI to roll out the SSP approach, which includes a no-deforestation requirement, and to promote CSS
production methods that includes mangrove restoration.
Barrier 6: Regulatory frameworks and enforcement are inadequate for protection and restoration of mangroves.
Activities in Component 3 address this barrier.
67. There is a lack of enforcement that allows the drivers of mangrove deforestation (Shrimp Aquaculture sector,
small scale land clearance for crops or pasture) to continue. Also, information for climate resilience is deficient
and poorly integrated into decision-making and planning across all structures and scales of governance.
68. Governance, knowledge of regulatory frameworks and enforcement are inadequate for protection and
restoration of mangroves by public, private and community-based actors. Detection of mangrove deforestation
often lags far behind the occurrence of events and usually depends primarily on ground-based observation from
government agents and complaints filed by citizens. MAATE field staff are limited and there is poor coordination
among overlapping government agencies, which means that relatively few deforestation events are identified,
and action taken. Despite the high rates of ongoing clearing of mangroves, only 13 judicial and administrative
proceedings were processed for deforestation in 2011-2016, and of these only three had been resolved by
2017. The lack of effective enforcement and sanction has been emphasized by community stakeholders during
the FPIC process of this project.
69. Overall, businesses, communities and local governments do not have information or access to technical support
needed to adopt practices to reduce emissions and/or exposure to climate risks. Growing awareness of the
importance of mangroves for the economies, populations and infrastructure of the coast has led to changes in
public policies (including the Socio Manglar incentive program and legal requirements to restore mangroves),
which has contributed to more recent net gains in mangrove coverage. Many key stakeholders, including the
general public, still lack information about laws and regulations, the economic value that mangrove ecosystem
services provide, and technical aspects of conservation, restoration and resource management.
70. Proposed project activities will address these barriers to achieve the overarching goal of the project.
Goal Statement: If local communities are provided with knowledge and resources for mangrove management and
livelihoods development, and if the private sector and government actively collaborate on mangrove protection and
restoration, and the enabling environment for mangrove protection is strengthened, then coverage and quality of
mangrove ecosystems will be increased, resulting in reduced climate change impacts on vulnerable coastal
populations, increased economic resilience, and reduced GHG emissions because healthy and more extensive
mangroves reduce flood impacts and sequester carbon.

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25
B
Outcomes and the project contribution:
Outcome 1. The area of mangroves under effective climate-adapted management is increased. The project will
expand the mangrove areas under effective community management, support adaptation planning in existing PAs
and strengthen management of other areas through support for improved land-use planning by local government and
improved application of existing regulations on mangroves. The project targets 156,633 ha of mangroves under
effective climate-adapted management by the end of the implementation period.
Outcome 2. Flood risks associated with climate change are reduced by expanding mangrove areas under
effective climate-adapted management. The project will increase mangrove cover through reduced deforestation
and restoration activities, which will result in reduced flood risk for an estimated 89,600 people.
Outcome 3. GHG emissions from deforestation are reduced and carbon sequestered by expanding mangrove
areas under effective climate-adapted management, including mangrove restoration. Reduced deforestation
and restoration activities will result in an estimated net reduction of 732,000 tCO2e over the project implementation
period and expected 4.6 MtCO2e over a 20-year project lifespan period.
Outcome 4. Institutional framework for mangrove protection and coastal planning is strengthened. Project
activities will result in improved regulatory systems or incentives for climate resilience and their effective
implementation at the level of the national government, nine subnational governments and 60 AUSCEM-holding
groups.
Co-benefit 1. Biodiversity and ecosystem service benefits are increased. The increased forest cover from
reduced deforestation and restoration will provide additional habitat for biodiversity (5,725 ha) and increase the
ecosystem services from the area gained. While the project does not propose to try and directly measure the value
of ecosystem co-benefits (due to the complexity and methodological challenges involved), global estimates of the
biodiversity ecosystem service value of one hectare of mangroves average US$21,100 per hectare per year (in 2018
prices) according to a recent review of 250 attempts at valuing the ecosystem services of mangroves (Getzner et al.,
2020), highlighting the importance of mangrove habitat. See also D.3 and Annex 3 for further discussion of ecosystem
service value.
Co-benefit 2. Economic resilience of coastal communities is increased. Project activities to secure mangrove
management rights for local communities, including for fishing rights, to improve livelihood activities and to support
small-scale community businesses will result in increased economic resilience for 41,500 people from coastal
communities.
Co-benefit 3. Uptake of sustainable shrimp production practices is increased. The project will contribute to
international and national initiatives to increase sustainability of shrimp production practices and to increase adoption
of nationally and internationally recognized aquaculture standards and/or improved practices that include
commitments to no deforestation covering at least 20,000 ha of shrimp farms.
Co-benefit 4. Economic value of fisheries for artisanal fishers is increased. The increased forest cover from
reduced deforestation and restoration (5,725 ha) will provide additional habitat for fisheries areas and nurseries.
Based on average estimates of catch, sale value and production, the additional habitat will increase the economic
value of artisanal fisheries by US$12.6 million per year (see Annex 3 for fisheries value calculations).
Project Components and Project Results
Project Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate-adapted management increased,
including through community-based management (AUSCEMs) and PAs implementing climate adaptation
plans.
Output 1.1. Reduced exposure to flood risk for vulnerable people and reduced GHG emissions from
mangrove restoration are achieved by strengthening community-based management through AUSCEMs and
PAs.
Output 1.2. Improved livelihood activities and more economically productive community businesses enable
local people to become more resilient to climate change and incentivized to participate in, and maintain,
mangrove conservation and restoration.
Project Component 2: The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG
emissions and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate
resilience for other coastal populations.

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26
B
Output 2.1. Shrimp aquaculture farms adopt practices and production standards that require elimination of
deforestation and active reforestation in coastal and mangrove areas.
Output 2.2. Sustainable management of mangroves is improved through agreements with the private sector,
including direct financial support for mangrove conservation and restoration.
Project Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation
and increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies,
coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.
Output 3.1. Decision making for mangrove management by national government agencies and local
governments is based on generation and provision of accurate and up-to-date data on mangrove condition
and socio-economic information on mangrove dependent communities.
Output 3.2. Legal and regulatory frameworks at local and sectoral level are harmonized and include climate
resilience and mitigation strategies and enforcement.
71. The interventions also need to be designed in a way that minimize potential technical risks that could arise from
the proposed interventions. The main risks to address within the design of technical interventions are:
• Some community members might not benefit equally from the project, exacerbating inequalities; and,
• Poorly implemented project activities could create tensions between different stakeholders who may
have conflicting interests regarding mangrove protection.
72. In addition, socio-political disruption, health risks and natural disasters could cause interruptions to activities
and changes in local, regional or national priorities. Other more general project risks and associated mitigation
measures are explained in section F.1.
73. The project’s theory of change also relies on the following assumptions (all are important but the most important
have been highlighted in bold):
• Community associations feel sufficiently incentivized by project activities to engage in
mangrove conservation and restoration.
• When community associations have resource rights over mangroves, they are more likely to implement
sustainable practices.
• Equipping community associations with the necessary knowledge and skills for mangrove
management and restoration will enhance their ability to implement effective conservation
practices.
• There are sufficient business opportunities for mangrove community associations that can be
developed as part of incentives for better mangrove management.
• Exposure of private sector actors to market drivers and climate risks motivates increased
investments in mangrove protection and climate smart practices.
• Commercial bank lending rates remain at levels that would not discourage investment in sustainable
aquaculture practices.
• Local governments will make use of improved data availability in their decision making and land-use
planning.
• Government agencies will have at least their current resources and capacities to support the
project.
• There will be political will to strengthen the application of legal and regulatory frameworks
during and after project implementation.

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27
B
Iflocal communities are provided with knowledge and resourcesfor mangrove management and livelihoods development, and if the private sector and
Goal government actively collaborate on, and finance, mangrove protection and restoration, and the enabling environment for mangrove protection is strengthened,
then coverage and quality of mangrove ecosystems will be increased, resulting in reduced climate change impacts on vulnerable coastalpopulations, increased
statement
economic resilience, and reduced GHG emissions becausehealthier and more extensive mangroves reduce flood impacts and sequester carbon.
Flood risks to GHG emissions Increased economic Increased biodiversity Increased Increased sustainability of
Outcomes and communities reduced (MRA4) resilience of coastal and ecosystem fisheries shrimp production
reduced (ARA1) communities (ARA1) service benefits value
Co-benefits
Strengthened
Increased cover of mangroves under improved
institutional framework
management (ARA4)
Component 3 (enabling environment):
Component 1 (community focused): Component 2 (private sector focused):
Project Output 3.1: Data on mangrove condition
Project Output 1.1 Strengthened community and Project Output 2.1Mangrove restoration and
Outputs protected areas management of mangroves. eliminating deforestation adopted on “early and socio-economic information available to
decision makers.
Project Output 1.2Improved livelihood activities mover” shrimp aquaculture farms.
Project Output 3.2 Strengthened planning and
and more economically productive community Project Output 2.2 Finance contributed by private
enforcement to support coastal climate resilience
businesses. sector for mangrove conservation and restoration.
and mitigation strategies.
Component 1 activities Component 2 activities
Component 3 activities
1.1.1 Strengthen and expand community-based 2.1.1Promote climate-smart shrimp aquaculture
mangrove conservation and management. practices. 3.1.1Monitor mangrove condition and socio-
economic impacts.
1.1.2Develop mangrove protected area climate 2.1.2Facilitate investment in shrimp farms for
Activities change adaptation strategies. climate-smart aquaculture. 3.2.1Support local governments to improve
and/or implement land use planning.
1.2.1Develop community livelihood and micro 2.2.1Establish agreements with businesses, to
business activities. contribute to mangrove restoration and financial 3.2.2Provide trainings to strengthen regulatory
sustainability of the Socio ManglarProgram. framework and law enforcement.
1.2.2Financial support of mangrove community
associations enterprises.
Figure 8. Simplified Theory of Change diagram for the Project
Activities, barriers, risks and assumptions
Component 3 activities
Activities Component 1 activities Component 2 activities
Barrier 1: Barrier 3: Barrier 4: Risk 3:
Communitieslacklegal Insufficientlong-term, stable Businesses, communitiesand Socio-political disruption,
rights, capacityand financingtosupport local governmentslack health risks and natural
economicalternatives for communitymangrove informationoraccessto disasters could cause
effectivemangrove conservationefforts. technicalsupportneededto interruptions to activities and
conservationand adoptpracticestoreduce changes in local, regional or
management, potentially emissionsand/orexposure national priorities
hinderingtheirengagement. toclimaterisks.
Barriers and
Risks
Barrier 2: Risk 1: Risk 2: Barrier 5: Barrier 6:
Insufficientincentives and Some community members Poorly implemented project Insufficient finance targeted Regulatoryframeworksand
investmentsforpracticesby might not benefit equally activities could create at sustainable aquaculture enforcementare
communitiesand from the project, tensions between different production methods due to inadequateforprotection
businessesthatenhance exacerbating inequalities. stakeholders who may have lack of knowledge among and restorationof
climateresilienceand conflicting interests financial institutions and mangroves
reduce emissions. regarding mangrove demand from producers.
protection
• Community associations feel sufficiently incentivized by project activities to engage in mangrove conservation and restoration.
• When community associations have resource rights over mangrovesthey are more likely to implement sustainable practices.
• Equipping community associations with the necessary knowledge and skills for mangrove management and restoration will enhancetheir ability to implement
effective conservation practices.
• There are sufficient business opportunities for mangrove community associations that can be developed as part of incentives for better mangrove management.
• Exposure of private sector actors to market drivers and climate risks motivates increased investments in mangrove protection andclimate smart practices.
• Commercial bank lending rates remain at levels that would not discourage investment in sustainable aquaculture practices.
• Local governments will make use of improved data availability in their decision making and land-use planning.
• Government agencies will have at least their current resources and capacities to support the project.
• There will be political will to strengthen the application of legal and regulatory frameworks during and after the end of project implementation.

--- Table 1 on Page 34 ---
Iflocal communities are provided with knowledge and resourcesfor mangrove management and livelihoods development, and if the private sector and
Goal government actively collaborate on, and finance, mangrove protection and restoration, and the enabling environment for mangrove protection is strengthened,
then coverage and quality of mangrove ecosystems will be increased, resulting in reduced climate change impacts on vulnerable coastalpopulations, increased
statement
economic resilience, and reduced GHG emissions becausehealthier and more extensive mangroves reduce flood impacts and sequester carbon.
Flood risks to GHG emissions Increased economic Increased biodiversity Increased Increased sustainability of
Outcomes and communities reduced (MRA4) resilience of coastal and ecosystem fisheries shrimp production
reduced (ARA1) communities (ARA1) service benefits value
Co-benefits
Strengthened
Increased cover of mangroves under improved
institutional framework
management (ARA4)
Component 3 (enabling environment):
Component 1 (community focused): Component 2 (private sector focused):
Project Output 3.1: Data on mangrove condition
Project Output 1.1 Strengthened community and Project Output 2.1Mangrove restoration and
Outputs protected areas management of mangroves. eliminating deforestation adopted on “early and socio-economic information available to
decision makers.
Project Output 1.2Improved livelihood activities mover” shrimp aquaculture farms.
Project Output 3.2 Strengthened planning and
and more economically productive community Project Output 2.2 Finance contributed by private
enforcement to support coastal climate resilience
businesses. sector for mangrove conservation and restoration.
and mitigation strategies.
Component 1 activities Component 2 activities
Component 3 activities
1.1.1 Strengthen and expand community-based 2.1.1Promote climate-smart shrimp aquaculture
mangrove conservation and management. practices. 3.1.1Monitor mangrove condition and socio-
economic impacts.
1.1.2Develop mangrove protected area climate 2.1.2Facilitate investment in shrimp farms for
Activities change adaptation strategies. climate-smart aquaculture. 3.2.1Support local governments to improve
and/or implement land use planning.
1.2.1Develop community livelihood and micro 2.2.1Establish agreements with businesses, to
business activities. contribute to mangrove restoration and financial 3.2.2Provide trainings to strengthen regulatory
sustainability of the Socio ManglarProgram. framework and law enforcement.
1.2.2Financial support of mangrove community
associations enterprises.
Figure 8. Simplified Theory of Change diagram for the Project
Activities, barriers, risks and assumptions
Component 3 activities
Activities Component 1 activities Component 2 activities
Barrier 1: Barrier 3: Barrier 4: Risk 3:
Communitieslacklegal Insufficientlong-term, stable Businesses, communitiesand Socio-political disruption,
rights, capacityand financingtosupport local governmentslack health risks and natural
economicalternatives for communitymangrove informationoraccessto disasters could cause
effectivemangrove conservationefforts. technicalsupportneededto interruptions to activities and
conservationand adoptpracticestoreduce changes in local, regional or
management, potentially emissionsand/orexposure national priorities
hinderingtheirengagement. toclimaterisks.
Barriers and
Risks
Barrier 2: Risk 1: Risk 2: Barrier 5: Barrier 6:
Insufficientincentives and Some community members Poorly implemented project Insufficient finance targeted Regulatoryframeworksand
investmentsforpracticesby might not benefit equally activities could create at sustainable aquaculture enforcementare
communitiesand from the project, tensions between different production methods due to inadequateforprotection
businessesthatenhance exacerbating inequalities. stakeholders who may have lack of knowledge among and restorationof
climateresilienceand conflicting interests financial institutions and mangroves
reduce emissions. regarding mangrove demand from producers.
protection
• Community associations feel sufficiently incentivized by project activities to engage in mangrove conservation and restoration.
• When community associations have resource rights over mangrovesthey are more likely to implement sustainable practices.
• Equipping community associations with the necessary knowledge and skills for mangrove management and restoration will enhancetheir ability to implement
effective conservation practices.
• There are sufficient business opportunities for mangrove community associations that can be developed as part of incentives for better mangrove management.
• Exposure of private sector actors to market drivers and climate risks motivates increased investments in mangrove protection andclimate smart practices.
• Commercial bank lending rates remain at levels that would not discourage investment in sustainable aquaculture practices.
• Local governments will make use of improved data availability in their decision making and land-use planning.
• Government agencies will have at least their current resources and capacities to support the project.
• There will be political will to strengthen the application of legal and regulatory frameworks during and after the end of project implementation. | Iflocal communities are provided with knowledge and resourcesfor mangrove management and livelihoods development, and if the private sector and
government actively collaborate on, and finance, mangrove protection and restoration, and the enabling environment for mangrove protection is strengthened,
then coverage and quality of mangrove ecosystems will be increased, resulting in reduced climate change impacts on vulnerable coastalpopulations, increased
economic resilience, and reduced GHG emissions becausehealthier and more extensive mangroves reduce flood impacts and sequester carbon.

--- Table 2 on Page 34 ---
Increased
fisheries
value | Increased sustainability of
shrimp production

--- Table 3 on Page 34 ---
 |  |  | Strengthened
institutional framework | 
Increased cover of mangroves under improved
management (ARA4) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Component 2 (private sector focused):
Project Output 2.1Mangrove restoration and
eliminating deforestation adopted on “early
mover” shrimp aquaculture farms.
Project Output 2.2 Finance contributed by private
sector for mangrove conservation and restoration. | Component 3 (enabling environment):
Project Output 3.1: Data on mangrove condition
and socio-economic information available to
decision makers.
Project Output 3.2 Strengthened planning and
enforcement to support coastal climate resilience
and mitigation strategies. |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Component 2 activities
2.1.1Promote climate-smart shrimp aquaculture
practices.
2.1.2Facilitate investment in shrimp farms for
climate-smart aquaculture.
2.2.1Establish agreements with businesses, to
contribute to mangrove restoration and financial
sustainability of the Socio ManglarProgram. | Component 3 activities
3.1.1Monitor mangrove condition and socio-
economic impacts.
3.2.1Support local governments to improve
and/or implement land use planning.
3.2.2Provide trainings to strengthen regulatory
framework and law enforcement. |  | 

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28
B
Figure 9: Linkages between project components and activities
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
Outcome
Energy Low-emission Building, Forestry and Most Health, well- Infrastructure Ecosystems
number
generation transport cities, land use vulnerable being, food and built and
and access industries, people and and water environment ecosystem
appliances communities security services
Outcome 1.
The area of
mangroves
under
effective ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒
☐ ☐ ☐
climate-
adapted
management
is increased.
Outcome 2.
Flood risks
associated
with climate ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
change are
reduced by
expanding

--- Table 1 on Page 35 ---
Figure 9: Linkages between project components and activities
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
Outcome
Energy Low-emission Building, Forestry and Most Health, well- Infrastructure Ecosystems
number
generation transport cities, land use vulnerable being, food and built and
and access industries, people and and water environment ecosystem
appliances communities security services
Outcome 1.
The area of
mangroves
under
effective ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒
☐ ☐ ☐
climate-
adapted
management
is increased.
Outcome 2.
Flood risks
associated
with climate ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
change are
reduced by
expanding

--- Table 2 on Page 35 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) |  |  |  | GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | MRA 1 | MRA 2 | MRA 3 | MRA 4 | ARA 1 | ARA 2 | ARA 3 | ARA 4
Outcome |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Energy | Low-emission | Building, | Forestry and | Most | Health, well- | Infrastructure | Ecosystems
number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | generation | transport | cities, | land use | vulnerable | being, food | and built | and
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and access |  | industries, |  | people and | and water | environment | ecosystem
 |  |  | appliances |  | communities | security |  | services
Outcome 1.
The area of
mangroves
under
effective
climate-
adapted
management
is increased. | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒
Outcome 2.
Flood risks
associated
with climate
change are
reduced by
expanding | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29
B
mangrove
areas under
effective
climate-
adapted
management.
Outcome 3.
GHG
emissions
from
deforestation
are reduced
and carbon
sequestered
by expanding ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒
mangrove ☐ ☐ ☐
areas under
effective
climate-
adapted
management,
including
mangrove
restoration.
Outcome 4.
Institutional
framework for
This outcome maps to core indicator 5 (enabling environment) of GCF’s IRMF: Degree to which GCF investments
mangrove
contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory frameworks for low-emission climate-resilient development
protection
pathways in a country-driven manner.
and coastal
planning is
strengthened.
Co-benefit
Co-benefit number
Environment
Social Economic Gender Adaptation Mitigation
al
1. Biodiversity and
ecosystem service ☒
benefits are ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
increased
2. Economic
resilience of coastal ☒
communities is ☐ ☐
increased
3. Uptake of
sustainable shrimp ☒ ☐
production practices ☐
is increased
4. Economic value
of fisheries for ☒
artisanal fishers is ☐ ☐ ☐
increased
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)

--- Table 1 on Page 36 ---
mangrove
areas under
effective
climate-
adapted
management.
Outcome 3.
GHG
emissions
from
deforestation
are reduced
and carbon
sequestered
by expanding ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒
mangrove ☐ ☐ ☐
areas under
effective
climate-
adapted
management,
including
mangrove
restoration.
Outcome 4.
Institutional
framework for
This outcome maps to core indicator 5 (enabling environment) of GCF’s IRMF: Degree to which GCF investments
mangrove
contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory frameworks for low-emission climate-resilient development
protection
pathways in a country-driven manner.
and coastal
planning is
strengthened.
Co-benefit
Co-benefit number
Environment
Social Economic Gender Adaptation Mitigation
al
1. Biodiversity and
ecosystem service ☒
benefits are ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
increased
2. Economic
resilience of coastal ☒
communities is ☐ ☐
increased
3. Uptake of
sustainable shrimp ☒ ☐
production practices ☐
is increased
4. Economic value
of fisheries for ☒
artisanal fishers is ☐ ☐ ☐
increased
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)

--- Table 2 on Page 36 ---
mangrove
areas under
effective
climate-
adapted
management. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Outcome 3.
GHG
emissions
from
deforestation
are reduced
and carbon
sequestered
by expanding
mangrove
areas under
effective
climate-
adapted
management,
including
mangrove
restoration. | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒
Outcome 4.
Institutional
framework for
mangrove
protection
and coastal
planning is
strengthened. | This outcome maps to core indicator 5 (enabling environment) of GCF’s IRMF: Degree to which GCF investments
contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory frameworks for low-emission climate-resilient development
pathways in a country-driven manner. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 36 ---
Co-benefit number | Co-benefit |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Environment |  | Social | Economic | Gender | Adaptation | Mitigation
 |  | al |  |  |  |  |  | 
1. Biodiversity and
ecosystem service
benefits are
increased | ☒ |  |  | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | 
2. Economic
resilience of coastal
communities is
increased | ☐ |  |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐
3. Uptake of
sustainable shrimp
production practices
is increased | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | 
4. Economic value
of fisheries for
artisanal fishers is
increased | ☐ |  |  |  | ☒ | ☐ |  | ☐

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30
B
B.3.1 Overview
74. Mangroves are among the planet’s most important habitats for carbon sequestration and Ecuador’s mangroves
have been identified as important stocks of irrecoverable carbon – carbon that once lost cannot now be
recovered before 2050 when the world must reach net-zero emissions to avoid the worst impacts of climate
change (Noon et al., 2021). At the same time, because mangroves sequester carbon into the soil over centuries,
mangrove restoration is an important nature-based solution over both the short- and long-term. Mangroves also
provide essential functions for coastal protection and reduction of flood risks for vulnerable populations with a
high incidence of poverty as well as for vital economic sectors for Ecuador’s economy, principally shrimp
aquaculture, of which 97% are small and medium producers. Mangroves also provide a suite of ecosystem
services that support livelihoods, particularly due to their importance in natural fisheries, making their
conservation and restoration multi-benefit, no-regret approaches to addressing climate change.
75. As described in section B1, loss of Ecuador’s mangroves has slowed in the last decade, but unprotected areas
continue to lose mangroves annually. This project will transform the situation by consolidating the recent gains
in community managed areas, address remaining drivers of deforestation and scale-up mangrove restoration
by catalyzing partnerships between community, private and public sector actors, and long-term incentives to
protect mangroves will be provided to AUSCEM through the Socio Manglar program.
76. Reducing gross deforestation rates of mangroves by 250 ha per year (50% of man-made deforestation) and
restoring 4,850 ha of mangroves are the principle direct strategies for generating flood-protection benefits for
89,600 people (coastal flood protection from mangroves), livelihoods benefits and economic resilience for
41,500 people from mangrove-dependent communities, achieving net emissions reductions and sequestration
of 4.6 MtCO2e over 20 years39, and integrating climate-change adaptation strategies into regional development
plans and policy instruments for 3.4 million people.
The project will focus on a combination of measures relating to reducing mangrove deforestation and increasing
reforestation, centered on community-based conservation approaches, increased private-sector engagement
and improved government agency and public-sector capacity centered on three main Components and six
project Outputs as described in Section B.2., the Theory of Change. Specific Project Results and Activities are
summarized below, with additional detail provided in Section 5.4.3 of Annex 2 and in Section E.6 of this
proposal (Log Frame, Activities).
Component 1 focuses on actions to increase both the area of mangrove under protection by local community
stakeholders, their economic sustainability and the quality and effectiveness of management for these areas, as well
as national PAs, to reduce flood risks and provide multiple benefits.
Component 2 focuses on engaging the private sector, particularly shrimp aquaculture, to become a transformational
agent for change, reversing its previous role as an agent of mangrove loss. This component will promote the
integration of climate-smart production practices to increase climate resilience and reduce pressures for mangrove
deforestation as well as catalyze new sources of financing for the long-term sustainability of community-led mangrove
conservation.
Component 3 focuses on creating the enabling conditions, through improved governance and the generation of
timely, targeted information, which are the scaffolding supporting mangrove conservation, planning, regulation and
benefits to the broader coastal and national communities.
77. Each component addresses critical barriers; none is sufficient alone to produce the desired climate outcomes
of maintaining mangroves to reduce vulnerability, especially to floods, and to reduce emissions. Local action by
communities requires responsive public institutions, reliable information, accessible finance and constructive
relationships with the private sector. For the private sector, realizing sustainable growth opportunities and
contributing to recovery of mangroves cannot be achieved in atomized fashion, but requires clear and consistent
regulation, and its application, as well as supportive government action to position the country’s shrimp sector
as a pioneer in climate-smart production.
B.3.2 Outcomes’ contribution to GCF Integrated Results Management Framework (IRMF)
39 732,000 tCO2e over the 7-year project implementation period

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31
B
78. A detailed description of project impacts and outcomes with regards to the GCF IRMF is included in sections
E.3 and E.4 of the Logical Framework. The project outcomes will be measured according to the core indicators
of the GCF IRMF and the project’s contribution to the IRMF indicators is briefly summarized here:
ARA 1 Most vulnerable people and communities
79. All three components, by working synergistically to conserve and expand mangrove cover to reduce flood risk,
contribute to reducing the impact of coastal flooding for 89,600 vulnerable people, 68% of whom live in poverty.
Component 1 specifically targets work with 41,500 people whose livelihoods directly depend on mangroves,
primarily through artisanal fisheries.
ARA4 Ecosystems and ecosystem services
80. All three components of the project, with convergent activities reinforcing sustainable management,
conservation and restoration, contribute to improved resilience of 156,633 ha mangrove ecosystems, by
ensuring maximum contiguous coverage and sustainable practices that do not undermine the ecological and
structural integrity of the ecosystem. Community-based approaches will directly focus on a total of 70,000 ha40,
PAs on 64,916 ha (Component 1), while private sector and governance-oriented approaches (Components 2
and 3) ensure the overall enabling conditions reducing pressures on mangroves in coastal Ecuador.
MRA 4 Forestry and land use
81. All three components converge on a primary goal of reducing mangrove deforestation by 250 ha per year.
Components 1 and 2 will result directly in 4,850 ha of mangrove reforestation in priority areas, which, over time,
will also reduce risks for populations in their areas of influence. These combined mangrove-based mitigation
activities will result in 4.6 MtCO2e in emissions reductions over 20 years (732,000 tCO2e by end of project
implementation).
82. Additionally to the IRMF, the project contributes to the GCF USP2 Targets, as follows:
Strategic Priority Description Contribution
Country More than 100 developing countries NDC and NAP:
Programming directly supported to advance NDCs, Ecuador will be directly supported to advance
NAPs or LTS implementation of its NDC as set out in the national
NDC implementation plan (which also currently
serves as the implementation plan for the new (2023)
National Adaptation Plan). The project will support
Ecuador’s conditional GHG reductions goals and
adaptation goals to increase the cover of mangrove
and expand the use of community-based
management of mangroves through AUSCEMs. The
project is expected to reduce national GHG
emissions by 732,000 tCO2e over the project
implementation period and 4.6 MtCO2e over the
project lifespan. The project will strengthen
management of 70,000 hectares of mangroves under
community management as part of the SBP41.
Ecuador’s current NDC goal is to increase the forest
area in the SBP by 127,500 hectares, including
mangroves. The project will establish an additional
10 community-held AUSCEMs covering mangroves
in addition to strengthening the existing 59
community associations with AUSCEMs (Ecuador’s
current NDC goal is to establish new 30 AUSCEMs
covering mangrove areas).
40 Including 60,217 ha in active AUSCEMs and an additional ~10,000 ha to be added.
41 the project will support the Socio Mang lar program, which is the part of the SBP focused on mangroves

--- Table 1 on Page 38 ---
78. A detailed description of project impacts and outcomes with regards to the GCF IRMF is included in sections
E.3 and E.4 of the Logical Framework. The project outcomes will be measured according to the core indicators
of the GCF IRMF and the project’s contribution to the IRMF indicators is briefly summarized here:
ARA 1 Most vulnerable people and communities
79. All three components, by working synergistically to conserve and expand mangrove cover to reduce flood risk,
contribute to reducing the impact of coastal flooding for 89,600 vulnerable people, 68% of whom live in poverty.
Component 1 specifically targets work with 41,500 people whose livelihoods directly depend on mangroves,
primarily through artisanal fisheries.
ARA4 Ecosystems and ecosystem services
80. All three components of the project, with convergent activities reinforcing sustainable management,
conservation and restoration, contribute to improved resilience of 156,633 ha mangrove ecosystems, by
ensuring maximum contiguous coverage and sustainable practices that do not undermine the ecological and
structural integrity of the ecosystem. Community-based approaches will directly focus on a total of 70,000 ha40,
PAs on 64,916 ha (Component 1), while private sector and governance-oriented approaches (Components 2
and 3) ensure the overall enabling conditions reducing pressures on mangroves in coastal Ecuador.
MRA 4 Forestry and land use
81. All three components converge on a primary goal of reducing mangrove deforestation by 250 ha per year.
Components 1 and 2 will result directly in 4,850 ha of mangrove reforestation in priority areas, which, over time,
will also reduce risks for populations in their areas of influence. These combined mangrove-based mitigation
activities will result in 4.6 MtCO2e in emissions reductions over 20 years (732,000 tCO2e by end of project
implementation).
82. Additionally to the IRMF, the project contributes to the GCF USP2 Targets, as follows:
Strategic Priority Description Contribution
Country More than 100 developing countries NDC and NAP:
Programming directly supported to advance NDCs, Ecuador will be directly supported to advance
NAPs or LTS implementation of its NDC as set out in the national
NDC implementation plan (which also currently
serves as the implementation plan for the new (2023)
National Adaptation Plan). The project will support
Ecuador’s conditional GHG reductions goals and
adaptation goals to increase the cover of mangrove
and expand the use of community-based
management of mangroves through AUSCEMs. The
project is expected to reduce national GHG
emissions by 732,000 tCO2e over the project
implementation period and 4.6 MtCO2e over the
project lifespan. The project will strengthen
management of 70,000 hectares of mangroves under
community management as part of the SBP41.
Ecuador’s current NDC goal is to increase the forest
area in the SBP by 127,500 hectares, including
mangroves. The project will establish an additional
10 community-held AUSCEMs covering mangroves
in addition to strengthening the existing 59
community associations with AUSCEMs (Ecuador’s
current NDC goal is to establish new 30 AUSCEMs
covering mangrove areas). |  |  | 
 | Strategic Priority | Description | Contribution
 | Country
Programming | More than 100 developing countries
directly supported to advance NDCs,
NAPs or LTS | NDC and NAP:
Ecuador will be directly supported to advance
implementation of its NDC as set out in the national
NDC implementation plan (which also currently
serves as the implementation plan for the new (2023)
National Adaptation Plan). The project will support
Ecuador’s conditional GHG reductions goals and
adaptation goals to increase the cover of mangrove
and expand the use of community-based
management of mangroves through AUSCEMs. The
project is expected to reduce national GHG
emissions by 732,000 tCO2e over the project
implementation period and 4.6 MtCO2e over the
project lifespan. The project will strengthen
management of 70,000 hectares of mangroves under
community management as part of the SBP41.
Ecuador’s current NDC goal is to increase the forest
area in the SBP by 127,500 hectares, including
mangroves. The project will establish an additional
10 community-held AUSCEMs covering mangroves
in addition to strengthening the existing 59
community associations with AUSCEMs (Ecuador’s
current NDC goal is to establish new 30 AUSCEMs
covering mangrove areas).

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32
B
Food 190 to 280 million beneficiaries 89,600 people.
adopting low-emission climate- Mangroves provide a range of ecosystem services
resilient agricultural and fisheries that directly and indirectly contribute to the
livelihoods and food security of local people. In
addition to the flood protection services that will
provide important climate change adaptation benefits
to 89,600 people, mangroves serve as important
nurseries and breeding grounds for species of fish,
shrimp, crabs and clams that support artisanal and
commercial/industrial fisheries. 41,500 people are
expected to benefit from low-emission, climate
resilient fisheries management practices that
underpin their livelihoods. Note that CI is
conservatively assuming that the 41,500 people are
included within the 89,600 beneficiaries of flood
protection.
Ecosystems 120 to 190 million hectares of 156,633 hectares
terrestrial and marine areas The project will contribute to the protection and
conserved, restored or brought under sustainable management of a total of 156,633ha of
sustainable management mangrove ecosystems by increasing the area under
community management, strengthening PA planning
to integrate climate change adaptation, improved
coastal land-use planning and strengthening the
capacity of government agencies and local
governments to enforce existing regulations
designed to protect mangroves.
Total (no double-counting) 156,633 ha (excludes restored areas)
1.Sustainable management (sub- 91,733 ha
total)
2.Conserved/protected (subtotal) 64,900 ha
3.Restored/natural regen/agroforestry 4,850 ha
etc (subtotal)
Infrastructure 45 to 60 developing countries Mangroves will provide flood protection benefits that
develop climate resilient reduce risk of coastal flooding and related damage.
infrastructure; including ecosystem-
based approaches
Adaptation and 40-70 approved proposals for The project will promote locally led adaptation action
locally-led action adaptation projects, including for through community management of mangroves and
locally-led adaptation action. action by the private sector to reduce deforestation
and support mangrove restoration.
Degree to which GCF investments contribute to strengthened institutional and regulatory frameworks for
low-emission climate-resilient development pathways in a country-driven manner.
83. Strengthening institutional and regulatory frameworks is the primary goal of Component 3, working particularly
with local (municipal and parish-level governments) as well as national-level institutions responsible for
planning, regulation, enforcement and information. Nine subnational governments and a variety of national
government institutions (e.g., MAATE and the Judiciary) will be strengthened through project activities, including
training, regulatory reform, technical support for planning, and improved inter-institutional coordination. At the
grassroots level, 60 mangrove-based associations will benefit from training and technical support to strengthen
their capacity for climate-responsive planning and development. The project also addresses current barriers
and deficiencies by supporting the capacity of government entities to monitor and report mangrove forest cover
and carbon stock information to enhance national mitigation efforts.

--- Table 1 on Page 39 ---
Food 190 to 280 million beneficiaries 89,600 people.
adopting low-emission climate- Mangroves provide a range of ecosystem services
resilient agricultural and fisheries that directly and indirectly contribute to the
livelihoods and food security of local people. In
addition to the flood protection services that will
provide important climate change adaptation benefits
to 89,600 people, mangroves serve as important
nurseries and breeding grounds for species of fish,
shrimp, crabs and clams that support artisanal and
commercial/industrial fisheries. 41,500 people are
expected to benefit from low-emission, climate
resilient fisheries management practices that
underpin their livelihoods. Note that CI is
conservatively assuming that the 41,500 people are
included within the 89,600 beneficiaries of flood
protection.
Ecosystems 120 to 190 million hectares of 156,633 hectares
terrestrial and marine areas The project will contribute to the protection and
conserved, restored or brought under sustainable management of a total of 156,633ha of
sustainable management mangrove ecosystems by increasing the area under
community management, strengthening PA planning
to integrate climate change adaptation, improved
coastal land-use planning and strengthening the
capacity of government agencies and local
governments to enforce existing regulations
designed to protect mangroves.
Total (no double-counting) 156,633 ha (excludes restored areas)
1.Sustainable management (sub- 91,733 ha
total)
2.Conserved/protected (subtotal) 64,900 ha
3.Restored/natural regen/agroforestry 4,850 ha
etc (subtotal)
Infrastructure 45 to 60 developing countries Mangroves will provide flood protection benefits that
develop climate resilient reduce risk of coastal flooding and related damage.
infrastructure; including ecosystem-
based approaches
Adaptation and 40-70 approved proposals for The project will promote locally led adaptation action
locally-led action adaptation projects, including for through community management of mangroves and
locally-led adaptation action. action by the private sector to reduce deforestation
and support mangrove restoration.
Degree to which GCF investments contribute to strengthened institutional and regulatory frameworks for
low-emission climate-resilient development pathways in a country-driven manner.
83. Strengthening institutional and regulatory frameworks is the primary goal of Component 3, working particularly
with local (municipal and parish-level governments) as well as national-level institutions responsible for
planning, regulation, enforcement and information. Nine subnational governments and a variety of national
government institutions (e.g., MAATE and the Judiciary) will be strengthened through project activities, including
training, regulatory reform, technical support for planning, and improved inter-institutional coordination. At the
grassroots level, 60 mangrove-based associations will benefit from training and technical support to strengthen
their capacity for climate-responsive planning and development. The project also addresses current barriers
and deficiencies by supporting the capacity of government entities to monitor and report mangrove forest cover
and carbon stock information to enhance national mitigation efforts. | Food | 190 to 280 million beneficiaries
adopting low-emission climate-
resilient agricultural and fisheries | 89,600 people.
Mangroves provide a range of ecosystem services
that directly and indirectly contribute to the
livelihoods and food security of local people. In
addition to the flood protection services that will
provide important climate change adaptation benefits
to 89,600 people, mangroves serve as important
nurseries and breeding grounds for species of fish,
shrimp, crabs and clams that support artisanal and
commercial/industrial fisheries. 41,500 people are
expected to benefit from low-emission, climate
resilient fisheries management practices that
underpin their livelihoods. Note that CI is
conservatively assuming that the 41,500 people are
included within the 89,600 beneficiaries of flood
protection.
 | Ecosystems | 120 to 190 million hectares of
terrestrial and marine areas
conserved, restored or brought under
sustainable management | 156,633 hectares
The project will contribute to the protection and
sustainable management of a total of 156,633ha of
mangrove ecosystems by increasing the area under
community management, strengthening PA planning
to integrate climate change adaptation, improved
coastal land-use planning and strengthening the
capacity of government agencies and local
governments to enforce existing regulations
designed to protect mangroves.
 |  | Total (no double-counting) | 156,633 ha (excludes restored areas)
 |  | 1.Sustainable management (sub-
total) | 91,733 ha
 |  | 2.Conserved/protected (subtotal) | 64,900 ha
 |  | 3.Restored/natural regen/agroforestry
etc (subtotal) | 4,850 ha
 | Infrastructure | 45 to 60 developing countries
develop climate resilient
infrastructure; including ecosystem-
based approaches | Mangroves will provide flood protection benefits that
reduce risk of coastal flooding and related damage.
 | Adaptation and
locally-led action | 40-70 approved proposals for
adaptation projects, including for
locally-led adaptation action. | The project will promote locally led adaptation action
through community management of mangroves and
action by the private sector to reduce deforestation
and support mangrove restoration.

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33
B
84. All three components contribute to maintaining and expanding mangrove coverage as a strategy to reduce flood
risks through mangrove protection for 89,600 people.
85. Three million and four hundred thousand people living in the eight priority municipalities will be reached as
indirect beneficiaries by risk reduction measures established as part of PDOTs, public investments and other
policies and programs adopted by these subnational governments.
B.3.3 Project Description (see Annex 2; Section 5.4.3 for additional detail; please see E.5.
Project/programme for a chart on specific outputs and their results)
Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate-adapted management increased, including
through community-based management (AUSCEMs) and PAs implementing climate adaptation plans.
86. Legally recognized, community-based stewardship, despite having demonstrated its effectiveness in protecting
mangroves (see Table 3), still has significant gaps in coverage that can be resolved through outreach and
assistance in organizing, planning and a strengthened relationship with the government programs that
recognize AUSCEM. For existing AUSCEM associations, ensuring that they have the organizational capacity
to sustain their stewardship and renew their management plans and legal agreements is critical to ensuring that
effectiveness of management is maintained.
87. These community-based mechanisms are also frequently economically precarious. Generating stronger local
economic benefits based on mangrove conservation, in the form of both public incentives (from the Socio
Manglar Program), finance for restoration activities, and local sustainable enterprises and livelihoods activities
is indispensable to ensuring that sustainable management and conservation of mangroves is economically
viable and contributes to dignified, equitable livelihoods.
88. Restoration of 4,600 ha under community stewardship will contribute to enhancing mangrove coverage and
associated benefits42.
89. By ensuring that AUSCEMs, as well as national PAs, grow both quantitatively (in area covered) and qualitatively,
in terms of robust management that integrates climate-change resiliency, mangrove areas will provide flood-
protection benefits for 89,600 vulnerable people, as well as directly benefiting communities who are dependent
on mangrove resources.
Output 1.1. Reduced exposure to flood risk for vulnerable people and reduced GHG emissions from mangrove
restoration are achieved by strengthening community-based management through AUSCEMs and PAs.
Activity 1.1.1. Strengthen and expand community-based mangrove conservation and management to reduce
deforestation and increase mangrove restoration.
90. CI and PUCESE (Pontifical Catholic University of Ecuador Esmeraldas Extension) will provide training,
exchanges, and targeted material support as key tools to strengthen the inclusive governance of existing
AUSCEMs, focusing on a variety of topics and tools that will empower these associations to better protect
mangroves at risk of deforestation, enhance their livelihood benefits and adapt to climate risk. As a result, at
least 60 associations, representing 4,600 families (24% with women-headed households), will have stronger
human, organizational and operational capacity reflected in Management Capacity Assessments and the
effective maintenance or renewal of AUSCEM agreements.
91. Existing AUSCEM groups will receive ongoing technical assistance from CI Ecuador or PUCESE for the
management, renewal and reporting of their agreements with the MAATE (Undersecretary of Natural Heritage),
including support for preparing semiannual reporting to MAATE and development and/or updating of
management plans for the mangrove areas under their responsibility. In each of the southern estuaries, CI will
have two project staff: one Mangrove Specialist and one Social Specialist responsible for daily activities in the
field. For the two northern estuaries, PUCESE will employ a Project Coordinator, a Mangrove specialist, a Social
Specialist and 10 community agents to support work in the field.
42 Note that an additional 250 ha of mangrove restoration is also planned under Activity 2.2.1 to be supported directly by shrimp
farms/aquaculture companies.

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34
B
92. CI and PUCESE will provide training sessions in the field with all association members and the fishers’ spouses
interested in participating in the trainings43. For the leaders of the associations, follow-up sessions will be
implemented to reinforce knowledge.
93. To ensure that the AUSCEMs can carry out their mangrove management and protection role, CI will also provide
equipment via in-kind grants to support community patrols, threats and environmental monitoring and to assist
with reporting infractions. To this end, the associations will be provided with basic monitoring equipment (for
measuring fish sizes as part of mangrove fisheries monitoring), GPS devices and demarcation signage.
94. As shown in section B.1., mangrove areas without AUSCEMs are at high risk of deforestation and this activity
is designed to increase community protection of mangroves. The areas prioritized for expansion of AUSCEMS
are those that are most likely to contribute quickly to the project’s deforestation reduction targets because they
have high threat, larger areas with good existing or potential governance structures; and areas most likely to
shield human settlements from coastal flooding. CI and PUCESE will support groups that have a lapsed
AUSCEM agreement with MAATE to renew their agreements (13,000 ha). In addition, for 10,000 ha of
mangroves not yet under AUSCEMs, CI and PUCESE will support community associations to establish new
AUSCEM in close collaboration with MAATE (Undersecretary of Natural Heritage) for the selection of the new
areas and the enforcement of the authority in the field. Technical support will be provided to the community
associations to develop the management plans and legal documents needed for the AUSCEM application
process and to undertake a community consultation process that ensures FPIC. These activities will start in the
second year and continue until the end of Year 5.
95. CI and PUCESE will also provide technical assistance to current and new AUSCEM groups to prepare and
apply for Socio Manglar incentive payments, with the aim of expanding coverage from the current baseline of
33,467 ha of mangroves under 25 AUSCEM groups receiving incentive payments to 62,243 ha during the
project implementation. In preparation for the application process, support will be provided to develop an
investment plan, and financial accounting training will be provided to ensure adequate capacity for managing
funds received from the Socio Manglar program (including verification that necessary bank accounts and legal
documents are in place). For successful applicants, CI and PUCESE will provide follow-up training on budgeting
practices and on requirements for monitoring and reporting to MAATE. The trainings and technical support will
also include diversity, equity and inclusion trainings with a particular focus on gender, governance and decision
making, accountability, financial planning, tax reporting and legal procedures for the associations and models
for investing the incentive in economic alternatives. This technical assistance will be provided in Years 2-5 of
the project.
96. GCF funding (targeting 4,600 ha restored) will be invested to cover costs of mangrove restoration with
AUSCEMs’ involvement, for which CI will enter into a combination of grant agreements with the associations
and service agreements with service providers for restoration activities. In addition, CI and PUCESE will support
training, monitoring and technical follow-up. This will be done from Years 2 to 5 and with the support of the
restoration specialist and the social technician based in each estuary.
97. Details of the process for identifying priority areas for restoration and further details on restoration methods are
provided in Appendices 3 and 4 of Annex 2, the Feasibility Study.
Activity 1.1.2. Implementation of mitigation and adaptation strategies in 64,913 ha of mangroves located in PAs.
98. Currently, PAs do not have enough human and financial resources to effectively implement conservation and
management actions nor to include adaptation or mitigation practices. As described in Section B1 and the
Feasibility Study, well-managed mangrove PAs have lower deforestation and therefore GHG emissions than
unprotected areas. Improving PA effectiveness can further reduce GHG emissions from loss and degradation
of the areas and increase new carbon sequestration through active restoration activities and natural mangrove
recovery. Mangroves themselves are potentially vulnerable to climate change and therefore PA managers need
to ensure that they are managing the PAs consistent with promoting ecosystem resilience. For example, one
issue with SLR is the need for mangroves to be able to expand landward. Ensuring that there is space to do so
could require management action in surrounding habitats. PAs usually don’t include adequate adaptation
practices in the management plans, so working to improve the planning and implementation of climate
adaptation actions is important.
43 There is one association in Jambeli Estuary that only has women as active members, the others are mainly formed by men.

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35
B
99. CI and PUCESE will work with MAATE staff (paid with MAATE in-kind co-financing) in four PAs – Manglares
Cayapas Mataje, Manglares Churute, Manglares El Salado and Manglares Estuario des Rio Muisine – which
are the PAs with the largest area of mangrove and the most deforestation (in terms of area), and therefore have
the highest potential for further reductions in deforestation. CI, PUCESE and MAATE staff will work to integrate
climate-change into planning instruments (management plans and annual operating plans) for each of the PAs.
In Year 1, workshops will be organized by CI to identify the conservation objectives and the specific climate
change threats that each PA faces. During Year 2, the partners will develop assessments of each PA
management plan, that will include recommendations for climate resilience and adaptation and identify
strategies and actions with MAATE staff and local stakeholders. The assessments and recommendations are
intended to be integrated into updated PA management plans at their next update (typically management plans
are updated every five years); and will be developed under service agreements through a competitive bid
process. During Years 2 and 3, twice-yearly training events will be developed in each of the PAs to make PA
managers aware of climate change risks and vulnerabilities and how to explicitly incorporate climate change
adaptation into MPA management plans and objectives.
100. Management of PAs to reduce deforestation will also be strengthened by improving staff training and providing
equipment for threat monitoring, enforcement, and community engagement, including monitoring equipment
such as data loggers, gear for underwater surveys, software and computers to ensure monitoring in line with
the climate adapted management plans and analysis of information collected. This equipment will be managed
by PA staff, with resources from the national environmental fund (FIAS) covering costs of operation and
maintenance.
101. Project impacts and learning at the four PAs will be amplified through the national network of PAs (Red de
Areas Marinas y Costeras Protegidas del Ecuador). PAs and PA networks need to be adaptively designed and
managed to address altered coastal and oceanic conditions and habitat shifts due to climate change, which
may affect future boundaries, locations, and sizes. Networks help reduce risk and promote resiliency. A network
analysis and action plan will be developed in Year 3. For this activity, CI will work closely with the Undersecretary
of Natural Heritage and the provincial offices of MAATE.
102. In subsequent years, knowledge on the design, implementation and monitoring practices will be presented to
the PA Network to amplify action. For this, CI will hold a workshop in Year 4 with all the marine PAs in the PA
network, produce and distribute guidelines on how to integrate climate change into management plans and
organize activities with local associations to highlight the importance of the topic. The PA network is critical to
maintaining climate change resilience and rebuilding ecological and social resilience.
Output 1.2. Improved livelihood activities and more economically productive community businesses to enable local
people to become more resilient to climate change and incentivized to participate in, and maintain, mangrove
conservation and restoration.
Activity 1.2.1. Technical and business development support to mangrove community associations, with an emphasis
on women, youth, and other vulnerable groups.
103. By supporting mangrove-dependent communities, through groups formally linked to mangrove conservation,
ongoing conservation and stewardship can be made economically viable, with improved incomes reinforcing
conservation, climate change mitigation and resilience objectives. By improving the economic productivity of
community enterprises, the value of mangroves to the communities is also increased and this creates incentives
for mangrove conservation. Increasing incomes to communities increases their resilience to climate change
shocks and provides more opportunities to adopt adaptation measures. CI and PUCESE will provide support to
at least 60 community associations linked to protection of mangroves to design and implement business plans
and strategies, including strategies for improving enterprise governance and administration, access to finance
and to markets for more resilient livelihood strategies from Year 1 of the project, with additional technical
capacity provided through specialist consultants. The estuary-based CI sustainable production specialist and
the social specialist will work directly with the associations. The main strategy of this Activity is focused on
adding value to mangrove-dependent fisheries products. Product quality and food safety will be enhanced by
monitoring cold chains, classification and selection of product sizes and classes according to market
requirements.
104. Other community economic activities not directly related to seafood products will also be supported to enforce
resilience of local communities and diversify income sources. These initiatives will receive technical support
from CI, market analysis and study visits to other initiatives for one-to-one training.

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36
B
Activity 1.2.2. Establish and consolidate financial mechanisms in support of mangrove community associations
(micro- and small enterprises).
105. Activity 1.2.2 is designed as a follow-on to support early-stage businesses (either new ones created in Activity
1.2.1 or existing ones).
106. CI will award small cash grants on a competitive basis for productive projects originating with the associations
legally established in the areas of the project and supported under Activity 1.2.1. Various organizations with
legal status in the provinces of Esmeraldas, Manabí, Guayas and El Oro will participate, including both
AUSCEM groups and other organizations with links to mangroves. The objective is to support promising micro-
and small-scale enterprises by helping them to scale their operations with the aim of improving the income of
these organizations and the standard of living of their members, while strengthening the incentives for
sustainable use of mangrove environmental goods and services. To be eligible for the grants, the enterprises
will require a simple business plan that includes a financial analysis demonstrating how the grant will transform
the business. These enterprises are artisanal fishing production association or cooperatives that report to the
Superintendence of Popular and Solidarity Economy. Also, in this category are included microenterprises that
have an annual income less than US$100,000 and between 1 to 9 workers.
107. This grant mechanism, totaling US$500,000, will be administered by CI and will provide an estimated 20-25
cash grants to community associations (US$10,000-50,000 per grant). Grant support can be invested in
processing equipment, operating costs and other needs to scale up enterprises. Selection criteria for the grants
have been designed (See Appendix 5 of Annex 2, Feasibility Study), and a selection committee will include
representatives from MAATE, associations and partner organizations of the project. CI will enter into grant
agreements with grantees and monitor sub-grants using CI’s policies and procedures.
108. To access credit and investment from existing private and public financial institutions, CI will support
associations to develop cost and market analysis to increase the degree of formality of the mangrove community
business, define baseline indicators (e.g., operational efficiency and profitability of the operation, profit/ha/day,
feed conversion index). This information and technical support will be used to provide assistance in the
identification and application to national sources of finance, such as cooperatives, public financial institutions
(BanEcuador) and other private financial entities that provide credit and investment to micro- and small
enterprises.
109. CI will hire a Bioentrepreneur Specialist with expertise in small enterprise development to provide the technical
support described in activity 1.2.2.
Component 2: The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions
and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for other
coastal populations.
110. Engagement with the private sector in the project consists of promoting and enabling the adoption of improved
shrimp production methods to reduce mangrove deforestation (and achieve other GHG emissions reductions
that are not the focus of the project) and advancing mangrove conservation and restoration through
philanthropic support. CI will work with Ecuador’s NCA to provide training on the SSP approach, which includes
a no-deforestation requirement and to promote CSS production methods that include mangrove restoration
(250 ha planned on farms in the project). CI will engage consultants to support small- and medium-sized shrimp
farms to access private finance.
111. In preparation for the project, the ASC and CI provided seed funding (US$50,000 and $100,000, respectively)
in 2021 to establish the Socio Manglar subaccount of Ecuador’s Socio Bosque Fund. This funding will be
available to support the Socio Manglar program during project implementation. ASC will request that their
members contribute to growing this subaccount through voluntary contributions.44 Additional fundraising by CI
and the Government of Ecuador will grow the subaccount to provide long-term community incentives for
mangrove conservation. Four million dollars (US$4 million) is requested from GCF to contribute to the Socio
Manglar subaccount and will be managed in an interest-bearing account separate from other contributors’
funds, which will be managed in an investment account in accordance with the investment policy of the fund
manager, FIAS.
44 These funds will be reported as parallel co-financing for the project during implementation.

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37
B
112. Adoption of improved management and production practices in the shrimp sector would lead to reduced GHG
emissions, improved climate resilience, and reduced environmental impacts, all while increasing production and
profitability of the sector (see Section B1 for discussion of shrimp aquaculture and the reasons these changes
have not yet occurred). By working on sector-wide policy and market changes, and directly working with a core
group of ‘early adopters’ comprising at least 20,000 ha (approximately 10% of all shrimp farms in Ecuador) to
adopt an integrated package of CSS practices, the project will:
• Reduce deforestation on current shrimp farms and build climate resiliency by reducing the overall
environmental footprint in terms of energy use, water quality, and biodiversity loss, and increased
profitability (through increased yields). Since the project will be working to protect all mangroves in
the project area (and almost all mangroves nationally) through either community AUSCEM
agreements, PAs or improved land-use planning with subnational governments, there is very little
opportunity for leakage of deforestation caused by improved management on farms.
• Restore 250 ha of mangrove forests on current shrimp farm areas (resulting in removal of 0.1
MtCO2e).
• Catalyze an estimated US$5 million in investment in the transition to CSS from private-sector sources
(see section B1 for background on other investment institutions interested in the aquaculture sector).
Note that GCF grant funding will not be used to directly invest in shrimp production using CSS
methods on shrimp farms. Shrimp farms needing to invest will do so from their own resources or from
private sector finance sources.
113. The rollout and adoption of the SSP approach and/or ASC certification nationally alongside the use of CSS will
push the shrimp aquaculture sector to adhere to zero deforestation and promote mangrove restoration. The
increased profitability of the CSS model will act as an incentive for farms to invest in it without the need for
future public grant funding. As farmers modernize their production ponds by adding aerators, autofeeders, and
water quality sensors and by utilizing biosecurity protocols, water quality management systems, and improved
data management and analytics, they are able to reduce the cost of producing shrimp on a per kilogram basis
and produce more shrimp per hectare of ponds. This enables farms to increase their profitability and output.
Sustainable intensification requires increasing technical capacity to enable ‘best management practices’ (see
Activity 2.1.1), financing of capital improvements (see Activity 2.1.2), and policy alignment (see Activity 2.1.3).
The CSS strategy will be applied to farms in different geographies, in areas of high climate vulnerability, and
near mangrove AUSCEMs and areas associated with Socio Manglar incentives. The project will specifically
target areas where risks, vulnerability and ecosystem services overlap. More broadly, this project will strengthen
the enabling conditions in policy, capacity, and market conditions to drive a sector-wide shift in production
practices to favor zero-deforestation and restoration of mangroves in and around shrimp aquaculture areas.
Project output 2.1. Shrimp aquaculture farms adopt practices and production standards that require elimination of
deforestation and active reforestation in coastal and mangrove areas.
Activity 2.1.1. Technical assistance for development and promotion of climate-smart shrimp aquaculture practices
in 20,000 ha of farms.
114. The activity will involve the design, implementation and monitoring of mangrove restoration and conservation
plans in and around shrimp farms to achieve biodiversity, water quality and coastal adaptation objectives (led
by CI, with partners from NCA, farm holders, members of local faming associations, and local communities).
115. CI and the NCA will provide direct technical support to aquaculture farms for adoption of the SSP standard and
CSS. The NCA will advise on training materials and training sessions. CSS involves working with shrimp farmers
to sustainably intensify shrimp production, constructing treatment wetlands and restoring coastal ecosystems.
NCA and ASC will act in an advisory role and provide input to training materials and trainings. Activities include
dissemination of sustainable management practices, dissemination of best restoration practices, and ongoing
socialization of CSS.
116. Intensification of production using a CSS approach creates the necessary conditions and incentives to integrate
mangrove restoration into shrimp farming operations while also enhancing climate change resilience of farms
by protecting against SLR and storm surge and mitigating and sequestering carbon emissions. Successful
uptake and implementation of CSS program activities in select regions of Ecuador will require substantial
coordination and capacity development at multiple levels of government, the private sector (farmers, supply
chain, and other companies), and civil society. CI will develop guidelines for sustainable intensification best
practices to engage with and train farmers, government agencies, and other private and public sector actors to
strengthen and internalize technical capacity building. Rather than working only with individual farms to

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38
B
implement the guidelines and foster adoption of best practices, CI and NCA will utilize a ‘jurisdictional approach’
to coordinate alignment among relevant stakeholders throughout the region. Jurisdictional Approach projects
have been shown to foster wider, faster adoption of best practices, with a particular efficacy at enabling
coordinated disease management, enhanced climate resilience, and environmental stewardship (Kittinger et
al., 2021). Implementing a jurisdictional approach to best intensification practices requires coordinated activities,
including:
• Partner selection (led by CI, in partnership with NCA), based on an assessment tool45 (see criteria in
Appendix 8 of Annex 2, Feasibility Study), applicable regionally and across geographies, to
evaluate candidate farms.
• Engagement to identify CSS project participants, and a final partner screening to select shrimp farms
(small, medium, or large) willing to participate in the project.
• Develop a collaborative, time-bound workplan with all CSS project partners based on the baseline
analyses, final partner screening, and engagement strategy with explicit commitments from each
participating farm to produce shrimp meeting the CSS criteria and each participating entity to support
the advancement of CSS with defined roles and outcomes (e.g. offtake agreements, policy support,
conservation use agreements). Led by CI, in partnership with NCA.
• Workplan execution and stewardship (led by CI, in partnership with NCA). Conduct trainings and
technical sessions for 200-250 farmers from small- and medium-sized farms and other stakeholders
(e.g. universities and NGOs working on the topic).
117. Technical assistance from CI and NCA will enable farmers to design and implement restoration initiatives on
portions of their farms, which will confer water quality benefits within the farm and provide broader climate
change mitigation and adaption benefits, including effective and efficient flood protection. The costs of the
mangrove restoration on farms will be financed by the farms.
118. A target of 250 ha of mangroves will be restored in the immediate vicinity of shrimp ponds and in areas where
ponds are no longer viable. Restoration designs as part of climate-smart business models will be developed by
consultants hired by CI to establish hydrology and landscape conditions within the restored area while allowing
the shrimp farm operations to be maintained or improved. This innovative approach improves upon the
conventional approaches to coastal protection, by integrating ecosystems to improve the overall outcome for
biodiversity, production, and coastal adaptation. The resulting designs, details and case studies generated
through this project will provide tools to replicate at scale elsewhere in the region and the world, with potential
to transform business-as-usual for global shrimp-farming practices and as a model for other agricultural
production sectors.
119. There are many examples of exploitation and mismanagement of mangroves and shrimp farms, and hence the
need to address these challenges through effective public policy that embraces partnerships between
government agencies, local communities and the private sector, all of whom operate in the same space.
Stakeholder consensus around the benefits and importance of CSS is a critical enabling condition of
implementation of CSS at project sites and project initiatives and is critical to achieving program sustainability.
Consensus requires alignment among a diverse set of stakeholders, ranging from community members, local
and national government, public institutions, universities, local organizations, national and international financial
institutions, supply chain actors, and most importantly, shrimp farmers and technicians. Additional efforts to
communicate project activities and outcomes will promote climate-smart shrimp amongst other producers in
Ecuador while signaling for supplemental interest and investments.
120. To disseminate knowledge gathered by the project, collections of key documents and resources will be housed
within existing knowledge portals including: i) the website and training initiatives led by NCA as part of the SSP
initiative; ii) the eco.business Sustainability Academy platform; iii) Escuela Politécnica del Litoral (ESPOL)
University, with its course on Marine engineering and Aquaculture engineering (a key stakeholder of the CSS
initiative); and iv) the GMA knowledge hub.
121. A CI Communications & Knowledge Management Manager, the Manager of Component 2 (Incentives, Financial
Mechanisms and Climate Finance) and the Climate Smart Aquaculture specialist will lead activities that will
target specific stakeholder groups. A total of 35 workshops are planned to socialize CSS production models
(with an estimated average of 20 people per training). A further 19 workshops are planned for CSS technical
training aimed at small- and medium-sized companies (with an estimated average of 20 people per training).
45 See https://ci-aquafarm-mapping.web.app/ for the CSS assessment tool developed for the Philippines and Indonesia that will be adapted
for Ecuador.

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39
B
Activity 2.1.2. Facilitate partnerships and access to mechanisms for credit and investment in shrimp farms for
expansion and consolidation of climate-smart aquaculture practices.
122. CI will work with different actors of the shrimp supply chain to address finance access barriers and facilitate the
flow of credit and investment for farm operations that seek to transition their production models to more
sustainable ones.
123. The limited offer of financial products, both from the financial system and other sources, is a significant barrier
for shrimp farms wanting to adopt the SSP and CSS models. The eco.business Fund is financing green credit
lines to key banks such as Produbanco, Banco de Guayaquil, Banco del Pacifico and Banco Pichincha, and is
an important ally in promoting a sustainable model of shrimp production, training bank staff on impact and risk
management in relation to the shrimp business and testing models so that the institutions feel confident in
investing in a shrimp-related business.
124. As new financial instruments are being developed, business demand for technical support to ensure successful
investments is also increasing. CI will coordinate with the eco.business Fund to support and expand initiatives
such as the Sustainability Academy, to small- and medium-sized farms, and other service providers in
sustainable production models and investments that derive into more sustainable operations (the platform is
open to the general public). The Sustainability Academy portal combines education materials, workshops, self-
assessment tools, and case documentation on several sectors, including shrimp aquaculture. The Sustainability
Academy content will be expanded to include CSS, good aquaculture practices, mangrove conservation and
restoration, safeguards implementation, and other climate and conservation-oriented programs, such as the
Socio Manglar program. The project will bring together stakeholders to make the Sustainability Academy and
the existing financial products more available to small- and medium-sized farmers that are not necessarily
clients of the banking system to date, expanding the base of beneficiaries of the program.
125. Implementation of demonstration cases, from diagnosis to work plan development, implementation and
measurement, is critical to develop the skills of investors, suppliers and farmers. To strengthen these successful
investment cases, CI will provide technical support to businesses in the project feasibility and implementation
phases. Criteria for selecting beneficiaries will be developed to include conservation priorities (mangrove
conservation or restoration component), market opportunities in connection with SSP and/or ASC, and
particularly links to investors or banks that can provide the required funding for making an operation more
sustainable. Support from the project will be conditional on the business’s commitment to invest in mangrove
restoration and/or conservation.
126. CI will also promote the implementation of a roundtable created by the National Mangrove Plan with industry
actors to include the CSS concept into the agenda and priority discussion topics and the solutions to address
finance access barriers described in the project approach. Links to the commercial sector will be critical to
reduce risks of investments in the shrimp industry, so working in connection with the NCA as well as
international buyers to secure commitments to CSS is important.
127. To address investment needs, the project will seek to identify and support shrimp farmers on the design of
sustainability efforts as a tool to mobilize capital towards CSS, ASC and SSP models. CI will assist these needs
through technical support from consultants. Shrimp farmers/companies will be eligible for this technical support
if they comply with initial requirements: i) a concrete investment opportunity that can improve climate resilient
practices and ii) a link to a financial institution interested in financing such investment. CI will assess all requests
and prioritize opportunities based on a series of eligibility criteria (further details in Section 5.4.3 of Annex 2,
Feasibility Study).
128. The technical support from the project will be used with the goal of unlocking private finance to specific
geographies with a role in mangrove conservation or restoration but not necessarily those farmers being the
most investable in the sector. Furthermore, there is an understanding that many small- and medium-sized
farmers operate in the area, and they are the ones that face more challenges in their capacity to attract
investment into their operations. This technical support will: a) strengthen weaknesses in management areas
that limit the capacity of attracting capital to promote sustainable intensification at farm level, or b) refine an
investment opportunity through a feasibility assessment, business plan development, impact targets such as
efficiencies and improved conditions, and definition of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to monitor
advancement towards those goals.

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40
B
129. The CI project staff (Climate Smart Aquaculture Specialist) will facilitate agreements between retailers,
importers/exporters, processers, and farmers to guarantee purchase of climate smart shrimp.
130. CI will work with NCA and ASC to continually strengthen training materials for the CSS concept and to refine
the concept itself based on industry feedback. CI will engage a consultant in Year 3 to develop a marketing
strategy for CSS in Ecuador. This will include assessing market engagement for CSS with retailers, including
market traceability, market recognition and establishing buyer assurance mechanisms. CI will also collaborate
with NCA and ASC and third-party independent auditors that confirm farm adherence to the CSS standard.
Output 2.2. Sustainable management of mangroves is improved through agreements with the private sector,
including direct financial support for mangrove conservation and restoration.
Activity 2.2.1. Establish agreements with businesses, including aquaculture companies, to contribute to mangrove
restoration and financial sustainability of the national Socio Bosque Incentive Program (the Socio Manglar
Program).
131. Ecuador’s Socio Manglar incentive mechanism provides a tangible, government-supported pathway for shrimp
farms and other enterprises operating on Ecuador’s coast to make effective their commitments to mangrove
conservation. CI, in preparation for this project, has worked with the ASC to create and contribute to the capital
of the Socio Manglar subaccount of Ecuador’s Socio Bosque Fund, with an initial donation of US$150,000
(US$50,000 from ASC and US$100,000 from CI). The Socio Bosque Fund is managed by Ecuador’s
Environmental and Sustainable Investment Fund (FIAS) , and the new Socio Manglar subaccount is managed
using the same operating procedures. Each fund manag4e6d by FIAS has a governance mechanism for decision
making and FIAS has a board made up of representatives from the public and private sectors. All funds are
audited, and information is presented to the board and to each governance mechanism. FIAS also has an
investment committee that oversees the policies and strategies implemented with the funds based in Ecuador
and with the funds invested internationally. Appendix 12 of Annex 2 provides further background on the Socio
Manglar subaccount.
132. FIAS is a private, non-profit entity that has a track record of the management, mobilization, investment and
implementation of public and private funds to finance nature conservation and mitigation and adaptation to
climate change, complementing the efforts of the Government of Ecuador. FIAS currently has more than
US$100 million in five funds under management, with contributions from the Government of Ecuador and
international donors, including CI. CI has a permanent voting seat on the “Technical Committee” responsible
for the management of the Socio Manglar subaccount. Through its role in the Socio Manglar subaccount
governance and ongoing financial and technical monitoring, CI will ensure compliance with GCF requirements
both during the project implementation period and beyond. After the project implementation ends, but during
the 20-year project lifespan, CI will provide an annual ‘testament’ to GCF confirming the continued existence of
the Socio Manglar subaccount and that its purpose remains consistent with the objectives of supporting
community management of mangrove areas. CI will also obtain from MAATE and FIAS written confirmation
that the remaining GCF funds in the Socio Manglar subaccount after project lifespan will continue to be used
for the objectives of supporting community management of mangrove areas. CI will monitor financial and
technical reports of the Socio Manglar subaccount, including the interest-bearing account in which GCF funds
will be held (financial reports) and broader Socio Manglar program (technical reports). Further details on CI’s
role in supervision, monitoring and compliance with GCF requirements after the project implementation period
are included in the Term Sheet, Annex 14.
133. The Government of Ecuador (through MAATE) currently finances the Socio Manglar program directly from its
annual budget and the REDD Early Movers project. The objective for the project is to build up the Socio Manglar
subaccount to provide a more stable and long-term sustainable source of financing for the Socio Manglar
program. Three main sources of funding for the Socio Manglar subaccount will be targeted: i) aquaculture
enterprises looking to expand their environmental commitments47; ii) Ecuadorian businesses seeking to
compensate for their carbon footprint under Ecuador’s Carbon Zero program (PECC); and iii) a US$4 million
contribution from GCF (see below). CI will work with ASC, the corporate partners of their value chain and their
membership (aquaculture enterprises) to secure voluntary commitments to contribute to the Socio Manglar
program. CI will also work closely with MAATE to promote support for mangrove conservation through the
PECC program.
46 FIAS is a private, non-profit entity to support finance for environmental and conservation purposes in line with MAATE priorities.
47 Such commitments would be voluntary and not be a condition for support from the project.

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41
B
134. To strengthen private-sector action, CI will develop a communications strategy, with the support of consultants,
highlighting the importance of mangroves and the role the private sector can take in protecting and restoring
them. The strategy will be developed for several audiences, including international companies in the ASC value
chain, national shrimp farms and other Ecuadorian companies (i.e., others not linked to the aquaculture sector)
looking to compensate their carbon footprint (through the PECC program). Meetings to present the Socio
Manglar program (including the Socio Manglar subaccount) and the opportunities for private sector engagement
with it will be organized in Years 2 and 3 in both Quito and Guayaquil.
135. GCF funds of US$4 million are requested to capitalize the Socio Manglar subaccount managed by FIAS. The
GCF funds will be granted to FIAS as an endowment in perpetuity for the subaccount, and will be held separately
from other funds in an interest-bearing account. The interest income will be used to pay annual incentives to
AUSCEMs in the Socio Manglar program both during the project and after the project implementation period
ends.48 The Socio Manglar subaccount is the principal mechanism for providing long-term sustainable finance
to support AUSCEMs. The US$4 million will capitalize the Socio Manglar subaccount at a level that, along with
other contributions (see next section), will generate enough income to provide incentive payments for the
additional AUSCEMs eligible for payments resulting from Component 1 of the Project. FIAS will manage the
GCF resources in a separate interest-bearing bank account alongside other contributions to the Socio Manglar
subaccount and in accordance with its existing management procedures, which have been assessed to be
compliant with GCF requirements. (See Appendix 12 of Annex 2 for details of the Socio Manglar subaccount
and projections for growing its capital). CI-Ecuador, with support from CI's Conservation Finance Division, will
monitor the use of GCF funds within the subaccount managed by FIAS.
136. In addition to capitalizing the Socio Manglar subaccount, the US$4 million in GCF funds are expected to catalyze
mobilization of private investment into the subaccount. Increasing the subaccount’s capital early in the project
(Year 2) is expected to provide a level of confidence from potential private sector donors because the
subaccount will already be functioning with sufficient capital to provide incentives to some AUSCEM groups.
Private-sector donors are more likely to contribute alongside public funding, such as from GCF, since it will
demonstrate there are realistic long-term prospects for the subaccount to act as a mechanism to provide
incentive payments and to attract sufficient additional capital to allow the Socio Manglar program to expand to
conserve more mangroves. The US$4 million is requested from GCF as a grant, rather than a reimbursable
grant or loan, since i) the Socio Manglar subaccount is intended to operate in perpetuity, ii) interest and
investment income earned o n it will be used to provide incentive payments in the form of grants to AUSCEM
groups and iii) there is no revenue to the Socio Manglar subaccount (other than the interest or investment
income on the capital) with which to repay a reimbursable grant or loan.
Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation and
increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies, coastal
management policies, and legal enforcement.
137. Actions by local communities and the private sector to protect mangroves and maintain flood-protection benefits
as a nature-based climate change adaptation and mitigation strategy depend significantly on the government
creating the necessary governance, regulatory and enabling conditions. These both dissuade and control illegal
activities and ensure that a full range of climate considerations are incorporated into planning and investment
decisions.
138. By generating and disseminating better climate-change and mangrove-forest information to decision makers
and stakeholders, project activities, particularly those focused on public entities, the project will contribute
directly to increasing climate knowledge for use in decision making and will provide the foundation for achieving
project Outcomes 1 and 2 and their associated impacts.
139. Improved legal and regulatory capacity, focused on planning, preparedness and enforcement, will contribute to
sustaining mangroves as well as enhancing awareness and resilience of direct and indirect beneficiaries,
primarily concentrated in the eight priority municipalities of the project area and will contribute directly to
strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate responsive planning and development.
48 This endowment grant mechanism is a Grant financing instrument within the scope of CI’s AMA accreditation. The $4 million endowment
will be disbursed from CI to FIAS via a su bgrant. FIAS will place the funds in an interest-bearing bank account, and any interest generated
from these funds will be used by FIAS to pay for the community incentive payments under the Socio Manglar Program. Further details are
included in Appendix 12 of Annex 2.

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42
B
Output 3.1. Decision making for mangrove management by national government agencies and local governments is
based on generation and provision of accurate and up-to-date data on mangrove condition and socio-economic
information on mangrove dependent communities.
Activity 3.1.1. Monitoring of mangrove condition and socio-economic impacts in mangrove-dependent communities.
140. The reduction of emissions and the environmental and social benefits associated with the implementation of
project activities will be monitored integrating remote sensing and community participation. This activity will
provide the data needed for monitoring of the GHG emission reductions achieved by the other components.
Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) of Mangrove Cover and Carbon Stocks
141. CI will enter into subgrants with two local universities or NGOs (competitively chosen) to collaboratively generate
data and capacity at multiple levels to improve MRV systems for mangroves, to be integrated both into project
M&E and the national REDD+ MRV system. Ecuador’s NDC is strongly linked with the terrestrial ecosystems.
Mangroves along with other fragile ecosystems are included as a key priority in the NDC (2019). The information
that this project will generate will be included in the national MRV system and the various initiatives that Ecuador
is implementing to reach the targets included in the NDCs. The information generated in this activity is also
fundamental to the implementation of the PECC with the private sector (linked to activity 2.2.1).
142. As described in Annex 2, natural changes in mangrove cover due to the complex hydrological dynamics of
mangrove ecosystems are an important contributor to mangrove losses and gains. Improving the understanding
of these natural changes is essential for future mangrove cover monitoring. MAATE, local universities and
community stakeholders such as mangrove associations will be trained by CI to monitor the dynamics and
structure of the mangroves and the biodiversity they contain. The areas that will be monitored will include: i)
areas affected by natural disturbances; ii) restored areas of mangroves and other natural forests; and iii) areas
of infrastructure development and deforestation not controlled by project activities. A subgrant will be awarded
to a local university or NGO to collect the mangrove ‘blue carbon’ monitoring information. CI will also provide
training on the collection of mangrove ‘blue carbon’ data to the sub-grantee and other stakeholders, including
MAATE staff.
143. Updated geospatial data on mangrove coverage and change will be gathered and integrated into national forest
inventory and FRELs. CI will enter into a subgrant with a local university or NGO to analyze mangrove cover
and provide results to the national MRV system.
144. CI will disseminate information to decision makers at the local and national level, through policy reports for local
governments, creating maps for local communities and extended reports to the MAATE and other national
decision makers.
Socio economic impact evaluation (SIE)
145. The SIE’s main objective is to assess the effects from project proposed activities on environmental and
socioeconomic outcomes (i.e., climate mitigation and emissions reductions, resilience, enhanced livelihoods)
and to detect an effect between treatment and control groups within the project implementation period for the
project activities.
146. CI will conduct the SIE in Year 2 following project start-up for the baseline and in Year 6 for the final assessment.
CI’s Moore Center for Science will support the establishment of the monitoring system and the processing and
analysis of the information. CI will also enter into grant agreements with local universities in Ecuador for the
data gathering and training. Eligibility criteria for selection of the local universities is provided as Appendix 7 of
Annex 2..
Output 3.2. Legal and regulatory frameworks at local and sectoral level are harmonized and include climate
resilience and mitigation strategies and enforcement.
Activity 3.2.1. Support local governments (2 provincial governments, 2 municipalities and 5 parishes) to improve
and/or implement PDOTs and other participatory planning instruments that incorporate climate change adaptation
and mangrove management, applying a gender approach.

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43
B
147. CI will work with local governments to enforce their capacity to manage their territories with a clear perspective
of integrated coastal zone management and marine spatial planning that are critically important to realizing
flood protection benefits from mangroves as well as other ecosystem services from coastal ecosystems. CI will
work with nine local governments/administrations to integrate natural climate change adaptation measures into
their planning, including mangrove conservation and restoration. For this, CI will work following PDOT´s
guidelines from the National Planning Secretariat that includes adaptation and mitigation actions . The local
governments have been prioritized based on the extent of their mangrove cover. To support this w49ork, CI will
provide a subgrant in Year 2 to a local organization (university or NGO to be competitively selected) to generate
climate risk information to inform local planning.
148. CI will work with five parish administrations (Parroquias) to develop climate change risk-management plans that
value impacts and involvement of men and women. CI will provide technical support to these local governments
for planning that will help them increase the economic, social, health and cultural resilience of individuals and
communities. The risk-management plans will include activities for monitoring and evaluation of the adaptive
capacity of men and women considering their access and control of resources, participation and roles within
organizational processes.
149. CI will work with two municipal governments (Guayaquil and Machala), responsible for land-use planning and
zoning through their PDOTs. CI will provide technical input and facilitation of participatory planning processes
to integrate strategies for climate-change adaptation, including strategies for conservation and restoration of
mangroves.
150. CI will support two provincial governments (Guayas and El Oro) with technical support to integrate climate
change considerations into the provincial planning and to support budget planning to promote additional climate
change investment. These activities will support management of priority conservation areas, local fishermen,
strengthen capacities for the preparation of management plans for the coastal areas, and develop land use and
management plans as well as integrated coastal management plans. The project will also support the integration
into the provincial plans of actions to create the enabling conditions necessary for the long-term conservation
and restoration of mangroves.
151. CI will enter into service agreements with consultants beginning in Year 2 to provide territorial planning support
to local governments for these activities. The CI Local Governance & Integrated Coastal Management Specialist
will provide support to these government entities across the four estuaries of the project.
152. CI will provide ongoing support, monitoring and public communication for the implementation of plans,
corresponding public investments and municipal ordinances and other legal instruments determined by
PDOTs.
Activity 3.2.2 Strengthen regulatory framework and law enforcement by agencies and institutions responsible for
control of mangroves, with a focus on human rights.
153. CI staff and consultants engaged by CI will conduct an analysis of multi-sectoral legal framework for mangroves
and climate change and the creation of multi-sectoral working groups (“mesas técnicas”) to generate proposals
for regulatory changes in Environment, Vice-ministry of Aquaculture and Fisheries (VMAP), Navy, Ports, and
GADs. Examples of such changes may include updates to the regulations regarding illegal shrimp farms not
covered by Executive Decree 1391, which have not been expropriated or approved, procedures for the
restoration of mangroves, and regulation of areas that were formerly mangroves.
154. CI will also support the discussion of legal reforms and new regulations in the context of the Roundtable for
Sustainable Shrimp, to be convened by the MAATE and VMAP. CI will provide staff time and cover workshop
costs to implement this roundtable.
155. In Years 2 to 5, CI’s Legal Specialist and Local Governance & Integrated Coastal Management Specialist will
work with partners to re-establish the strategy of the UOCVs for law enforcement and sanctions for illegal
activities affecting mangroves. A joint effort between the Oceanographic Institute of the Navy (INOCAR),
MAATE, VMAP, NGOs and the NCA, the UOCVs’ main goal is to avoid and control the clear-cutting of mangrove
forest areas through the cooperation of public, private and NGO entities. The implementation of this initiative
49 (https://www.planificacion.gob.ec/guias-para-la-formulacion-actualizacion-de-los-pdot/)

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44
B
includes the surveillance technical system, the legal control technical system and the report and communication
system.
156. Also in Years 2 to 5, CI’s Legal Specialist and Component 3 Coordinator will support MAATE staff members with
responsibilities for mangrove administration, planning, PAs, and provincial districts by providing them training
on the laws and regulations relating to mangroves and the administrative procedures for enforcement and
sanctions. A system to follow up deforestation complaints will be improved by CI project staff and implemented
in collaboration with government officials so complaints from local associations, local governments and citizens
will have a transparent follow-up process.
157. In Year 3, CI will engage a consultant to develop a training curriculum relating to mangroves specifically aimed
at judges and other staff of the judiciary system, including from the Public Prosecutor, Navy, and Ministry of
Fisheries and Aquaculture. Training workshops will be conducted by CI’s Legal Specialist and the Local
Governance & Integrated Coastal Management Specialist for judges and judiciary staff. This training will be
integrated into the regular training curriculum of the named institutions.
158. In Years 1 to 3, CI will engage a consultant to design an online and mobile app to facilitate reporting of
deforestation and other impacts on mangroves. The consultant will also provide training to users of the app
(MAATE staff and AUSCEMs).
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
NDA and Government Partner
159. Ecuador’s MAATE, as the GCF National Designated Authority (NDA), will ensure that activities implemented by
the project align with strategic national objectives, priorities, and standards, including the National Climate
Change Strategy, and help advance ambitious action on adaptation and mitigation in line with national goals
and needs. The Executing Entity (EE) will engage with the NDA throughout project implementation. The NDA
will contribute to the development of the multiyear workplan and will be provided with detailed reporting on the
status of project activities and impacts. MAATE, through its Undersecretariat of Natural Heritage and
Undersecretariat of Climate Change, will also contribute to project activities and provide grant and in-kind co-
financing as described elsewhere in this proposal.
Accredited Entity
160. CI, through its CI-GCF Agency, will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE) for the project. The CI-GCF Agency will
be responsible for the overall oversight of this project as defined in the Accredited Master Agreement (AMA)
between the GCF and CI, including technical, financial, and administrative monitoring and supervision (through
reporting, audits, and annual site visits) and review and approval of the EE’s annual workplans and budgets.
CI-GCF will also be responsible for providing support, guidance and backstopping to the EE; monitoring the
achievement of project results and Outputs; reporting to the GCF; and project closure and evaluation. CI-GCF
will conduct these responsibilities and disburse GCF funds to the EE. The CI-GCF Agency currently serves as
AE for FP026, Sustainable Landscapes in Madagascar, a GCF project addressing mitigation, adaptation, and
sustainable livelihoods, and for FP158, Ecosystem-based Adaptation and Mitigation in Botswana’s Communal
Rangelands.
Project Governance
161. The project’s governance structure includes the Project Steering Committee and the Project Management
Committee. The Project Steering Committee will be comprised of the following individuals: i) the Undersecretary
of Climate Change of MAATE or his/her delegate; ii) the Undersecretary of Natural Heritage of MAATE or his/her
delegate; and iii) the Vice President of CI-Ecuador or his/her delegate; and will be chaired by the Undersecretary
of Climate Change.
162. The principal functions of the Project Steering Committee will be to provide strategic guidance and support
adaptive management of project implementation, review progress and evaluation reports, discuss problems or
strategic issues that might arise during implementation, and provide support for the necessary inter-institutional
coordination and contributions to project activities. The Steering Committee will also participate in the selection
of the Project Director, through a competitive process.

--- Table 1 on Page 51 ---
includes the surveillance technical system, the legal control technical system and the report and communication
system.
156. Also in Years 2 to 5, CI’s Legal Specialist and Component 3 Coordinator will support MAATE staff members with
responsibilities for mangrove administration, planning, PAs, and provincial districts by providing them training
on the laws and regulations relating to mangroves and the administrative procedures for enforcement and
sanctions. A system to follow up deforestation complaints will be improved by CI project staff and implemented
in collaboration with government officials so complaints from local associations, local governments and citizens
will have a transparent follow-up process.
157. In Year 3, CI will engage a consultant to develop a training curriculum relating to mangroves specifically aimed
at judges and other staff of the judiciary system, including from the Public Prosecutor, Navy, and Ministry of
Fisheries and Aquaculture. Training workshops will be conducted by CI’s Legal Specialist and the Local
Governance & Integrated Coastal Management Specialist for judges and judiciary staff. This training will be
integrated into the regular training curriculum of the named institutions.
158. In Years 1 to 3, CI will engage a consultant to design an online and mobile app to facilitate reporting of
deforestation and other impacts on mangroves. The consultant will also provide training to users of the app
(MAATE staff and AUSCEMs).
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
NDA and Government Partner
159. Ecuador’s MAATE, as the GCF National Designated Authority (NDA), will ensure that activities implemented by
the project align with strategic national objectives, priorities, and standards, including the National Climate
Change Strategy, and help advance ambitious action on adaptation and mitigation in line with national goals
and needs. The Executing Entity (EE) will engage with the NDA throughout project implementation. The NDA
will contribute to the development of the multiyear workplan and will be provided with detailed reporting on the
status of project activities and impacts. MAATE, through its Undersecretariat of Natural Heritage and
Undersecretariat of Climate Change, will also contribute to project activities and provide grant and in-kind co-
financing as described elsewhere in this proposal.
Accredited Entity
160. CI, through its CI-GCF Agency, will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE) for the project. The CI-GCF Agency will
be responsible for the overall oversight of this project as defined in the Accredited Master Agreement (AMA)
between the GCF and CI, including technical, financial, and administrative monitoring and supervision (through
reporting, audits, and annual site visits) and review and approval of the EE’s annual workplans and budgets.
CI-GCF will also be responsible for providing support, guidance and backstopping to the EE; monitoring the
achievement of project results and Outputs; reporting to the GCF; and project closure and evaluation. CI-GCF
will conduct these responsibilities and disburse GCF funds to the EE. The CI-GCF Agency currently serves as
AE for FP026, Sustainable Landscapes in Madagascar, a GCF project addressing mitigation, adaptation, and
sustainable livelihoods, and for FP158, Ecosystem-based Adaptation and Mitigation in Botswana’s Communal
Rangelands.
Project Governance
161. The project’s governance structure includes the Project Steering Committee and the Project Management
Committee. The Project Steering Committee will be comprised of the following individuals: i) the Undersecretary
of Climate Change of MAATE or his/her delegate; ii) the Undersecretary of Natural Heritage of MAATE or his/her
delegate; and iii) the Vice President of CI-Ecuador or his/her delegate; and will be chaired by the Undersecretary
of Climate Change.
162. The principal functions of the Project Steering Committee will be to provide strategic guidance and support
adaptive management of project implementation, review progress and evaluation reports, discuss problems or
strategic issues that might arise during implementation, and provide support for the necessary inter-institutional
coordination and contributions to project activities. The Steering Committee will also participate in the selection
of the Project Director, through a competitive process.

--- Table 2 on Page 51 ---
 | to design an online and mobile app to facilitate reporting of
deforestation and other impacts on mangroves. The consultant will also provide training to users of the app | 
(MAATE staff and AUSCEMs). | 

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45
B
163. The Project Steering Committee will meet at least twice per year, to review the progress of the ongoing semester
or year and to advise the Project Director on strategic and policy-related decisions. The Project Steering
Committee will be convened by the Project Director in advance to give the members sufficient time to schedule
the meeting and agree on the agenda. The Project Director will prepare minutes of each meeting. Extraordinary
meetings of the Project Steering Committee will be convened when deemed necessary and at the request of
one of its members. The Project Steering Committee may also invite key stakeholders to support specific
themes.
164. The Project Management Advisory Committee will comprise the following individuals: i) the Director of the
Marine, Coastal and Oceanic50 (MAATE); ii) the Director of Climate Change Adaptation51 (MAATE); iii) a
representative from VMAP; d) the Director of the Coastal and Marine Program of CI-Ecuador; and e) the Project
Directorr employed by CI; and will be chaired by the Director of Marine, Coastal and Oceanic from MAATE.
165. The Project Management Advisory Committee will meet at least four times per year to advise the Project
Director and the National Project Director (NPD) on technical matters, and to discuss challenges and
collaboration opportunities during implementation. The Project Management Committee may invite key partners
to provide advice on specific themes.
166. For both governance committees, members who are government employees will not be renumerated by GCF
funds.
167. The NPD will be appointed by MAATE’s Undersecretary of Natural Heritage, who will be employed and funded
by MAATE. The NPD will advise the Project Director on government policies and priorities; review coherence
of the project activities, including results, risks, planning and procurement processes; advise on the project’s
annual Procurement Plan for project services and goods; and review the technical and financial quarterly project
reports to the AE.
168. Technical Advisory Committees will be created for each of the Components and each of the estuaries of the
project. In the case of Component 1, the Technical Advisory Committee will include MAATE, the Risk
Secretariat, Universities working in climate change adaptation and mitigation, and representatives from
AUSCEM. The Component 2 committee will include MAATE, the VMAP, the NCA, the Fisheries and
Aquaculture Public Research Institute, shrimp farmers, and other value chain members. The Component 3
committee will include MAATE, the VMAP, the Planning National Secretariat, Provincial, municipal, and Parish
governments, and representatives of the INOCAR, the Prosecutor’s Office, and Judiciary Council. At the level
of each estuary, a committee will be created to integrate the Zonal Directors of MAATE with the planning
activities of local governments and AUSCEMS representatives.
Executing Entity
169. CI will self-execute this project. CI, acting through its country office in Ecuador (referred to in this proposal as
“CI” or “CI-Ecuador”),52 will be the EE for all activities of this project. CI-Ecuador will be responsible for project
execution, management of sub-grantees and their activities, reporting to the AE, and ensuring optimal alignment
with the Government of Ecuador policies and priorities in coordination with MAATE to achieve project outcomes
and Fund-level goals. As EE, CI, acting through its country office in Ecuador, will enter into legal agreements
(including sub-grant agreements, services agreements, and MOUs) for this project. As a branch of CI, CI-
Ecuador will follow CI policies and procedures in the execution of this project, including terms included in CI’s
Operations Manual (see Annex 21). The CI-GCF Agency has assessed the capacity of CI-Ecuador and has
determined it to be capable of applying CI and CI-GCF standards and policies in the execution of this Project.
Throughout Project implementation, CI-Ecuador will be supported by various CI divisions which will lend specific
expertise, including CI’s Americas Division, Conservation Finance Division (supporting private-sector funding),
50 This Direction manages marine, coastal and oceanic heritage.
51 This Direction seeks to increase adapti ve capacity and reduce environmental, social and economic vulnerability to climate change,
through the management and implementation of policies, plans, programs, projects, measures and actions to achieve resilient communities
and ecosystems to climate change.
52 All references to “CI Ecuador” denote the actions undertaken by the project’s CI staff employed through CI Ecuador, a branch office of
Conservation International Foundation registered in Ecuador as an external company. The legal entity for this reference is Conservation
International Foundation. CI Foundation will be the legal entity entering into any agreements, sub-agreements, or MOUs used in this
project.

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46
B
and CI’s Center for Oceans (supporting blue carbon and mangrove restoration), and Project Delivery and
Monitoring (supporting safeguards and gender).
170. For more than 30 years, CI has been protecting nature for the benefit of all. CI employs more than 1,000 people
and works with more than 2,000 partners in 30+ countries. Since 1987, CI has supported more than 1,200 PAs
and undertaken interventions across 77 countries, protecting more than 601 million hectares of land, marine
and coastal areas. For over two decades, CI has been operating in Ecuador in the Galápagos, marine and
coastal areas of continental Ecuador, Andes Choco and the Amazon to implement conservation solutions within
priority landscapes. CI has supported the creation and management of marine and coastal PAs, working in
close collaboration with artisanal fisher associations to promote capacity building and sustainable management
measures of resources (in Galápagos with the spiny lobster, tuna, and prawn fisheries and in mainland Ecuador,
with black shell and red crab fisheries).
171. CI-Ecuador will establish the main Project Management Unit (PMU) at CI’s office in Guayaquil. The PMU will
be headed by a full-time Project Director employed by CI, who will be responsible for coordination with all
stakeholders and successful implementation of the project and attainment of results specified in the project’s
Funding Proposal, to the required standards of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost. The
PMU will be responsible for overall project management and planning, providing support to the execution of
day-to-day activities, coordinating with the national government and project partners, coordinating with the AE,
managing and overseeing grants, and coordinating project execution across two project offices and four estuary
sites. The PMU will also include the Operations and Finance Director and the Project Finance Manager and will
receive support from the CI-Ecuador Senior Operations Director. Upon project inception, the Project Director in
coordination with the Operations and Finance Director will prepare a Project Operations Manual, including
responsibilities, procedures and details for a smooth and effective implementation, which will be approved by
the Project Steering Committee. The project will also have dedicated full-time staff, including Monitoring &
Evaluation Manager, Safeguards Manager, Gender Manager, Communications & Knowledge Manager,
Procurement Manager and 3 Component Leads. Additional Project staff as detailed in Annex 4 will be based
in Guayaquil and Esmeraldas.
172. In addition, CI, in coordination with MAATE, will establish an Estuary Field Unit (EFU) in each of the Project’s
four target estuaries (Cayapas-Mataje, Muisne-Cojimíes, Gulf of Guayaquil, and Jambelí) as regional execution
offices. These EFUs will be housed in the MAATE Provincial Directions in Esmeraldas, Guayaquil, and Machala
(as in-kind support from MAATE), and will each be led by two project staff: an Estuary Coordinator and a Social
Technician (CI staff for the southern estuaries and PUSECE staff for the northern estuaries). Establishing EFUs
in the estuaries directly involved in the day-to-day activities of the local associations is a cost-effective strategy
for achieving the goals of the project. Evaluations on mangrove areas have shown that frequent technical
support leads to sustainable change in behavior and practices in local communities to change behavior and
practices. The Estuary Coordinator will ensure effective liaison and coordination with local stakeholders and
local government, Component Leads, the PMU, and the other EFUs in implementation of the project activities,
and the supporting staff will support implementation of Conservation and Stewardship Agreements with fishing
associations and in-kind grants to local NGOs and universities.

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47
B
Figure 10. Project Governance
Subgrantee Organizations
173. CI will provide GCF funding to several sub-grantee organizations to implement certain project activities or sub-
activities (see Annex 23). CI will enter into a grant agreement compliant with GCF requirements with each of
the sub-grantees. CI Ecuador will manage and monitor these subgrants, will approve grantees’ annual
workplans and budgets, and will have ultimate approval authority over their activities. The resources will be
granted based on selection criteria included Appendix 5 in Annex 2.
174. PUCESE will execute activities under Component 1 in the two northern estuaries in the project: Cayapas Mataje
and Muisne Cojimies. PUCESE has prior experience working with local communities and local associations that
depend on mangrove resources as well as developing research on mangroves and climate change. PUCESE
is based close to the project area and has opened a new campus near the target Cayapas Mataje estuary. CI
will enter into a cash grant agreement with PUCESE for the implementation of its designated activities in
Component 1. CI Ecuador will apply risk mitigation measures and manage and monitor in-kind sub-grants to
ensure that goods are used in a manner consistent with CI and GCF policies, including safeguards and
prohibited practices.
175. FIAS manages the Socio Manglar subaccount of the existing Socio Bosque Fund. Under Output 2.2., CI will
provide a $4 million grant to FIAS that FIAS will hold in an interest-bearing account and use the interest
generated to pay for community incentive payments under the Socio Manglar program. FIAS is a private, non-
profit entity that has a track record of the management, mobilization, investment and implementation of public
and private funds to finance conservation of natural resources and biodiversity, mitigation and adaptation to
climate change and environmental quality, complementing the efforts of the Government of Ecuador. FIAS
currently has more than US$100 million in five funds under management, with contributions from the
Government of Ecuador, Germany, Italy and other international sources, including GCF. CI has contributed to
three FIAS funds to date, including a US$4 million in grant funds for the Ecuador Azul Fund managed by FIAS.
176. CI will also enter into sub-grant agreements with community AUSCEM associations as described under
Component 1 (selection criteria in Annex 2, Appendix 5). CI will provide goods via in-kind grants to the
associations that follow the terms of related conservation agreements between CI and the associations for
conservation, management and restoration activities as described under Activity 1.1.1. CI will also enter into
small cash grant agreements with the community associations for the development of enterprises and livelihood
activities as described under Activity 1.2.2.

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48
B
177. CI will enter into sub-grant agreements with local universities or NGOs in Ecuador to support data gathering
related to monitoring on blue carbon, mangrove forest cover and socio-economic impacts of the project.
Selection criteria for these sub-awardees are included in Appendices 7, 10 and 11 of Annex 2.
Other Implementation Partners
178. As described in section B.3, important partners will contribute to the implementation of the project but will not
receive GCF resources. CI will coordinate implementation of the project with these Implementation Partners
(detailed in Annex 23) and will enter into agreements with them as appropriate to ensure clarity of roles and
responsibilities of each party.
179. CI will work with key government partners, in addition to the NDA. The VMAP will support the CSS initiative in
Output 2.1 and will support the harmonization of the legal framework under Output 3.2. Provincial, municipal
and Parish governments/administrations are key partners who will receive technical assistance to integrate
climate-change adaptation and mangrove management measures into land-use planning as part of Activity
3.2.1. The INOCAR, Prosecutor’s Office, and Judiciary Council will participate in training and capacity building
under Activity 3.2.2.
180. Partners from the pr ivate sector will contribute to and support activities in Component 2, including the NCA,
ASC, financial institutions, and the eco.business Fund.
Figure 11: Project implementation arrangements and financial flows by Component
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
181. Public and private funding for the activities proposed in this project are limited and insufficient to tackle the
ongoing challenge of mangrove deforestation and restoration at the scale required. GCF funding is necessary
to implement the project and catalyze change. Project beneficiaries are among the most vulnerable populations
in Ecuador, with direct exposure to heightened flood risks and livelihood disruptions associated with climate
change compounded by low adaptive capacity due to poverty.
182. Grant funding is warranted to create the enabling conditions for sustained capacity and investment. The
important ecosystem services that mangroves provide are not currently adequately valued by public and private
sector actors and receive limited investment. In particular, mangroves have proven effectiveness in reducing

--- Table 1 on Page 55 ---
177. CI will enter into sub-grant agreements with local universities or NGOs in Ecuador to support data gathering
related to monitoring on blue carbon, mangrove forest cover and socio-economic impacts of the project.
Selection criteria for these sub-awardees are included in Appendices 7, 10 and 11 of Annex 2.
Other Implementation Partners
178. As described in section B.3, important partners will contribute to the implementation of the project but will not
receive GCF resources. CI will coordinate implementation of the project with these Implementation Partners
(detailed in Annex 23) and will enter into agreements with them as appropriate to ensure clarity of roles and
responsibilities of each party.
179. CI will work with key government partners, in addition to the NDA. The VMAP will support the CSS initiative in
Output 2.1 and will support the harmonization of the legal framework under Output 3.2. Provincial, municipal
and Parish governments/administrations are key partners who will receive technical assistance to integrate
climate-change adaptation and mangrove management measures into land-use planning as part of Activity
3.2.1. The INOCAR, Prosecutor’s Office, and Judiciary Council will participate in training and capacity building
under Activity 3.2.2.
180. Partners from the pr ivate sector will contribute to and support activities in Component 2, including the NCA,
ASC, financial institutions, and the eco.business Fund.
Figure 11: Project implementation arrangements and financial flows by Component
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
181. Public and private funding for the activities proposed in this project are limited and insufficient to tackle the
ongoing challenge of mangrove deforestation and restoration at the scale required. GCF funding is necessary
to implement the project and catalyze change. Project beneficiaries are among the most vulnerable populations
in Ecuador, with direct exposure to heightened flood risks and livelihood disruptions associated with climate
change compounded by low adaptive capacity due to poverty.
182. Grant funding is warranted to create the enabling conditions for sustained capacity and investment. The
important ecosystem services that mangroves provide are not currently adequately valued by public and private
sector actors and receive limited investment. In particular, mangroves have proven effectiveness in reducing

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49
B
escalating coastal flood risks due to climate change and they are among the world’s most valuable ecosystems
for mitigating GHG emissions, especially through the accumulation of carbon in soil as organic matter.
183. Gaps in the generation and dissemination of data regarding climate change scenarios and mangrove ecosystem
services for adaptation in coastal Ecuador have resulted in public entities, particularly subnational governments
(provincial, municipal and parishes), not adequately incorporating climate change risks and the
protection/restoration of mangroves into investment decisions. Similarly, while the carbon sequestration benefits
of mangroves, particularly in soils, are well documented globally, better Ecuador-specific data and monitoring
protocols to integrate these climate benefits fully into national public investment, mitigation strategies and GHG
accounting are needed to better mobilize both national and international finance. These gaps have historically
led to under-investment in mangrove conservation and restoration in Ecuador, despite the strong public benefits
of mangroves.
184. Private-sector investment in mangroves has also been constrained. Private sector investment would in principle
be motivated by: i) the potential for private returns; ii) regulatory requirements; and iii) market drivers (e.g.
demand for sustainable shrimp). To date, these factors have had limited effects in driving private investment,
and the project seeks to address these constraints.
185. Private sector returns from mangrove conservation and restoration have been undervalued, leading in the
aquaculture sector to extensive production models that have driven approximately half of mangrove
deforestation in Ecuador historically. There is, however, strong potential for key actors to internalize benefits
through reduced costs and/or increased revenues. Shrimp aquaculture, using CSS models (see section B.3
and Annex 2), can increase yields, profitability and resilience through sustainable intensification, including
increases in on-farm mangrove areas, requiring a shift away from Ecuador’s traditional, extensive methods of
shrimp aquaculture. Shifting a critical mass of early movers to CSS will leverage additional private finance and
drive a broader sector-wide change in practice.
186. For community associations linked to protection of mangroves, reinforcing and expanding enterprises and
revenue streams such as crab and shellfish fisheries or ecotourism also provide a way to internalize the returns
of their mangrove conservation commitments under stewardship agreements (AUSCEM, see section B.3 and
Annex 2). Currently, these livelihoods and income generating activities are not optimized, limiting the scale and
effectiveness of these conservation strategies.
187. Regulatory requirements have contributed to reversing Ecuador’s mangrove deforestation trends, but gross
deforestation continues due to insufficient investment in enforcement and oversight, while market signals,
especially from international demand for more sustainable products in shrimp markets, are rapidly
strengthening.
188. Motivating private sector investment, which has to date been marginal for mangrove conservation/restoration
requires better alignment of the potential for private benefits and regulatory frameworks and incentives that
recognize the public benefits and externalities of mangroves. By generating and providing data, facilitating
technical support and building the capacity of both the public and private sectors, the project will support long-
term integration into policy and institutional frameworks governing mangroves as well as strengthening the
financial mechanisms for stable investment flows.
189. The project objectives align well with GCF’s function as demonstrated by its contribution to three of GCF’s
priority results areas (forestry and land-use, most vulnerable people and communities and ecosystems and
ecosystem services) and the significant GHG emissions reductions and adaptation benefits it will provide. Given
the existing challenges for Ecuador’s government budget, which have been exacerbated by the economic
impacts of Covid, significant national public funding for the project is not realistic. Nevertheless, the project will
benefit from some government co-financing for support to community mangrove conservation. The project
provides an important opportunity to catalyze current interest in improving sustainability within the shrimp
farming industry such that it adopts a pathway towards zero mangrove deforestation and mangrove restoration,
which will provide important climate change mitigation and coastal flood protection benefits. Further, there is a
substantial unrealized but demonstrated opportunity to protect mangroves through community conservation,
which would strengthen protection of existing areas and provide opportunities for restoration while also creating
new economic opportunities for some of Ecuador’s poorest and most vulnerable coastal communities. However,
to capitalize on these opportunities, grant funding is critical to overcome the barriers to mangrove conservation
and restoration. CI has raised funding for successful pilot projects on community conservation and promoting

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50
B
climate-smart shrimp, but these are insufficient to tackle the issues for mangroves at the scale required. GCF
funding for this project would not be duplicating work supported by other donors.
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
[See Annex 2, Feasibility Study for more details.]
190. Project investments will drive a paradigm shift in the institutional, organizational and financial frameworks
governing mangroves as a climate-change adaptation and mitigation tool, by the private and public sector. The
project includes various activities that build sustainability, outlined below by component.
Project Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate-adapted management increased,
including through community-based management (AUSCEMs) and PAs implementing climate adaptation
plans.
191. Project investments in strengthening the management of AUSCEMs and PAs, expanding their coverage, and
explicitly incorporating climate risks and benefits into management will consolidate a foundation that will be
institutionalized and extend beyond the project lifespan.
192. AUSCEMs and Socio Manglar agreements create legally binding terms and agreements for community-based
mangrove conservation and incentives for up to two decades. Project investments will support training, planning
and administrative support to overcome initial establishment costs for agreements and thus scale up long-
lasting coverage of these programs.
193. AUSCEMs establish (renewable) ten-year commitments from communities (with contracts established
voluntarily and with mutual consent, between the government and community beneficiaries) to conserve and
sustainably manage mangroves, recognized and enforced by the environmental authority. Areas restored to
mangroves under this component will be within AUSCEMs or within formal PAs to ensure continued protection
of these areas beyond project implementation. The project design assumes that the Government of Ecuador
will continue to use AUSCEMs as a mechanism for engaging communities in mangrove conservation and
sustainable management.
194. The project will expand the coverage of Socio Manglar agreements to cover an additional 20,000 ha. These
Socio Manglar agreements embody a 10-year renewable commitment on the part of the Government of Ecuador
to sustain these areas and benefits, while including additional legal provisions in their contracts beyond the
terms of AUSCEMs, including financial planning, accounting, tax obligations and reporting to the environmental
authority and to the members. As noted in the project Theory of Change, an important assumption of the project
is that the government continues to be committed to the use of AUSCEMs and Socio Manglar agreements.
195. The project also includes incorporating climate adaptation into the strategies of government-run mangrove-
dominated Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). By integrating these strategies into the management plans of these
MPAs, any long-term costs associated with them will be integrated into the regular MPA budgets. Ecuador’s
MPAs already have consistent funding annually from the government but there are also additional ongoing
actions to increase the sustainability of funding for the MPAs through two dedicated trust funds. This work on
MPA sustainable funding is not directly part of this GCF project but will contribute to the long-term sustainability
of the GCF investments.
196. Legal commitments and financial commitments will contribute to reinforcing a solid foundation of grassroots
capacity built by the project. Social capital and local livelihoods require legal and financial instruments, and vice
versa. Mangrove-based associations already have a strong predisposition and interest in mangrove
conservation, driving the signing of AUSCEM agreements covering 60,000 ha to date. By investing in
organizational and planning capacity across 60 associations with AUSCEMs, the project will strengthen human
capacity of these local organizations and PA staff to value benefits of mangroves, including climate resilience,
based on a participatory, gender-sensitive approach. Further reinforcing local commitments to mangrove
management, local enterprises will perceive increased economic benefits through the implementation of
business plans and strategies that are economically viable and have continuity after the project ends.

--- Table 1 on Page 57 ---
climate-smart shrimp, but these are insufficient to tackle the issues for mangroves at the scale required. GCF
funding for this project would not be duplicating work supported by other donors.
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
[See Annex 2, Feasibility Study for more details.]
190. Project investments will drive a paradigm shift in the institutional, organizational and financial frameworks
governing mangroves as a climate-change adaptation and mitigation tool, by the private and public sector. The
project includes various activities that build sustainability, outlined below by component.
Project Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate-adapted management increased,
including through community-based management (AUSCEMs) and PAs implementing climate adaptation
plans.
191. Project investments in strengthening the management of AUSCEMs and PAs, expanding their coverage, and
explicitly incorporating climate risks and benefits into management will consolidate a foundation that will be
institutionalized and extend beyond the project lifespan.
192. AUSCEMs and Socio Manglar agreements create legally binding terms and agreements for community-based
mangrove conservation and incentives for up to two decades. Project investments will support training, planning
and administrative support to overcome initial establishment costs for agreements and thus scale up long-
lasting coverage of these programs.
193. AUSCEMs establish (renewable) ten-year commitments from communities (with contracts established
voluntarily and with mutual consent, between the government and community beneficiaries) to conserve and
sustainably manage mangroves, recognized and enforced by the environmental authority. Areas restored to
mangroves under this component will be within AUSCEMs or within formal PAs to ensure continued protection
of these areas beyond project implementation. The project design assumes that the Government of Ecuador
will continue to use AUSCEMs as a mechanism for engaging communities in mangrove conservation and
sustainable management.
194. The project will expand the coverage of Socio Manglar agreements to cover an additional 20,000 ha. These
Socio Manglar agreements embody a 10-year renewable commitment on the part of the Government of Ecuador
to sustain these areas and benefits, while including additional legal provisions in their contracts beyond the
terms of AUSCEMs, including financial planning, accounting, tax obligations and reporting to the environmental
authority and to the members. As noted in the project Theory of Change, an important assumption of the project
is that the government continues to be committed to the use of AUSCEMs and Socio Manglar agreements.
195. The project also includes incorporating climate adaptation into the strategies of government-run mangrove-
dominated Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). By integrating these strategies into the management plans of these
MPAs, any long-term costs associated with them will be integrated into the regular MPA budgets. Ecuador’s
MPAs already have consistent funding annually from the government but there are also additional ongoing
actions to increase the sustainability of funding for the MPAs through two dedicated trust funds. This work on
MPA sustainable funding is not directly part of this GCF project but will contribute to the long-term sustainability
of the GCF investments.
196. Legal commitments and financial commitments will contribute to reinforcing a solid foundation of grassroots
capacity built by the project. Social capital and local livelihoods require legal and financial instruments, and vice
versa. Mangrove-based associations already have a strong predisposition and interest in mangrove
conservation, driving the signing of AUSCEM agreements covering 60,000 ha to date. By investing in
organizational and planning capacity across 60 associations with AUSCEMs, the project will strengthen human
capacity of these local organizations and PA staff to value benefits of mangroves, including climate resilience,
based on a participatory, gender-sensitive approach. Further reinforcing local commitments to mangrove
management, local enterprises will perceive increased economic benefits through the implementation of
business plans and strategies that are economically viable and have continuity after the project ends.

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51
B
Project Component 2: The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG
emissions and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate
resilience for other coastal populations.
197. Long-term sustainability is the underlying rationale for this project outcome. By recognizing and internalizing
the value of mangrove conservation and restoration in private-sector practices and investment decisions, the
project will lay the foundation for ongoing action.
198. In the shrimp aquaculture sector, shifting a significant proportion of production area to climate-smart practices
will lead to on-farm improvements in mangrove conservation and other climate-related practices over 20,000
ha of aquaculture. By linking these actions by early adopters to public-private dialogue and market engagement,
the project aims to shift policies, commercial strategies and common practice broadly across the sector,
positioning Ecuador’s shrimp sector internationally and driving demand and therefore further adoption of
ASC/SSP certification and CSS practices. Once established as common, profitable practices and demand
grows, any ongoing investment to maintain ASC/SSP certification status and CSS practices is expected to come
from the companies themselves, either through self-financing made possible by enhanced profitability or from
private financial institutions (see activity 2.1.2). In addition, in parallel with this project, CI is working with partners
to establish a Climate Smart Shrimp Fund that will create a track record of successful CSS loans (as defined
by loan repayment at commercial rate5s3, farm profitability, and mangrove restoration) to demonstrate
attractiveness to local financial institutions.
199. The CSS Fund is being developed as a blended finance vehicle, with approximately 30% concessional finance
and 70% commercial finance. The fund's long-term goal is to make the case to local financial institutions that
they can and should make CSS loans. Although the CSS Fund is not being developed as part of this GCF-
funded project, it will contribute to the sustainability of the work being supported by GCF. Should the CSS Fund
be fully capitalized during project implementation, this funding will be considered parallel financing.
200. Certification schemes are designed to reward responsible farming practices. Globally, buyers in major markets
are making strong commitments to purchase farmed seafood products from certified sources and ASC is a
recognized leader in seafood certification. This growing demand provides the incentive needed for shrimp farms
to invest in more sustainable practices and to undergo the assessments necessary to obtain certification. The
project will remove the knowledge barriers that are currently blocking more widespread participation in
certification and by the end of the project there will be more examples of small- and medium-sized farms that
have obtained private financing that will serve as examples for the industry and for the financial institutions that
invest. The market-based incentives created by certification, and the influence of best practice among early
adopters, combined with improved regulation (through the activities of Component 3) should mean that more
attention is paid to environmental concerns including ensuring no further clearing of mangrove beyond the
project. Price premiums for certified shrimp can be elusive. Instead, market access via preferential sourcing is
a common incentive for farms to attain certification54. The project will support farmers to access these markets.
201. The project will expand a dedicated long-term finance mechanism to assure continuity of resources for the
Socio Manglar incentive payments to communities managing mangroves, and leverage commitments from the
Government of Ecuador, which will provide US$449,000 per year for these incentives as cofinance. The project
will contribute to capitalizing the Socio Manglar subaccount of the existing and highly successful Socio Bosque
Fund. Four million dollars (US$4 million) of GCF funding is requested to increase the capital of the Socio
Manglar subaccount, which will leverage additional private investment including from companies involved in
shrimp aquaculture and Ecuador’s PECC. The GCF contribution of $4 million will be held in an interest-bearing
bank account while funds from other contributors will be held in an investment account and invested in
accordance with the investment policy of FIAS. Projections for the growth of the capitalization and use of the
subaccount are provided in Appendix 12 of Annex 2. By clearly demonstrating and documenting emissions
mitigation benefits, the project will also contribute to creating the necessary conditions for results-based
payments (RBPs) for mangrove conservation in the long-term.
53 https://www.climatefinancelab.org/ideas/climate-smart-shrimp-fund/
54 For more information on markets of certified shrimp, see FS section 4.6.1.3 and From Company Commitments to
Collective Global Action: What’s Next for our Sustainable Seafood Strategy • The David and Lucile Packard Foundation

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52
B
Project Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation
and increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies,
coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.
202. Sustainability and long-term permanence of improvements to policies and public institutions will be ensured by
a combination of legal/regulatory instruments and institutional capacity.
203. A key set of outputs of this Component relate to the inclusive development of policy, planning and legal
instruments that will govern management, enforcement and government budget allocations. These instruments
will extend beyond the end of GCF funding and will include instruments at various levels:
• GADs will have codified mangrove conservation and climate considerations in local development plans,
regulations and policy frameworks (e.g. municipal ordinances, budgets, PDOTs, COA, integrated coastal
development plans), ensuring the basis for long-term application of these regulatory instruments guiding
development and public investment.
• Harmonized public policy instruments for the management of the mangrove ecosystem (e.g., procedures
for assuring transparency in regulation, decision making and enforcement action, inter-agency
cooperation for establishing technical standards).
• Improvements in procedures at MAATE for reception and processing of complaints, enforcement and
sanctions, reflected in regulatory reforms formally adopted by the Ministry and/or other public entities.
204. In addition, capacity building for national and regional institutions will help ensure that institutions can continue
to monitor the effectiveness and sustainability of their actions after project completion and improve their
effectiveness. Key partners in project implementation have been, and will be, involved in all aspects of project
design and execution to ensure that they can sustain these activities after the GCF funding concludes. For
example, forest monitoring data, specific to mangroves, including robust accounting of soil organic carbon, will
be generated by the project with the aim of including a robust set of data and methodologies for inclusion by
Ecuador´s MAATE in the national Forest Reference Emissions Level (FREL). By incorporating this very
significant carbon pool and sequestration into national monitoring, Ecuador will be able to provide a more
comprehensive accounting of emissions and reductions as well as potentially mobilizing additional carbon
finance. Also, institutionalization of training programs, curricula and materials developed by the project will
provide the basis for ongoing replication by MAATE and the Judicial Branch after the project concludes.

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53
C
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested
Total amount Currency
GCF funding
(i + ii + iii + iv + v
36.4 million USD ($)
+ vi + vii)
GCF financial
Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
instrument
(i) Senior loans
(ii) Subordinated
loans
(iii) Equity
(iv) Guarantees
(v) Reimbursable
grants
(vi) Grants 36.4
(vii) Results-based
payments
(b) Co-financing Total amount Currency
information55 9.5 million USD ($)
Financial
Name of Amoun
instrumen Currency Tenor & grace Pricing Seniority
institution t
t
Grant
MAATE 2.7 million USD ($)
In kind
MAATE 1.4 million USD ($)
In kind
CI 5.5 million USD ($)
Total Amount Currency
financing
(c) = (a)+(b) 45.9 million USD ($)
In addition to the co-financing committed for the project, other contributions can be considered
parallel finance complementing the project. Prior to implementation of the Project, the ASC
(d) Other
provided US$50,000 and CI Ecuador provided US$ 100,000 in 2021 to establish the Socio Manglar
financing
subaccount of the Socio Bosque Fund in preparation for the project. During project
arrangements
implementation, the ASC will request that its members contribute to the Socio Manglar subaccount
and contributions
(support for Activity 1.2.2). CI also expects that shrimp farms will seek an estimated US$ 5 million
(max. 250 words,
in financing from various financial institutions for investments in CSS (see Activity 2.1.2). During
approximately 0.5
implementation, CI will make efforts to track such parallel financing for final project reporting as
page)
detailed in the GCF Policy on Co-financing.
C.2. Financing by component
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost56
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million
million Instrument million Instrument Institutions
USD ($)
USD ($) USD ($)
55 Please see Annex 4 for details on co-finance.
56 Columns may not add up to the total am ounts due to rounding. Please see Annex 4 Detailed Budget Plan for exact figures.

--- Table 1 on Page 60 ---
FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) Requested |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  | 
 | GCF funding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (i + ii + iii + iv + v |  | 36.4 |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  | 
 | + vi + vii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF financial |  | Amount | Tenor |  |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  | Pricing |  | 
 | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(i) Senior loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (ii) Subordinated |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(iii) Equity |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(iv) Guarantees |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (v) Reimbursable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vi) Grants |  | 36.4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vii) Results-based |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | payments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (b) Co-financing |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  | 
 | information55 |  | 9.5 |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  | 
Name of
institution |  |  | Financial
instrumen
t |  | Amoun
t | Currency |  | Tenor & grace |  |  | Pricing |  | Seniority | 
MAATE |  |  | Grant |  | 2.7 | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
MAATE |  |  | In kind |  | 1.4 | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
CI |  |  | In kind |  | 5.5 | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Total |  | Amount |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 45.9 |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (c) = (a)+(b) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(d) Other
financing
arrangements
and contributions
(max. 250 words,
approximately 0.5
page) |  |  | In addition to the co-financing committed for the project, other contributions can be considered
parallel finance complementing the project. Prior to implementation of the Project, the ASC
provided US$50,000 and CI Ecuador provided US$ 100,000 in 2021 to establish the Socio Manglar
subaccount of the Socio Bosque Fund in preparation for the project. During project
implementation, the ASC will request that its members contribute to the Socio Manglar subaccount
(support for Activity 1.2.2). CI also expects that shrimp farms will seek an estimated US$ 5 million
in financing from various financial institutions for investments in CSS (see Activity 2.1.2). During
implementation, CI will make efforts to track such parallel financing for final project reporting as
detailed in the GCF Policy on Co-financing. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
C.2. Financing by component |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost56
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million
million Instrument million Instrument Institutions
USD ($)
USD ($) USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 60 ---
Name of
institution

--- Table 3 on Page 60 ---
Amoun
t

--- Table 4 on Page 60 ---
(d) Other
financing
arrangements
and contributions
(max. 250 words,
approximately 0.5
page)

--- Table 5 on Page 60 ---
Component | Component | Output | Indicative
cost56
million
USD ($) |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Financial |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Name of
Institutions | Name of | 
 |  |  |  |  | million |  |  | Instrument |  |  | million |  |  |  | Institutions | 
 |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 6 on Page 60 ---
Indicative
cost56
million
USD ($)

--- Table 7 on Page 60 ---
Financial
Instrument

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54
C
Output 1.1:
Reduced exposure
to flood risk for
vulnerable people 2.7 Grants Government
of Ecuador
and reduced GHG
(MAATE)
emissions from
mangrove
restoration are 22.4 16.3 Grants Government
0.9 In-Kind
Component 1: achieved by of Ecuador
Mangrove areas strengthening (MAATE)
under effective community-based
and climate- management 2.5 In-Kind CI
adapted through AUSCEMs
management and protected
increased, areas.
including through Output 1.2:
community- Improved livelihood
based activities and more
management economically
(AUSCEMs) and productive
protected areas community
implementing businesses enable
climate local people to
adaptation plans. become more 3.3 2.9 Grants 0.4 In-Kind CI
resilient to climate
change and
incentivized to
participate in, and
maintain,
mangrove
conservation and
restoration.
Output 2.1: Shrimp
aquaculture farms
adopt practices
Component 2: and production
The private standards that
sector becomes require elimination 4.0 3.5 Grants 0.5 In-Kind CI
a of deforestation
transformational and active
agent for change reforestation in
by reducing coastal and
GHG emissions mangrove areas.
and providing Output 2.2:
financial support Sustainable
to conserve and management of
restore mangroves
mangroves that improved through
increase climate agreements with
resilience for the private sector, 6.2 5.4 Grants 0.8 In-Kind CI
other coastal including direct
populations. financial support
for mangrove
conservation and
restoration.
Component 3: Output 3.1:
Create the Decision making
enabling for mangrove 2.5 2.2 Grants 0.3 In-kind CI
conditions for management by
sustaining national

--- Table 1 on Page 61 ---
 | Component 1:
Mangrove areas
under effective
and climate-
adapted
management
increased,
including through
community-
based
management
(AUSCEMs) and
protected areas
implementing
climate
adaptation plans. | Output 1.1:
Reduced exposure
to flood risk for
vulnerable people
and reduced GHG
emissions from
mangrove
restoration are
achieved by
strengthening
community-based
management
through AUSCEMs
and protected
areas. | 22.4 | 16.3 | Grants | 2.7
0.9
2.5 | Grants
In-Kind
In-Kind | Government
of Ecuador
(MAATE)
Government
of Ecuador
(MAATE)
CI | 
 |  | Output 1.2:
Improved livelihood
activities and more
economically
productive
community
businesses enable
local people to
become more
resilient to climate
change and
incentivized to
participate in, and
maintain,
mangrove
conservation and
restoration. | 3.3 | 2.9 | Grants | 0.4 | In-Kind | CI | 
 | Component 2:
The private
sector becomes
a
transformational
agent for change
by reducing
GHG emissions
and providing
financial support
to conserve and
restore
mangroves that
increase climate
resilience for
other coastal
populations. | Output 2.1: Shrimp
aquaculture farms
adopt practices
and production
standards that
require elimination
of deforestation
and active
reforestation in
coastal and
mangrove areas. | 4.0 | 3.5 | Grants | 0.5 | In-Kind | CI | 
 |  | Output 2.2:
Sustainable
management of
mangroves
improved through
agreements with
the private sector,
including direct
financial support
for mangrove
conservation and
restoration. | 6.2 | 5.4 | Grants | 0.8 | In-Kind | CI | 
 | Component 3:
Create the
enabling
conditions for
sustaining | Output 3.1:
Decision making
for mangrove
management by
national | 2.5 | 2.2 | Grants | 0.3 | In-kind | CI | 

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55
C
reductions in government
mangrove agencies and local
deforestation governments is
and increased based on
mangrove generation and
restoration by provision of
strengthening accurate and up-to-
governance, date data on
climate change mangrove
adaptation condition and
strategies, socio-economic
coastal information on
management mangrove
policies, and dependent
legal communities.
enforcement.
Output 3.2: Legal
and regulatory
frameworks at local
and sectoral level
are harmonized
3.8 3.3 Grants 0.5 In-kind CI
and include climate
resilience and
mitigation
strategies and
enforcement.
M&E M&E 1.2 1.1 Grants 0.2 In-kind CI
PMC Government
0.5 In-kind
of Ecuador
PMC 2.5 1.7 Grants (MAATE)
0.2 In-kind
CI
Indicative total cost (USD)
45.9 36.4 9.5
GCF Funding is requested for all Project Activities. In addition, co-financing will be provided by the Government of
Ecuador, through MAATE, and CI. MAATE will provide in-kind staff time and associated operational cost to support work
under Output 1.1 (see paragraphs 113 and 184). Staff time will include MAATE specialists in climate change, sustainable
production and development, forestry direction, and PAs as well as regional personnel. Operational costs associated
with the staff costs (e.g., rent, communications, services, supplies and maintenance) will also be provided in-kind.
MAATE will also provide in-kind staff time and associated operational costs to support its PMC-related activities. MAATE
will also provide grant funding in the form of direct incentive payments to beneficiaries for the Socio Manglar program
contributing to A1.1.1 impacts.
CI will provide in-kind financing of indirect costs that are not eligible for GCF financing to support all components of this
project (see Annex 14 for details).
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building
Yes ☒ No
activities? ☐
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology
Yes ☒ No
development/transfer? ☐
Capacity building is a cross-cutting element of this project across outcomes and with multiple stakeholder groups.
Communities: AUSCEM communities will receive training, technical assistance and financial support to better conserve
mangroves and their vital ecosystem services for both climate change mitigation and adaptation. This capacity building
also includes the strengthening of mangrove community associations’ micro- and small-sized enterprises, with an

--- Table 1 on Page 62 ---
reductions in government
mangrove agencies and local
deforestation governments is
and increased based on
mangrove generation and
restoration by provision of
strengthening accurate and up-to-
governance, date data on
climate change mangrove
adaptation condition and
strategies, socio-economic
coastal information on
management mangrove
policies, and dependent
legal communities.
enforcement.
Output 3.2: Legal
and regulatory
frameworks at local
and sectoral level
are harmonized
3.8 3.3 Grants 0.5 In-kind CI
and include climate
resilience and
mitigation
strategies and
enforcement.
M&E M&E 1.2 1.1 Grants 0.2 In-kind CI
PMC Government
0.5 In-kind
of Ecuador
PMC 2.5 1.7 Grants (MAATE)
0.2 In-kind
CI
Indicative total cost (USD)
45.9 36.4 9.5
GCF Funding is requested for all Project Activities. In addition, co-financing will be provided by the Government of
Ecuador, through MAATE, and CI. MAATE will provide in-kind staff time and associated operational cost to support work
under Output 1.1 (see paragraphs 113 and 184). Staff time will include MAATE specialists in climate change, sustainable
production and development, forestry direction, and PAs as well as regional personnel. Operational costs associated
with the staff costs (e.g., rent, communications, services, supplies and maintenance) will also be provided in-kind.
MAATE will also provide in-kind staff time and associated operational costs to support its PMC-related activities. MAATE
will also provide grant funding in the form of direct incentive payments to beneficiaries for the Socio Manglar program
contributing to A1.1.1 impacts.
CI will provide in-kind financing of indirect costs that are not eligible for GCF financing to support all components of this
project (see Annex 14 for details). |  |  | 
 | C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) |  | 
 | C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building | Yes ☒ No
☐ | 
 | activities? |  | 
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology | Yes ☒ No
☐ | 
 | development/transfer? |  | 
Capacity building is a cross-cutting element of this project across outcomes and with multiple stakeholder groups.
Communities: AUSCEM communities will receive training, technical assistance and financial support to better conserve
mangroves and their vital ecosystem services for both climate change mitigation and adaptation. This capacity building
also includes the strengthening of mangrove community associations’ micro- and small-sized enterprises, with an |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 62 ---
reductions in
mangrove
deforestation
and increased
mangrove
restoration by
strengthening
governance,
climate change
adaptation
strategies,
coastal
management
policies, and
legal
enforcement. | government
agencies and local
governments is
based on
generation and
provision of
accurate and up-to-
date data on
mangrove
condition and
socio-economic
information on
mangrove
dependent
communities. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 3.2: Legal
and regulatory
frameworks at local
and sectoral level
are harmonized
and include climate
resilience and
mitigation
strategies and
enforcement. | 3.8 | 3.3 | Grants | 0.5 | In-kind | CI
M&E | M&E | 1.2 | 1.1 | Grants | 0.2 | In-kind | CI
PMC | PMC | 2.5 | 1.7 | Grants | 0.5
0.2 | In-kind
In-kind | Government
of Ecuador
(MAATE)
CI
Indicative total cost (USD) |  | 45.9 | 36.4 |  | 9.5 |  | 

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56
C
emphasis on women, youth and other vulnerable groups (Activities 1.1.1 and Output 1.2; GCF funding requested
US$561,675)
Shrimp famers: Increasing the technical capacity of small- and medium-sized shrimp farmers to drive adoption of
climate-smart practices (Project Output 2.1; GCF funding requested US$289,390) is key to the success of the project.
Government:
• MAATE’s capacities for planning and implementation of activities that improve climate resilience and mangrove
conservation in PAs will also be improved (Activity 1.1.2; GCF funding requested US$82,266);
• National entities (MAATE, judiciary) will attend training and technical assistance for complaints, enforcement
and sanctions for infractions affecting mangroves (Activity 3.2.2; GCF funding requested US$230,774).
• Government entities will have the capacity to generate and incorporate improved mangrove forest cover and
carbon stock data for planning, policies, investments and enforcement through training and basic equipment
(Activity 3.1.1; GCF funding requested US$12,058);
• Local and provincial governments (GADs) will have the capacity to develop, update and/or adopt zoning and
development plans including criteria and indicators relating to mangrove protection, climate change mitigation
or adaptation (Activity 3.2.1; GCF funding requested US$39,884);
Local NGOs and universities: The Project will also support the capacity building of partners that need to enforce their
operation practices through Enforcement Plans to subgrantees. There will be a technology transfer in restoration
practices with green-gray practices in Ecuador through the trainings provided to shrimp farmers and promotion of the
CSS concept (Project Output 2.1).

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57
D
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
205. The project will provide both adaptation and mitigation benefits. The direct adaptation benefits come from
reduced flooding risk of vulnerable people and project activities that are expected to increase people’s
resilience through livelihood benefits associated with better mangrove management. The mitigation
benefits come from a combination of reduced emissions by reducing mangrove deforestation and from
carbon sequestration in areas of restored mangroves.
206. Eight priority municipalities, with a population of 3.4 million, were selected based on mangrove cover and
population at risk of flooding related to climate change (see B.1.1.4). Flood risk modelling including the
effect of mangrove cover to reduce risk was used to estimate flood risk beneficiaries and expected reduced
losses of economic assets (see Annex 25). Based on the modelling, the flood risk for 89,600 people can
be mitigated by reducing mangrove loss and enhancing mangrove restoration efforts to increase the rate
of mangrove recovery as compared to baseline rates. The population at risk is likely to increase as
population grows, however we conservatively assume benefits for the 89,600 people as modelling
population growth and migration introduces great uncertainty into the estimations (See Annex 25 for details
of Adaptation beneficiaries).
Adaptation Impacts
Impact Indicator Value Data and assumptions
Change in expected losses of US$ 280 million per year in During project implementation period.
economic assets due to the impact avoided losses of economic
Based on US$1,600 in avoided property
of extreme climate-related assets due to the flood
damage/ha/y of additional mangrove by
disasters in the geographic area of protection benefits of
comparison to the baseline.
the GCF intervention (US$) – mangroves
ARA1 Most vulnerable people and
communities
Direct and Indirect beneficiaries 89,600 direct beneficiaries of People at high annual risk of flooding
reached (ARA 1 Most vulnerable flood protection benefits. benefit from enhanced mangrove
people and communities) coverage and management. See Annex
25
3.4 million indirect
People living in municipalities with high
beneficiaries of improved
mangrove coverage to benefit from
planning processes in
improved land-use planning.
mangrove-rich municipalities
Beneficiaries (female/male) 41,500 people (50% female, Includes total population expected to
adopting improved and/or new 50% male) with diversified benefit from AUSCEMs, including
climate resilient livelihood options climate-resilient livelihoods, support to livelihood activities in
– ARA 1 Most vulnerable people and/or reduced flood risk Component 1. These beneficiaries are
and communities also expected to benefit from flood
protection benefits and are therefore not
double counted in the estimation of total
project direct beneficiaries.
Hectares of terrestrial non-forest, 156,633 ha of mangrove Includes all of Ecuador’s mangroves.
freshwater and coastal-marine protected and strengthened Although project activities are directly
areas brought under restoration focused on four estuaries (including
and/or improved ecosystems (ha) 96% of Ecuador’s mangroves), the
enabling conditions activities

--- Table 1 on Page 64 ---
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF’s Initial Investment Framework. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 205. The project will provide both adaptation and mitigation benefits. The direct adaptation benefits come from |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | reduced flooding risk of vulnerable people and project activities that are expected to increase people’s |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | resilience through livelihood benefits associated with better mangrove management. The mitigation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | benefits come from a combination of reduced emissions by reducing mangrove deforestation and from |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | carbon sequestration in areas of restored mangroves. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 206. Eight priority municipalities, with a population of 3.4 million, were selected based on mangrove cover and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | population at risk of flooding related to climate change (see B.1.1.4). Flood risk modelling including the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | effect of mangrove cover to reduce risk was used to estimate flood risk beneficiaries and expected reduced |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | losses of economic assets (see Annex 25). Based on the modelling, the flood risk for 89,600 people can |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | be mitigated by reducing mangrove loss and enhancing mangrove restoration efforts to increase the rate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of mangrove recovery as compared to baseline rates. The population at risk is likely to increase as |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | population grows, however we conservatively assume benefits for the 89,600 people as modelling |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | population growth and migration introduces great uncertainty into the estimations (See Annex 25 for details |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of Adaptation beneficiaries). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Adaptation Impacts |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Impact Indicator |  |  | Value |  |  | Data and assumptions | 
 |  | Change in expected losses of |  | US$ 280 million per year in
avoided losses of economic
assets due to the flood
protection benefits of
mangroves | US$ 280 million per year in |  | During project implementation period.
Based on US$1,600 in avoided property
damage/ha/y of additional mangrove by
comparison to the baseline. | During project implementation period. | 
 |  | economic assets due to the impact |  |  | avoided losses of economic |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Based on US$1,600 in avoided property | 
 |  | of extreme climate-related |  |  | assets due to the flood |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | damage/ha/y of additional mangrove by | 
 |  | disasters in the geographic area of |  |  | protection benefits of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | comparison to the baseline. | 
 |  | the GCF intervention (US$) – |  |  | mangroves |  |  |  | 
 |  | ARA1 Most vulnerable people and |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | communities |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Direct and Indirect beneficiaries
reached (ARA 1 Most vulnerable
people and communities) | Direct and Indirect beneficiaries |  |  | 89,600 direct beneficiaries of |  | People at high annual risk of flooding
benefit from enhanced mangrove
coverage and management. See Annex
25
People living in municipalities with high
mangrove coverage to benefit from
improved land-use planning. | People at high annual risk of flooding | 
 |  | reached (ARA 1 Most vulnerable |  |  | flood protection benefits. |  |  | benefit from enhanced mangrove | 
 |  | people and communities) |  |  |  |  |  | coverage and management. See Annex | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 25 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 3.4 million indirect |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | People living in municipalities with high | 
 |  |  |  |  | beneficiaries of improved |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mangrove coverage to benefit from | 
 |  |  |  |  | planning processes in |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | improved land-use planning. | 
 |  |  |  |  | mangrove-rich municipalities |  |  |  | 
 | Beneficiaries (female/male)
adopting improved and/or new
climate resilient livelihood options
– ARA 1 Most vulnerable people
and communities |  |  | 41,500 people (50% female,
50% male) with diversified
climate-resilient livelihoods,
and/or reduced flood risk | 41,500 people (50% female, |  |  | Includes total population expected to | 
 |  |  |  |  | 50% male) with diversified |  |  | benefit from AUSCEMs, including | 
 |  |  |  |  | climate-resilient livelihoods, |  |  | support to livelihood activities in | 
 |  |  |  |  | and/or reduced flood risk |  |  | Component 1. These beneficiaries are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | also expected to benefit from flood | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | protection benefits and are therefore not | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | double counted in the estimation of total | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | project direct beneficiaries. | 
 | Hectares of terrestrial non-forest,
freshwater and coastal-marine
areas brought under restoration
and/or improved ecosystems (ha) |  |  | 156,633 ha of mangrove
protected and strengthened |  |  |  | Includes all of Ecuador’s mangroves. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Although project activities are directly | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | focused on four estuaries (including | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 96% of Ecuador’s mangroves), the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | enabling conditions activities | 

--- Table 2 on Page 64 ---
Beneficiaries (female/male)
adopting improved and/or new
climate resilient livelihood options
– ARA 1 Most vulnerable people
and communities

--- Table 3 on Page 64 ---
Hectares of terrestrial non-forest,
freshwater and coastal-marine
areas brought under restoration
and/or improved ecosystems (ha)

--- Table 4 on Page 64 ---
156,633 ha of mangrove
protected and strengthened

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58
D
– ARA 4 Ecosystems and (component 3) are expected to
ecosystem services strengthen mangrove management
nationally.
Includes areas in PAs, AUSCEMs
(existing and additional), and shrimp
farms as well as currently unprotected
areas that will be protected through
improved planning and enforcement at
diverse levels of government.
Mitigation Impacts
• GHG emissions from gross deforestation under the baseline scenario are projected to be 2,428,986 tCO2e
over the project implementation period and 11,062,246 tCO2e over 20 years.
• Reductions in GHG emissions from reducing deforestation due to project interventions relative to this
baseline scenario are projected to be 567,404 tCO2e over the project period and 3,566,685 tCO2e over
20 years.
• In addition, removals of GHG emissions from project reforestation activities are projected to be 164,707
tCO2e over the project implementation and 1,042,785 tCO2e over 20 years.
• Total net GHG reductions, from avoided deforestation and mangrove restoration are projected to be
732,111 tCO2e over the project implementation period and 4,609,470 tCO2e over 20 years.
• A detailed description of methods and data is included in Annex 22 along with an Excel workbook with
the calculations of GHG emission reductions, including all assumptions and equations used, to enable a
technical assessment to retrace the calculations.
• Estimates will be refined through on-the-ground measurements during project implementation.
Impact Indicator Value Data and assumptions
Tonnes of GHG emissions (tCO2e) See above and spreadsheet in Appendix
reduced, avoided or 732,111 tCO2e reduced during 22.
removed/sequestered – MRA4 project implementation period
Includes sequestration from mangrove
Forests and land use
4,609,470 tCO2e reduced over restoration.
20 years
207. In addition to the project’s contributions towards advancing national climate change adaption and mitigation
plans, the project will also contribute to the aims of the GMA57, which brings together a global community of
practitioners to halt mangrove loss, restore lost mangroves and secure mangrove protection. CI is a founding
member along with other international organizations and the project will contribute in two ways to the GMA’s
work.
208. The first relates to ongoing knowledge sharing of GMA, especially related to mangrove restoration and “blue
carbon” information. One of the functions of GMA is as a knowledge hub to share information between
practitioners engaged in mangrove conservation and restoration. The mangrove restoration approach is
informed by GMA toolkits and best practice guides. Data collected under activity 3.1.1 will also be shared
with the GMA as a matter of course (through the Mangrove Restoration Tracker Tool and Global Mangrove
Watch).
209. Second, the project itself makes an important contribution to the ‘Mangrove Breakthrough’, an initiative
launched by the GMA and the UN Climate Change high level Champions during the UNFCCC COP27. This
high-level initiative aims to secure the future of 15 million hectares of mangroves globally (through
conservation, restoration and securing long-term financing of mangrove protection). This project alone
represents about 1% of this goal.
57 https://www.mangrovealliance.org/

--- Table 1 on Page 65 ---
 | – ARA 4 Ecosystems and
ecosystem services |  |  |  |  |  |  | (component 3) are expected to |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | strengthen mangrove management |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | nationally. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Includes areas in PAs, AUSCEMs |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (existing and additional), and shrimp |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | farms as well as currently unprotected |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | areas that will be protected through |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | improved planning and enforcement at |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | diverse levels of government. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Impacts |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • GHG emissions from gross deforestation under the baseline scenario are projected to be 2,428,986 tCO2e |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | over the project implementation period and 11,062,246 tCO2e over 20 years. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Reductions in GHG emissions from reducing deforestation due to project interventions relative to this |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | baseline scenario are projected to be 567,404 tCO2e over the project period and 3,566,685 tCO2e over |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 20 years. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • In addition, removals of GHG emissions from project reforestation activities are projected to be 164,707 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | tCO2e over the project implementation and 1,042,785 tCO2e over 20 years. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Total net GHG reductions, from avoided deforestation and mangrove restoration are projected to be |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 732,111 tCO2e over the project implementation period and 4,609,470 tCO2e over 20 years. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • A detailed description of methods and data is included in Annex 22 along with an Excel workbook with |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the calculations of GHG emission reductions, including all assumptions and equations used, to enable a |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | technical assessment to retrace the calculations. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Estimates will be refined through on-the-ground measurements during project implementation. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Impact Indicator |  |  | Value |  |  | Data and assumptions |  |  | 
 | Tonnes of GHG emissions (tCO2e)
reduced, avoided or
removed/sequestered – MRA4
Forests and land use | Tonnes of GHG emissions (tCO2e) |  |  | 732,111 tCO2e reduced during |  | See above and spreadsheet in Appendix
22.
Includes sequestration from mangrove
restoration. | See above and spreadsheet in Appendix |  |  | 
 |  | reduced, avoided or |  |  |  |  |  | 22. |  |  | 
 |  | removed/sequestered – MRA4 |  |  | project implementation period |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Includes sequestration from mangrove |  |  | 
 |  | Forests and land use |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 4,609,470 tCO2e reduced over |  |  | restoration. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 20 years |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 207. In addition to the project’s contributions towards advancing national climate change adaption and mitigation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | plans, the project will also contribute to the aims of the GMA57, which brings together a global community of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | practitioners to halt mangrove loss, restore lost mangroves and secure mangrove protection. CI is a founding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | member along with other international organizations and the project will contribute in two ways to the GMA’s |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | work. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 208. The first relates to ongoing knowledge sharing of GMA, especially related to mangrove restoration and “blue |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | carbon” information. One of the functions of GMA is as a knowledge hub to share information between |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | practitioners engaged in mangrove conservation and restoration. The mangrove restoration approach is |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | informed by GMA toolkits and best practice guides. Data collected under activity 3.1.1 will also be shared |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | with the GMA as a matter of course (through the Mangrove Restoration Tracker Tool and Global Mangrove |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Watch). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 209. Second, the project itself makes an important contribution to the ‘Mangrove Breakthrough’, an initiative |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | launched by the GMA and the UN Climate Change high level Champions during the UNFCCC COP27. This |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | high-level initiative aims to secure the future of 15 million hectares of mangroves globally (through |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | conservation, restoration and securing long-term financing of mangrove protection). This project alone |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | represents about 1% of this goal. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 65 ---
– ARA 4 Ecosystems and
ecosystem services

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59
D
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
210. This project will drive a paradigm shift in the way that Ecuador values and benefits from critical natural
infrastructure that protects coastal people and assets from flooding. By fully valuing the adaptation and
mitigation benefits of mangrove ecosystems and integrating these into governance and economic
frameworks across Ecuador’s coastal region, the project presents an innovative approach to the goals of
reducing GHG emissions and improving the livelihoods of some of the country's most vulnerable people.
The current paradigm undervalues both climate risks and the ecosystem services provided by mangroves,
particularly with regards to climate change adaptation and mitigation. Under the current paradigm, exposure
to climate risk and GHG emissions are both augmented by lack of sufficient government, private sector and
civil society action. This situation is due to lack of adequate information, institutional coordination,
empowerment of local stakeholders, and mobilization of private sector investment.
211. The combination of bolstering public sector frameworks and capacity, catalyzing public-private partnerships
and private investment and strengthening local community participation and economic benefits, with a focus
on the ‘green infrastructure’ that mangroves provide is an innovative and cost-effective approach with strong
potential for scaling up and replication. Successful approaches will be sustained by local communities and
government entities over time and the project will create lessons, guidance and tools for application in other
countries with communities living in coastal areas threatened by climate change.
212. Across all activities, the project will engage in comprehensive monitoring and reporting with the aim of
strengthening learning and knowledge sharing. The project aims to carry out two comprehensive
evaluations: at the project mid-term and at the final evaluation of the project. Each exercise will include the
identification of lessons learned and their dissemination.
213. Complementing the strong focus on local action, community participation, gender equity and private sector
engagement, the project will consistently work to integrate these into a strong enabling environment and
policy framework. This enabling environment includes the strengthening of regulatory and policy frameworks
at the national and subnational level, as well as creating mechanisms and successful ongoing processes for
dialogue and collaboration across sectors.
214. The project includes a series of capacity building packages for local communities to strengthen their ability
to participate in innovative business models, as well as to engage more closely in the land use planning
process with local government. Building consensus among key stakeholders, including government,
community groups, and private sector actors, is a difficult task, largely neglected because of its high
transaction costs. However, many experiences confirm that sharing a common vision is a very efficient and
effective mechanism through which to achieve social objectives. The project approach is to develop a
pragmatic mechanism through which consensus can be reached on the operational management of
mangroves. The project has selected several planning tools to be formulated through a transparent and
open participatory process, guided by the entity responsible for their promulgation and facilitated through
the project. Technical assistance, training, logistical support, and coordination are the responsibilities of the
project, along with the facilitation process to allow all stakeholders to express their views, expectations, and
contributions, and to reach agreements for the benefit of all. It is expected that after several similar
participatory processes, community leaders, public officials, and private sector leaders will learn that such
an approach is valid and worthwhile, despite the additional initial transaction costs, and that reaching
agreements is an effective means of managing relationships with other stakeholders.
215. The project will strengthen the participation of the private sector through its support to the definition of clear
land use plans and the adoption of climate-smart practices, especially conservation and restoration of
mangroves.
216. The project involves the scaling up and consolidation of activities that have successfully been used to
conserve and restore mangroves in Ecuador. The area where the project is located lacks the most basic
land-use planning instruments that could guide the sustainable use of natural resources. These instruments
will be built jointly between the local communities and the local government as a first step to ensure the
long-term sustainable development of the provinces involved. The project will facilitate participatory, open
and transparent planning processes. In addition, the participatory process for land use planning will be
closely documented and the lessons from this experience will be shared with the national government.
Legal and regulatory adjustments, as needed for effective planning, will be recommended through technical
documents.

--- Table 1 on Page 66 ---
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 210. This project will drive a paradigm shift in the way that Ecuador values and benefits from critical natural | 
 | infrastructure that protects coastal people and assets from flooding. By fully valuing the adaptation and | 
 | mitigation benefits of mangrove ecosystems and integrating these into governance and economic | 
 | frameworks across Ecuador’s coastal region, the project presents an innovative approach to the goals of | 
 | reducing GHG emissions and improving the livelihoods of some of the country's most vulnerable people. | 
 | The current paradigm undervalues both climate risks and the ecosystem services provided by mangroves, | 
 | particularly with regards to climate change adaptation and mitigation. Under the current paradigm, exposure | 
 | to climate risk and GHG emissions are both augmented by lack of sufficient government, private sector and | 
 | civil society action. This situation is due to lack of adequate information, institutional coordination, | 
 | empowerment of local stakeholders, and mobilization of private sector investment. | 
 |  | 
 | 211. The combination of bolstering public sector frameworks and capacity, catalyzing public-private partnerships | 
 | and private investment and strengthening local community participation and economic benefits, with a focus | 
 | on the ‘green infrastructure’ that mangroves provide is an innovative and cost-effective approach with strong | 
 | potential for scaling up and replication. Successful approaches will be sustained by local communities and | 
 | government entities over time and the project will create lessons, guidance and tools for application in other | 
 | countries with communities living in coastal areas threatened by climate change. | 
 |  | 
 | 212. Across all activities, the project will engage in comprehensive monitoring and reporting with the aim of | 
 | strengthening learning and knowledge sharing. The project aims to carry out two comprehensive | 
 | evaluations: at the project mid-term and at the final evaluation of the project. Each exercise will include the | 
 | identification of lessons learned and their dissemination. | 
 |  | 
 | 213. Complementing the strong focus on local action, community participation, gender equity and private sector | 
 | engagement, the project will consistently work to integrate these into a strong enabling environment and | 
 | policy framework. This enabling environment includes the strengthening of regulatory and policy frameworks | 
 | at the national and subnational level, as well as creating mechanisms and successful ongoing processes for | 
 | dialogue and collaboration across sectors. | 
 |  | 
 | 214. The project includes a series of capacity building packages for local communities to strengthen their ability | 
 | to participate in innovative business models, as well as to engage more closely in the land use planning | 
 | process with local government. Building consensus among key stakeholders, including government, | 
 | community groups, and private sector actors, is a difficult task, largely neglected because of its high | 
 | transaction costs. However, many experiences confirm that sharing a common vision is a very efficient and | 
 | effective mechanism through which to achieve social objectives. The project approach is to develop a | 
 | pragmatic mechanism through which consensus can be reached on the operational management of | 
 | mangroves. The project has selected several planning tools to be formulated through a transparent and | 
 | open participatory process, guided by the entity responsible for their promulgation and facilitated through | 
 | the project. Technical assistance, training, logistical support, and coordination are the responsibilities of the | 
 | project, along with the facilitation process to allow all stakeholders to express their views, expectations, and | 
 | contributions, and to reach agreements for the benefit of all. It is expected that after several similar | 
 | participatory processes, community leaders, public officials, and private sector leaders will learn that such | 
 | an approach is valid and worthwhile, despite the additional initial transaction costs, and that reaching | 
 | agreements is an effective means of managing relationships with other stakeholders. | 
 |  | 
 | 215. The project will strengthen the participation of the private sector through its support to the definition of clear | 
 | land use plans and the adoption of climate-smart practices, especially conservation and restoration of | 
 | mangroves. | 
 |  | 
 | 216. The project involves the scaling up and consolidation of activities that have successfully been used to | 
 | conserve and restore mangroves in Ecuador. The area where the project is located lacks the most basic | 
 | land-use planning instruments that could guide the sustainable use of natural resources. These instruments | 
 | will be built jointly between the local communities and the local government as a first step to ensure the | 
 | long-term sustainable development of the provinces involved. The project will facilitate participatory, open | 
 | and transparent planning processes. In addition, the participatory process for land use planning will be | 
 | closely documented and the lessons from this experience will be shared with the national government. | 
 | Legal and regulatory adjustments, as needed for effective planning, will be recommended through technical | 
 | documents. | 

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60
D
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Environmental co-benefits
217. The project will reduce deforestation, increase restoration and enhance management across Ecuador’s
entire mangrove area of 156,633 ha.
218. In addition to the mitigation and flood-risk abatement benefits highlighted under GCF’s reporting framework
(D.1), mangroves provide significant additional ecosystem services including biodiversity conservation and
habitats for fishery nursing grounds. Ecuadorian mangroves are home to 179 plant species (Cornejo, 2014)
and constitute important nesting grounds for numerous bird species. Mangroves are also an important
habitat for spawning, breeding and nurseries of commercial and non-commercial fish species. The
structural complexity and ecological conditions of mangroves provide both protection from predators and
abundant food resources due to the high primary productivity of this ecosystem (Huxham et al., 2004,
Mirera et al., 2010, Shinnaka et al., 2007, Wang et al., 2009). Globally, secondary production of fish is 1-
11.8 t/ha/y (Mirera, Kairo, and Waweru, 2010). Fisheries production dependent on mangroves alone has
been estimated to be US$100-21,000/ha/y (Spalding et al, 2010). According to UNEP (2014), the full range
of ecosystem services are worth an average US$33,000 to US$57,000/ha/yr to the national economies of
developing countries with mangroves (UNEP, 2014). A more recent review of 250 studies around the world
that have estimated the biodiversity and ecosystem service value of one hectare of mangrove reported an
average value of US$21,100 ha/yr in 2018 prices (Getzner et al., 2020). Irrespective of valuation methods
used, the importance of mangrove fisheries as a food source for local communities is widely recognized.
Social co-benefits including health impacts
219. In addition to the reduction of flood risks, the project will result in additional co-benefits, especially for
mangrove-dependent communities and associations:
• Improved social cohesion and organizational capacity for mangrove management by 60 associations
will lead to enhanced ability to engage with government stakeholders, resolve internal conflicts and
develop additional community activities.
• Improved mangrove management and plans are likely to integrate other social and environmental
considerations with benefits for human health and wellbeing including water management and waste
disposal.
• Improvements in control of illegal activities in mangrove areas, in partnership between community-
based associations and government authorities will also generate collateral benefits in enhancing
local security.
Economic co-benefits
220. Mangrove conservation and restoration is a relatively low-cost solution for climate change adaptation that
will generate economic benefits for the government, the private sector, and the communities through the
avoided cost of the impacts of extreme climate events. The shrimp sector will be able to access new
markets by producing shrimp more sustainably and being able to brand and market the product
accordingly, resulting in increased export revenue and employment.
221. Communities will see lower flooding and relocation costs, reduced impacts on infrastructure, housing,
crops and livelihoods. Livelihood diversification and adaptive fishing techniques will increase the
resilience, economic stability, and food security of marginalized coastal fishing communities. Mangrove
ecosystems are the foundation for diversified local economies, with 80% of the human population of the
mangrove ecosystem dedicated to artisanal fishing, obtaining corvina (Cynoscion albus), mullet (Mugil
curema), sea catfish (Arius kesslei) and grunts (Anisotremus caesius), as well as red crab (Ucides
occidentalis) and black clam (Anadara spp.). Several of these species migrate to the sea and are an
important contribution to the composition of rich marine fisheries, frequently exploited by the marine fishing
industry.
Gender-sensitive development impact
222. The project will contribute directly to increasing the empowerment of women and other vulnerable groups
in economic activities and advancing their participation and leadership in organizations and enterprises.
See G.2 and Annex 8.

--- Table 1 on Page 67 ---
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | Environmental co-benefits | 
 | 217. The project will reduce deforestation, increase restoration and enhance management across Ecuador’s | 
 | entire mangrove area of 156,633 ha. | 
 |  | 
 | 218. In addition to the mitigation and flood-risk abatement benefits highlighted under GCF’s reporting framework | 
 | (D.1), mangroves provide significant additional ecosystem services including biodiversity conservation and | 
 | habitats for fishery nursing grounds. Ecuadorian mangroves are home to 179 plant species (Cornejo, 2014) | 
 | and constitute important nesting grounds for numerous bird species. Mangroves are also an important | 
 | habitat for spawning, breeding and nurseries of commercial and non-commercial fish species. The | 
 | structural complexity and ecological conditions of mangroves provide both protection from predators and | 
 | abundant food resources due to the high primary productivity of this ecosystem (Huxham et al., 2004, | 
 | Mirera et al., 2010, Shinnaka et al., 2007, Wang et al., 2009). Globally, secondary production of fish is 1- | 
 | 11.8 t/ha/y (Mirera, Kairo, and Waweru, 2010). Fisheries production dependent on mangroves alone has | 
 | been estimated to be US$100-21,000/ha/y (Spalding et al, 2010). According to UNEP (2014), the full range | 
 | of ecosystem services are worth an average US$33,000 to US$57,000/ha/yr to the national economies of | 
 | developing countries with mangroves (UNEP, 2014). A more recent review of 250 studies around the world | 
 | that have estimated the biodiversity and ecosystem service value of one hectare of mangrove reported an | 
 | average value of US$21,100 ha/yr in 2018 prices (Getzner et al., 2020). Irrespective of valuation methods | 
 | used, the importance of mangrove fisheries as a food source for local communities is widely recognized. | 
 |  | 
 | Social co-benefits including health impacts | 
 | 219. In addition to the reduction of flood risks, the project will result in additional co-benefits, especially for | 
 | mangrove-dependent communities and associations: | 
 | • Improved social cohesion and organizational capacity for mangrove management by 60 associations | 
 | will lead to enhanced ability to engage with government stakeholders, resolve internal conflicts and | 
 | develop additional community activities. | 
 | • Improved mangrove management and plans are likely to integrate other social and environmental | 
 | considerations with benefits for human health and wellbeing including water management and waste | 
 | disposal. | 
 | • Improvements in control of illegal activities in mangrove areas, in partnership between community- | 
 | based associations and government authorities will also generate collateral benefits in enhancing | 
 | local security. | 
 | Economic co-benefits | 
 | 220. Mangrove conservation and restoration is a relatively low-cost solution for climate change adaptation that | 
 | will generate economic benefits for the government, the private sector, and the communities through the | 
 | avoided cost of the impacts of extreme climate events. The shrimp sector will be able to access new | 
 | markets by producing shrimp more sustainably and being able to brand and market the product | 
 | accordingly, resulting in increased export revenue and employment. | 
 |  | 
 | 221. Communities will see lower flooding and relocation costs, reduced impacts on infrastructure, housing, | 
 | crops and livelihoods. Livelihood diversification and adaptive fishing techniques will increase the | 
 | resilience, economic stability, and food security of marginalized coastal fishing communities. Mangrove | 
 | ecosystems are the foundation for diversified local economies, with 80% of the human population of the | 
 | mangrove ecosystem dedicated to artisanal fishing, obtaining corvina (Cynoscion albus), mullet (Mugil | 
 | curema), sea catfish (Arius kesslei) and grunts (Anisotremus caesius), as well as red crab (Ucides | 
 | occidentalis) and black clam (Anadara spp.). Several of these species migrate to the sea and are an | 
 | important contribution to the composition of rich marine fisheries, frequently exploited by the marine fishing | 
 | industry. | 
 |  | 
 | Gender-sensitive development impact | 
 | 222. The project will contribute directly to increasing the empowerment of women and other vulnerable groups | 
 | in economic activities and advancing their participation and leadership in organizations and enterprises. | 
 | See G.2 and Annex 8. | 
 |  | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61
D
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
223. Economic growth in Ecuador has directly reduced poverty and inequality levels and increased the size of
the middle class. Between 2007 and 2018, poverty decreased from 36.7% to 23.2%, while extreme poverty
decreased from 16.5% to 8.4%. Similarly, inequality as measured by the GINI Coefficient has fallen from
0.55 in 2007 to 0.47 in 2018.
224. However, the economy is still heavily dependent on the oil sector, a vulnerability demonstrated in recent
years during periods of low oil prices and the appreciation of the US dollar. The reduction of this
dependency has been part of the national strategies implemented by the central government.
225. With more than 3,630 km of coastline, approximately 54% of Ecuador's population of 17 million people lives
in Ecuador's five coastal provinces. These areas are particularly vulnerable to SLR and the associated risks
of saltwater intrusion and storm surges, flooding and storms.
226. These trends put coastal areas in Ecuador at particular risk. With 45% of the population below the extreme
poverty line in the project area, the poverty rate in coastal areas is well above the national average. An
increasing number of predominantly poor and vulnerable people in the coastal areas live in unsafe housing,
in part due to rapid urbanization and persistent poverty.
227. Beyond the basic challenges of coastal development, the risks of climate change are placing additional
stresses on the Government of Ecuador's efforts to achieve sustainable development. Despite the high
level of exposure and vulnerability of the country's coasts, there is no integrated plan for the protection of
mangroves and wetlands to address the combined future impact of sea level rise and intensified storms.
228. The project addresses the needs of the government of Ecuador, coastal communities, and important
economic sectors such as the shrimp and fisheries sector to address the risks and impacts of climate
change as described in the National Climate Change Strategy and the National Climate Change Plan.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
229. The project is fully aligned with national plans to combat climate change and with a set of national policies
and strategies. In addition to climate policies, the project is well aligned with a major new initiative
announced by the Government of Ecuador in March 2023 to protect its entire coastline and marine
resources within eight nautical miles of the coast. This initiative is in the early stages of design and
consultation, but the objective can’t be achieved without protection and sustainable management of the
country’s rich mangrove resources, which this GCF project will be helping to achieve.
230. The MAATE is the national environmental authority in charge of designing environmental policies and
coordinating strategies, programs, and projects for the conservation of ecosystems and the sustainable
use of natural resources. It proposes and defines the rules for environmental quality, with development
based on the conservation and adequate use of biodiversity and natural resources. The GCF Focal Point
(NDA) is part of the MAATE.
231. MAATE has been involved in the whole process of the development of the proposal, including development
of the PPF application, public consultations and review of drafts of the funding proposal. Several different
Under-secretariats of MAATE have been involved, including Climate Change, Natural Heritage and the
former Coastal and Marine Resources (now included within Natural Heritage).
232. The protection of mangroves in the context of climate risk management in coastal areas is included as a
priority in all current Ecuadorian climate policies, strategies and plans:
• National Climate Change Strategy 2012-2025: The proposed project directly addresses seven of the
eight national climate change priorities.
• NDC prioritizes addressing the multi-million-dollar cost of extreme climate events and recognizes
ecosystem conservation measures as important adaptation and mitigation measures.
• Mangroves are declared as forest and protective vegetation under Ecuadorian law and are an integral
part of the country's REDD+ efforts.

--- Table 1 on Page 68 ---
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 223. Economic growth in Ecuador has directly reduced poverty and inequality levels and increased the size of | 
 | the middle class. Between 2007 and 2018, poverty decreased from 36.7% to 23.2%, while extreme poverty | 
 | decreased from 16.5% to 8.4%. Similarly, inequality as measured by the GINI Coefficient has fallen from | 
 | 0.55 in 2007 to 0.47 in 2018. | 
 |  | 
 | 224. However, the economy is still heavily dependent on the oil sector, a vulnerability demonstrated in recent | 
 | years during periods of low oil prices and the appreciation of the US dollar. The reduction of this | 
 | dependency has been part of the national strategies implemented by the central government. | 
 |  | 
 | 225. With more than 3,630 km of coastline, approximately 54% of Ecuador's population of 17 million people lives | 
 | in Ecuador's five coastal provinces. These areas are particularly vulnerable to SLR and the associated risks | 
 | of saltwater intrusion and storm surges, flooding and storms. | 
 |  | 
 | 226. These trends put coastal areas in Ecuador at particular risk. With 45% of the population below the extreme | 
 | poverty line in the project area, the poverty rate in coastal areas is well above the national average. An | 
 | increasing number of predominantly poor and vulnerable people in the coastal areas live in unsafe housing, | 
 | in part due to rapid urbanization and persistent poverty. | 
 |  | 
 | 227. Beyond the basic challenges of coastal development, the risks of climate change are placing additional | 
 | stresses on the Government of Ecuador's efforts to achieve sustainable development. Despite the high | 
 | level of exposure and vulnerability of the country's coasts, there is no integrated plan for the protection of | 
 | mangroves and wetlands to address the combined future impact of sea level rise and intensified storms. | 
 |  | 
 | 228. The project addresses the needs of the government of Ecuador, coastal communities, and important | 
 | economic sectors such as the shrimp and fisheries sector to address the risks and impacts of climate | 
 | change as described in the National Climate Change Strategy and the National Climate Change Plan. | 
 |  | 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 |  | 
 | 229. The project is fully aligned with national plans to combat climate change and with a set of national policies | 
 | and strategies. In addition to climate policies, the project is well aligned with a major new initiative | 
 | announced by the Government of Ecuador in March 2023 to protect its entire coastline and marine | 
 | resources within eight nautical miles of the coast. This initiative is in the early stages of design and | 
 | consultation, but the objective can’t be achieved without protection and sustainable management of the | 
 | country’s rich mangrove resources, which this GCF project will be helping to achieve. | 
 |  | 
 | 230. The MAATE is the national environmental authority in charge of designing environmental policies and | 
 | coordinating strategies, programs, and projects for the conservation of ecosystems and the sustainable | 
 | use of natural resources. It proposes and defines the rules for environmental quality, with development | 
 | based on the conservation and adequate use of biodiversity and natural resources. The GCF Focal Point | 
 | (NDA) is part of the MAATE. | 
 |  | 
 | 231. MAATE has been involved in the whole process of the development of the proposal, including development | 
 | of the PPF application, public consultations and review of drafts of the funding proposal. Several different | 
 | Under-secretariats of MAATE have been involved, including Climate Change, Natural Heritage and the | 
 | former Coastal and Marine Resources (now included within Natural Heritage). | 
 |  | 
 | 232. The protection of mangroves in the context of climate risk management in coastal areas is included as a | 
 | priority in all current Ecuadorian climate policies, strategies and plans: | 
 | • National Climate Change Strategy 2012-2025: The proposed project directly addresses seven of the | 
 | eight national climate change priorities. | 
 | • NDC prioritizes addressing the multi-million-dollar cost of extreme climate events and recognizes | 
 | ecosystem conservation measures as important adaptation and mitigation measures. | 
 | • Mangroves are declared as forest and protective vegetation under Ecuadorian law and are an integral | 
 | part of the country's REDD+ efforts. | 

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62
D
• In April 2017, the Organic Environmental Code was published in which there are 10 articles (Art. 99,
Art. 100, Art. 101, Art. 102, Art. 103, Art. 104, Art. 105, Art. 106, Art. 107, Art. 108) related to the
conservation of mangroves, among which it is established that mangroves (along with several other
categories of non-tree vegetation) are part of the National Forest Estate. Conservation of the
mangrove ecosystem is described according to Art. 99 of Chapter IV, which prohibits its affectation,
felling, and change of land use, in accordance with the law, and at the same time strengthens the
participation of the communities in the care of mangrove ecosystems.
• The National Adaptation Plan approved in February 2023 includes mangrove conservation and
restoration as an adaptation strategy.
233. Ecuador’s NDC does not provide detailed targets but highlights the following relevant mitigation actions
that the project will contribute to: conservation of natural heritage, strengthening of sustainable forest
management, strengthening of the restoration of natural heritage, strengthening forest control, and
strengthening the national system of PAs. The adaptation component of the NDC highlights the importance
of mangroves and the ecosystem functions that they provide. It identifies increasing the area of forests and
coastal ecosystems as a priority action to maintain their ecosystem function in climate change scenarios.
Further, the implementation of sustainable natural resource use is also highlighted as a priority. Finally, the
NDC notes as a priority the ‘creation and strengthening of capacities on climate change and natural heritage
management in social, academic, research and government sectors.’
234. The implementation plan for the first NDC (2020-2025) does not cover the proposed project period and an
implementation plan beyond 2025 has not yet been developed. However, the current 2020-2025
implementation plan provides a sense of level of ambition and how the project will contribute to achieving
NDC goals. The current plan includes a conditional goal of reducing GHG emissions from the Land Use,
Land-use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sector of 62,074,310 MtCO2e. The estimated contribution of this
project to that goal would be 732,111 MtCO2e, or 1.2%, over the project implementation period, rising to
4,609,470 MtCO2e, or 7.4%, over the project lifespan. Other goals included in the NDC implementation
plan to which the project would contribute are: i) Update at least three tools for the management of PAs
with climate change adaptation criteria (four updated management plans, including adaptation measures,
are planned under the project); i) Increase the area under conservation by at least 127,500 ha through
Socio Bosque incentives to contribute to the maintenance of ecosystem functionality in climate change
scenarios (10,000 new hectares are planned under the project in addition to strengthening management at
60,000 hectares of existing AUSCEMs with incentive payments); and iii) Deliver at least 30 AUSCEM
agreements in mangrove areas.
235. Additional frameworks, such as the updated National Climate Change Plan, are still under development.
However, it is expected that this document will highlight the importance of coastal ecosystems for mitigation
and adaptation.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
236. The financial structure of the project will ensure efficient use of GCF funds by directing that funding at the
key barriers that are currently hindering progress to reduce mangrove deforestation and by encouraging
mangrove restoration efforts. The majority of the project funding is directed towards community-based and
public sector actions to strengthen mangrove conservation and restoration. The approximately 11% of GCF
funding used for activities with the private sector (i.e., Output 2.1) is aimed at small- and medium-sized
shrimp producers to provide training, promote the use of certification standards and to facilitate the access
to credit that these farmers need to invest in the CSS model and/or achieve certification SSP/ASC
standards. Investment on shrimp farms to implement more sustainable production methods will be financed
by the private sector and not using GCF funds. The GCF funds directed towards supporting the private
sector (~US$3.1 million) are expected to result in approximately US$5 million investment by the private
sector in climate-smart shrimp production methods and certification. Further uptake of these models
beyond the project implementation period is expected once these models are broadly recognized by the
industry to increase profitability and resilience as noted in section B5.
237. The overall efficiency of the Project with regards to expected mitigation benefits is extremely high with a
projected 4.6 MtCO2e of GHG emissions reduced and sequestered over the project lifespan, equivalent to

--- Table 1 on Page 69 ---
 | • In April 2017, the Organic Environmental Code was published in which there are 10 articles (Art. 99, | 
 | Art. 100, Art. 101, Art. 102, Art. 103, Art. 104, Art. 105, Art. 106, Art. 107, Art. 108) related to the | 
 | conservation of mangroves, among which it is established that mangroves (along with several other | 
 | categories of non-tree vegetation) are part of the National Forest Estate. Conservation of the | 
 | mangrove ecosystem is described according to Art. 99 of Chapter IV, which prohibits its affectation, | 
 | felling, and change of land use, in accordance with the law, and at the same time strengthens the | 
 | participation of the communities in the care of mangrove ecosystems. | 
 | • The National Adaptation Plan approved in February 2023 includes mangrove conservation and | 
 | restoration as an adaptation strategy. | 
 |  | 
 | 233. Ecuador’s NDC does not provide detailed targets but highlights the following relevant mitigation actions | 
 | that the project will contribute to: conservation of natural heritage, strengthening of sustainable forest | 
 | management, strengthening of the restoration of natural heritage, strengthening forest control, and | 
 | strengthening the national system of PAs. The adaptation component of the NDC highlights the importance | 
 | of mangroves and the ecosystem functions that they provide. It identifies increasing the area of forests and | 
 | coastal ecosystems as a priority action to maintain their ecosystem function in climate change scenarios. | 
 | Further, the implementation of sustainable natural resource use is also highlighted as a priority. Finally, the | 
 | NDC notes as a priority the ‘creation and strengthening of capacities on climate change and natural heritage | 
 | management in social, academic, research and government sectors.’ | 
 |  | 
 | 234. The implementation plan for the first NDC (2020-2025) does not cover the proposed project period and an | 
 | implementation plan beyond 2025 has not yet been developed. However, the current 2020-2025 | 
 | implementation plan provides a sense of level of ambition and how the project will contribute to achieving | 
 | NDC goals. The current plan includes a conditional goal of reducing GHG emissions from the Land Use, | 
 | Land-use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sector of 62,074,310 MtCO2e. The estimated contribution of this | 
 | project to that goal would be 732,111 MtCO2e, or 1.2%, over the project implementation period, rising to | 
 | 4,609,470 MtCO2e, or 7.4%, over the project lifespan. Other goals included in the NDC implementation | 
 | plan to which the project would contribute are: i) Update at least three tools for the management of PAs | 
 | with climate change adaptation criteria (four updated management plans, including adaptation measures, | 
 | are planned under the project); i) Increase the area under conservation by at least 127,500 ha through | 
 | Socio Bosque incentives to contribute to the maintenance of ecosystem functionality in climate change | 
 | scenarios (10,000 new hectares are planned under the project in addition to strengthening management at | 
 | 60,000 hectares of existing AUSCEMs with incentive payments); and iii) Deliver at least 30 AUSCEM | 
 | agreements in mangrove areas. | 
 |  | 
 | 235. Additional frameworks, such as the updated National Climate Change Plan, are still under development. | 
 | However, it is expected that this document will highlight the importance of coastal ecosystems for mitigation | 
 | and adaptation. | 
 |  | 
 |  | 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 |  | 
 | 236. The financial structure of the project will ensure efficient use of GCF funds by directing that funding at the | 
 | key barriers that are currently hindering progress to reduce mangrove deforestation and by encouraging | 
 | mangrove restoration efforts. The majority of the project funding is directed towards community-based and | 
 | public sector actions to strengthen mangrove conservation and restoration. The approximately 11% of GCF | 
 | funding used for activities with the private sector (i.e., Output 2.1) is aimed at small- and medium-sized | 
 | shrimp producers to provide training, promote the use of certification standards and to facilitate the access | 
 | to credit that these farmers need to invest in the CSS model and/or achieve certification SSP/ASC | 
 | standards. Investment on shrimp farms to implement more sustainable production methods will be financed | 
 | by the private sector and not using GCF funds. The GCF funds directed towards supporting the private | 
 | sector (~US$3.1 million) are expected to result in approximately US$5 million investment by the private | 
 | sector in climate-smart shrimp production methods and certification. Further uptake of these models | 
 | beyond the project implementation period is expected once these models are broadly recognized by the | 
 | industry to increase profitability and resilience as noted in section B5. | 
 |  | 
 | 237. The overall efficiency of the Project with regards to expected mitigation benefits is extremely high with a | 
 | projected 4.6 MtCO2e of GHG emissions reduced and sequestered over the project lifespan, equivalent to | 

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63
D
a cost of US$10 per tCO2e, which is in the typical range for avoided deforestation type mitigation projects.
In addition, the project will be bringing multiple adaptation benefits to a wide range of people, including
direct expected livelihood benefits for 41,500 people and reduced risk of flooding for 89,600 people. We
conservatively assume that the 41,500 people will also be beneficiaries of flood protection and therefore
use the figure of 89,600 people as the total direct beneficiaries for the project (i.e. we do not sum these two
figures together to get the overall number of beneficiaries), which equates to a cost of US$512 per person
over the six-year implementation period.
238. Grant funding is appropriate for the project because its primary goals are to secure public goods, in the
form of the ecosystem services that mangroves provide to achieve mitigation and adaptation benefits. Most
of the population that will benefit is defined as poor based on Ecuador’s unmet needs index and the direct
activities to improve livelihoods are directed at poor communities that can play an essential role in improving
mangrove management. The part of the project targeted at the private sector is designed to enable
increased private sector investment in climate-smart practices by addressing barriers related to lack of
knowledge and targeted support for the development of investment plans needed for unlocking further
private sector investment.
239. An Economic Analysis for the Project is provided as Annex 3a (model in Excel) and 3b (narrative) and
demonstrates the important economic value of the project. A Financial Analysis has not been included
because it is less meaningful for this project since its objective is to secure public goods and services rather
than generate a financial return. Based on the economic analysis assumptions, which were chosen to be
conservative, the economic Net Present Value (NPV) of the project over the 20 years and applying a 6%
discount rate is US$158 million more than the NPV for the ‘without project’ scenario. The estimated
economic benefits of the project outweigh the costs by a factor of 4.7. Further, the ‘project’ scenario as
presented in this Funding Proposal provided the most economic value of four scenarios that were
considered (based on the highest NPV, benefits to cost ratio and economic internal rate of return). The
three other alternative scenarios included in the economic cost benefit analysis were the ‘without project’
scenario, a scenario that only included the project’s proposed mangrove conservation activities to reduce
deforestation and a scenario that only included the project’s proposed mangrove restoration targets and
activities. The high economic value of the proposed project reflects the very high economic value of
mangroves to the broader economy of Ecuador. Much of the value is driven by the importance of fisheries
production, which underpins the livelihoods of the coastal fisher families that make up much of the
vulnerable population of coastal Ecuador. The sensitivity analysis included in the model shows that the
economic benefits of the project (and in fact all the scenarios considered) are robust to increases in costs
and reductions in benefits of +/- 30%. The model (Annex 3a) can be adjusted to consider the impacts of
larger changes.

--- Table 1 on Page 70 ---
 | a cost of US$10 per tCO2e, which is in the typical range for avoided deforestation type mitigation projects. | 
 | In addition, the project will be bringing multiple adaptation benefits to a wide range of people, including | 
 | direct expected livelihood benefits for 41,500 people and reduced risk of flooding for 89,600 people. We | 
 | conservatively assume that the 41,500 people will also be beneficiaries of flood protection and therefore | 
 | use the figure of 89,600 people as the total direct beneficiaries for the project (i.e. we do not sum these two | 
 | figures together to get the overall number of beneficiaries), which equates to a cost of US$512 per person | 
 | over the six-year implementation period. | 
 |  | 
 | 238. Grant funding is appropriate for the project because its primary goals are to secure public goods, in the | 
 | form of the ecosystem services that mangroves provide to achieve mitigation and adaptation benefits. Most | 
 | of the population that will benefit is defined as poor based on Ecuador’s unmet needs index and the direct | 
 | activities to improve livelihoods are directed at poor communities that can play an essential role in improving | 
 | mangrove management. The part of the project targeted at the private sector is designed to enable | 
 | increased private sector investment in climate-smart practices by addressing barriers related to lack of | 
 | knowledge and targeted support for the development of investment plans needed for unlocking further | 
 | private sector investment. | 
 |  | 
 | 239. An Economic Analysis for the Project is provided as Annex 3a (model in Excel) and 3b (narrative) and | 
 | demonstrates the important economic value of the project. A Financial Analysis has not been included | 
 | because it is less meaningful for this project since its objective is to secure public goods and services rather | 
 | than generate a financial return. Based on the economic analysis assumptions, which were chosen to be | 
 | conservative, the economic Net Present Value (NPV) of the project over the 20 years and applying a 6% | 
 | discount rate is US$158 million more than the NPV for the ‘without project’ scenario. The estimated | 
 | economic benefits of the project outweigh the costs by a factor of 4.7. Further, the ‘project’ scenario as | 
 | presented in this Funding Proposal provided the most economic value of four scenarios that were | 
 | considered (based on the highest NPV, benefits to cost ratio and economic internal rate of return). The | 
 | three other alternative scenarios included in the economic cost benefit analysis were the ‘without project’ | 
 | scenario, a scenario that only included the project’s proposed mangrove conservation activities to reduce | 
 | deforestation and a scenario that only included the project’s proposed mangrove restoration targets and | 
 | activities. The high economic value of the proposed project reflects the very high economic value of | 
 | mangroves to the broader economy of Ecuador. Much of the value is driven by the importance of fisheries | 
 | production, which underpins the livelihoods of the coastal fisher families that make up much of the | 
 | vulnerable population of coastal Ecuador. The sensitivity analysis included in the model shows that the | 
 | economic benefits of the project (and in fact all the scenarios considered) are robust to increases in costs | 
 | and reductions in benefits of +/- 30%. The model (Annex 3a) can be adjusted to consider the impacts of | 
 | larger changes. | 
 |  | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64
E
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.
E.1. Project/Programme Focus
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages)
Assessment Current state (baseline) Potential target scenario How the project/programme will
Dimension (Description) contribute (Description)
Description Rating
Ecuador’s mangroves have been The paradigm shift achievable by the
The project will deliver 4.6 MtCO2e over
decimated over the last 40 years, project is to align government, private 20 years, excluding replication effects.
mainly due to aquaculture sector and community initiatives to This would represent a significant
expansion, and remain in a increase mangrove coverage nationally paradigm shift in Ecuador’s GHG
precarious state despite a recent by conserving remaining mangroves and emissions. Further, by strengthening the
stabilization in mangrove loss. restoring additional areas to accelerate protection of existing mangroves and
Recent initiatives to halt mangrove net gain of mangrove area. The target restoring new areas, the project will
Scale loss, notably measures to better Medium scenario involves well protected maintain coastal flood protection
functions for an estimated 89,600 people.
regulate shrimp farm expansion mangroves with minimal further loss
The mangroves will also maintain other
and community-based mangrove under a combination of state-controlled
essential ecosystem services, including
management pilots, have been PA and community-managed areas and
fisheries production that supports
locally effective and provide an an expansion of restored areas.
livelihoods of vulnerable people.
opportunity that needs to be
consolidated and expanded upon.

--- Table 1 on Page 71 ---
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK |  |  |  |  |  | 
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.1. Project/Programme Focus |  |  |  |  | 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
Assessment
Dimension |  | Current state (baseline) |  | Potential target scenario
(Description) | How the project/programme will
contribute (Description) | 
 |  | Description | Rating |  |  | 
Scale |  | Ecuador’s mangroves have been
decimated over the last 40 years,
mainly due to aquaculture
expansion, and remain in a
precarious state despite a recent
stabilization in mangrove loss.
Recent initiatives to halt mangrove
loss, notably measures to better
regulate shrimp farm expansion
and community-based mangrove
management pilots, have been
locally effective and provide an
opportunity that needs to be
consolidated and expanded upon. | Medium | The paradigm shift achievable by the
project is to align government, private
sector and community initiatives to
increase mangrove coverage nationally
by conserving remaining mangroves and
restoring additional areas to accelerate
net gain of mangrove area. The target
scenario involves well protected
mangroves with minimal further loss
under a combination of state-controlled
PA and community-managed areas and
an expansion of restored areas. | The project will deliver 4.6 MtCO2e over
20 years, excluding replication effects.
This would represent a significant
paradigm shift in Ecuador’s GHG
emissions. Further, by strengthening the
protection of existing mangroves and
restoring new areas, the project will
maintain coastal flood protection
functions for an estimated 89,600 people.
The mangroves will also maintain other
essential ecosystem services, including
fisheries production that supports
livelihoods of vulnerable people. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 71 ---
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.

--- Table 3 on Page 71 ---
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)

--- Table 4 on Page 71 ---
Assessment
Dimension

--- Table 5 on Page 71 ---
Potential target scenario
(Description)

--- Table 6 on Page 71 ---
How the project/programme will
contribute (Description)

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65
E
Few aquaculture companies have Once the climate-smart shrimp model is
The project will address knowledge and
adopted sustainable production more widely demonstrated to provide financial barriers to promote adoption of
techniques with high added economic value while delivering the CSS model and more widespread
environmental standards, so there environmental benefits, and knowledge adherence to standards such as the
are insufficient models and there and financial barriers are removed, it can ASC’s and those advocated by Ecuador’s
are knowledge and financial be replicated within Ecuador, the region SSP. The project will provide the
barriers to replication. and internationally. necessary knowledge, remove financial
barriers and provide demonstrations of
Replicability Low the model that will allow other companies
Community management of The AUSCEM community management
to replicate it both nationally and
mangroves has been piloted model is already demonstrated but once
internationally.
successfully but could be it is made more effective and linked to
replicated throughout Ecuador sustainable community businesses, it
and in other countries. could be replicated throughout the Further strengthening of the AUSCEM
community management model and
country and could be adopted in other
further demonstration of its benefits to
countries.
communities will lead to increased
demand for new AUSCEMs.
The project will strengthen the enabling
Government commitment to The paradigm shift would see improved conditions necessary to sustain
improving mangrove conservation decision making and enforcement of reductions in the loss of mangroves by
is evidenced by recent decrees to existing legislation to protect mangroves strengthening governance, coastal
ensure that aquaculture at all levels of government. management policies and enforcement.
operations are operating legally,
as well as the operation and the Improved enforcement of legislation The project will be promoting the use of
funding of four mangrove PAs would be accompanied by the improved climate-smart production
covering 64,916 ha. However, widespread adoption of profitable, methods for shrimp farming. Once the
Sustainability legal requirements for shrimp Low climate-smart shrimp production models methodology of this profitable approach is
farms regarding mangrove linked to highly respected certification better known, existing private financing
will provide the means necessary for it to
restoration and conservation are standards that command a premium
be replicated.
low and significant areas of price.
mangroves remain outside the PA
network and community-managed Financial institutions would encourage The project will be expanding the Socio
areas. investment in shrimp farming operations Manglar subaccount (part of the existing
Socio Bosque Fund) and the government
that integrate climate-smart practices.
will be seeking additional funding for it
from various sources to grow it over time

--- Table 1 on Page 72 ---
Replicability | Few aquaculture companies have
adopted sustainable production
techniques with high
environmental standards, so there
are insufficient models and there
are knowledge and financial
barriers to replication.
Community management of
mangroves has been piloted
successfully but could be
replicated throughout Ecuador
and in other countries. | Low | Once the climate-smart shrimp model is
more widely demonstrated to provide
added economic value while delivering
environmental benefits, and knowledge
and financial barriers are removed, it can
be replicated within Ecuador, the region
and internationally.
The AUSCEM community management
model is already demonstrated but once
it is made more effective and linked to
sustainable community businesses, it
could be replicated throughout the
country and could be adopted in other
countries. | The project will address knowledge and
financial barriers to promote adoption of
the CSS model and more widespread
adherence to standards such as the
ASC’s and those advocated by Ecuador’s
SSP. The project will provide the
necessary knowledge, remove financial
barriers and provide demonstrations of
the model that will allow other companies
to replicate it both nationally and
internationally.
Further strengthening of the AUSCEM
community management model and
further demonstration of its benefits to
communities will lead to increased
demand for new AUSCEMs.
Sustainability | Government commitment to
improving mangrove conservation
is evidenced by recent decrees to
ensure that aquaculture
operations are operating legally,
as well as the operation and the
funding of four mangrove PAs
covering 64,916 ha. However,
legal requirements for shrimp
farms regarding mangrove
restoration and conservation are
low and significant areas of
mangroves remain outside the PA
network and community-managed
areas. | Low | The paradigm shift would see improved
decision making and enforcement of
existing legislation to protect mangroves
at all levels of government.
Improved enforcement of legislation
would be accompanied by the
widespread adoption of profitable,
climate-smart shrimp production models
linked to highly respected certification
standards that command a premium
price.
Financial institutions would encourage
investment in shrimp farming operations
that integrate climate-smart practices. | The project will strengthen the enabling
conditions necessary to sustain
reductions in the loss of mangroves by
strengthening governance, coastal
management policies and enforcement.
The project will be promoting the use of
improved climate-smart production
methods for shrimp farming. Once the
methodology of this profitable approach is
better known, existing private financing
will provide the means necessary for it to
be replicated.
The project will be expanding the Socio
Manglar subaccount (part of the existing
Socio Bosque Fund) and the government
will be seeking additional funding for it
from various sources to grow it over time

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66
E
Private sector sources of finance The So cio Manglar subaccount of the
so that it is able to support the number
and extent of AUSCEMs for which there
for aquaculture operations are Socio Bosque Fund, which has been
is demand.
available but don’t currently created to support community-based
incentivize climate-smart mangrove management, would be large
practices, including mangrove enough, and generate sufficient
conservation and restoration. resources, to provide long-term
sustainable finance to all participating
Financial resources for supporting communities.
community-based mangrove
management are limited. There
are more requests from
communities to manage
mangrove areas than current
resources can support. There are
no long-term dedicated funds to
support community management
other than the US$150,000 Socio
Manglar subaccount of the Socio
Bosque Fund established in
preparation for this project.
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).
Target
IRMF Means of Verification
GCF Result Area Baseline Assumptions / Note
Indicator (MoV) Mid-term Final58
58 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end
of the total lifespan period which is defin ed as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
 | Private sector sources of finance
for aquaculture operations are
available but don’t currently
incentivize climate-smart
practices, including mangrove
conservation and restoration.
Financial resources for supporting
community-based mangrove
management are limited. There
are more requests from
communities to manage
mangrove areas than current
resources can support. There are
no long-term dedicated funds to
support community management
other than the US$150,000 Socio
Manglar subaccount of the Socio
Bosque Fund established in
preparation for this project. |  |  |  | The So cio Manglar subaccount of the
Socio Bosque Fund, which has been
created to support community-based
mangrove management, would be large
enough, and generate sufficient
resources, to provide long-term
sustainable finance to all participating
communities. |  |  |  |  | so that it is able to support the number
and extent of AUSCEMs for which there
is demand. |  | 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
GCF Result Area |  | IRMF
Indicator | Means of Verification
(MoV) |  |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  |  | Assumptions / Note
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final58 |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 73 ---
IRMF
Indicator

--- Table 3 on Page 73 ---
Means of Verification
(MoV)

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67
E
Direct: Project reports on 86,200 87,900 89,600 Direct: Calculated based on
updated maps for flood the number of people with
protection provided by reduced exposure to
new mangrove cover. flooding due to mangroves
conserved or restored by
Indirect: Census data for the project
the coastal provinces
where the project works. Indirect: based on the
population of the
Core 2: Direct and municipalities where
indirect beneficiaries mangroves occur and the
reached project works (census data)
Target figures include
beneficiaries under
ARA1 Most
Supplementary 2.1. Hence,
vulnerable people
0 0 3.4 M the targets under Core 2
and communities
indicator is not to be added
with Supplementary 2.1.
Report of the social 0 males 20,750 41,500
impact evaluation of the
Project that includes a 0 females direct direct Assumption: there is a good
Supplementary 2.1:
gender approach. (MRV) beneficiaries beneficiaries response from
Beneficiaries
adopting or adopting or communities, businesses
(female/male) adopting
continuing to continuing to and local governments to
improved and/or new
have a have a adopt and replicate
climate-resilient
diversified diversified adaptation strategies
livelihood options
climate climate including new livelihood
resilient option resilient option options. The adaptation
(sustainable (sustainable benefits for direct
fisheries and fisheries and beneficiaries are increased

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
ARA1 Most
vulnerable people
and communities | Core 2: Direct and
indirect beneficiaries
reached | Direct: Project reports on
updated maps for flood
protection provided by
new mangrove cover.
Indirect: Census data for
the coastal provinces
where the project works. | 86,200
0 | 87,900
0 | 89,600
3.4 M | Direct: Calculated based on
the number of people with
reduced exposure to
flooding due to mangroves
conserved or restored by
the project
Indirect: based on the
population of the
municipalities where
mangroves occur and the
project works (census data)
Target figures include
beneficiaries under
Supplementary 2.1. Hence,
the targets under Core 2
indicator is not to be added
with Supplementary 2.1.
 | Supplementary 2.1:
Beneficiaries
(female/male) adopting
improved and/or new
climate-resilient
livelihood options | Report of the social
impact evaluation of the
Project that includes a
gender approach. (MRV) | 0 males
0 females | 20,750
direct
beneficiaries
adopting or
continuing to
have a
diversified
climate
resilient option
(sustainable
fisheries and | 41,500
direct
beneficiaries
adopting or
continuing to
have a
diversified
climate
resilient option
(sustainable
fisheries and | Assumption: there is a good
response from
communities, businesses
and local governments to
adopt and replicate
adaptation strategies
including new livelihood
options. The adaptation
benefits for direct
beneficiaries are increased

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68
E
sustainable sustainable access and control over
shrimp shrimp mangrove resources
farming) farming) associated with AUSCEM
agreements and more
resilient livelihoods
(supported through
activities 1.2.1 and 1.2.2).
Calculated based on US$ 250.6 M in US$ 256.7 M US$ 281.0 M Project interventions are
economic value of avoided property per year in per year in effective in increasing
avoided damages (in loss from avoided avoided mangrove areas over
US$) per ha of mangrove area property loss property loss baseline scenario.
increase due to
mangrove restored or Valuation per hectare per
project activities.
conserved by project, year based on Menéndez
Supplementary 3.1: over projected baseline model described in Annex
Change in expected scenario. 2, which gives a flood
losses of economic prevention value for
assets due to the impact Area verified through mangroves of $1,600 per
of extreme climate- satellite monitoring of year
related disasters in te mangrove cover.
geographic area of the Baseline: 156,633 ha
GCF intervention
Hectares additional to
baseline at:
Midterm: 2575 ha
Final: 5975 ha
Core 4: Hectares of Official records 0 ha of 60,000 ha 156,633 ha Political will of MAATE,
natural resources (contracts, agreements, 156,63359 ha of local governments and local
brought under improved management plans, mangrove
59 Total area of mangroves within priority subnational government areas targeted by project. This area encompasses areas of AUSCEM and protected areas targeted for management improvements
(120,000 ha, Project Result 1.1) as well a s the portion of total shrimp farm area targeted by project (22,000 ha, Project Result 2.1) comprised of mangrove cover, as well as additional areas outside
of these categories or formal protection with improved coverage and strengthened by project interventions at scale of national and subnational government policies and activities.

--- Table 1 on Page 75 ---
 |  |  |  | sustainable
shrimp
farming) | sustainable
shrimp
farming) | access and control over
mangrove resources
associated with AUSCEM
agreements and more
resilient livelihoods
(supported through
activities 1.2.1 and 1.2.2).
 | Supplementary 3.1:
Change in expected
losses of economic
assets due to the impact
of extreme climate-
related disasters in te
geographic area of the
GCF intervention | Calculated based on
economic value of
avoided damages (in
US$) per ha of
mangrove restored or
conserved by project,
over projected baseline
scenario.
Area verified through
satellite monitoring of
mangrove cover. | US$ 250.6 M in
avoided property
loss from
mangrove area
increase due to
project activities. | US$ 256.7 M
per year in
avoided
property loss | US$ 281.0 M
per year in
avoided
property loss | Project interventions are
effective in increasing
mangrove areas over
baseline scenario.
Valuation per hectare per
year based on Menéndez
model described in Annex
2, which gives a flood
prevention value for
mangroves of $1,600 per
year
Baseline: 156,633 ha
Hectares additional to
baseline at:
Midterm: 2575 ha
Final: 5975 ha
 | Core 4: Hectares of
natural resources
brought under improved | Official records
(contracts, agreements,
management plans, | 0 ha of
156,63359 ha of
mangrove | 60,000 ha | 156,633 ha | Political will of MAATE,
local governments and local

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69
E
A RA4 Ecosystems low-emission and/or local development and eco systems with associations to adopt and
and ecosystem climate-resilient zoning plans) for sufficient implement strategies.
services management practice mangrove areas under protection or CC
improved management. strategies
With areas confirmed by
assessment of
mangrove forest cover
by remote sensing.
Supplementary 4.1: Project records on 0 ha 2200 ha 4850 ha Assumes average survival
Hectares of terrestrial mangrove restoration rates of mangrove
forest, terrestrial non- activities. Remote seedlings and planting of
forest, freshwater and sensing, project GIS and restoration keeps to the
coastal marine areas database. original schedule.
brought under resoration
and/or improved
ecosystems
Project MRV linked to 0 tCO2e 195,186 tCO2e 732,111 tCO2e Financial support from
national forest reduced reduced during private and public sources
monitoring system. project term is sufficient to incentivize
conservation and
Core 1: GHG emissions Verified through satellite 4.6 MtCO2 restoration.
MRA4 Forestry and
reduced, avoided or monitoring of mangrove reduced over
land use
removed/sequestered cover and forest 20 years Local, regional and national
inventory plots governments maintain and
strengthen planning and
enforcement to reduce
deforestation
E.4 . GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)

--- Table 1 on Page 76 ---
A RA4 Ecosystems
and ecosystem
services | low-emission and/or
climate-resilient
management practice | local development and
zoning plans) for
mangrove areas under
improved management.
With areas confirmed by
assessment of
mangrove forest cover
by remote sensing. | eco systems with
sufficient
protection or CC
strategies |  |  | associations to adopt and
implement strategies.
 | Supplementary 4.1:
Hectares of terrestrial
forest, terrestrial non-
forest, freshwater and
coastal marine areas
brought under resoration
and/or improved
ecosystems | Project records on
mangrove restoration
activities. Remote
sensing, project GIS and
database. | 0 ha | 2200 ha | 4850 ha | Assumes average survival
rates of mangrove
seedlings and planting of
restoration keeps to the
original schedule.
MRA4 Forestry and
land use | Core 1: GHG emissions
reduced, avoided or
removed/sequestered | Project MRV linked to
national forest
monitoring system.
Verified through satellite
monitoring of mangrove
cover and forest
inventory plots | 0 tCO2e | 195,186 tCO2e
reduced | 732,111 tCO2e
reduced during
project term
4.6 MtCO2
reduced over
20 years | Financial support from
private and public sources
is sufficient to incentivize
conservation and
restoration.
Local, regional and national
governments maintain and
strengthen planning and
enforcement to reduce
deforestation

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70
E
Se lect at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elab orate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section.
Baseline context Rating for current Target scenario How the project will
Core Indicator Coverage
(description) state (baseline) (description) contribute
National government, 20 The project will create
subnational the enabling conditions
Core Indicator 5: Degree governments and 60 National government, 9 for sustaining the
to which GCF artisanal fisheries and subnational reductions in mangrove
investments contribute mangrove management governments and 60 deforestation by
to strengthening groups with limited or no artisanal fisheries and strengthening
institutional and regulatory systems or mangrove management governance, climate Multiple sub-national
low
regulatory frameworks incentives for climate groups include improved change adaptation areas within a country
for low emission climate- resilience and their regulatory systems or strategies, coastal
resilient development effective implementation incentives for climate management policies
pathways in a country- resilience and their and legal enforcement
driven manner effective implementation (see description of
Component 3 in B3 for
details)
50 farms60 have ASC Increased adoption of The project will be
certification, 10 nationally and working with the shrimp
companies are members internationally aquaculture sector to
Core indicator 7: Degree
or associates of the SSP recognized aquaculture encourage the adoption
to which GCF
initiative61 and 1 standards and/or of standards that include
Investments contribute
company is improved practices by commitments to no National level (one
to market low
experimenting with CSS shrimp farms (e.g., mangrove deforestation country)
development/transforma
practices62. ASC/SSP or CSS and practices that
tion at the sectoral,
practices) that include include restoring
local, or national level
commitments to no mangroves (see
mangrove deforestation Outcome 2 in section
to cover at least B3.
60 According to ASC online searchable database, https://www.asc-aqua.org/find-a-farm/; accessed 28 Feb 2023
61 According to the SSP website, https://w ww.sustainableshrimppartnership.org/ssp-members/; accessed 28 Feb 2023
62 In collaboration with CI Ecuador

--- Table 1 on Page 77 ---
Se lect at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elab orate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. |  |  |  |  | 
Core Indicator | Baseline context
(description) | Rating for current
state (baseline) | Target scenario
(description) | How the project will
contribute | Coverage
Core Indicator 5: Degree
to which GCF
investments contribute
to strengthening
institutional and
regulatory frameworks
for low emission climate-
resilient development
pathways in a country-
driven manner | National government, 20
subnational
governments and 60
artisanal fisheries and
mangrove management
groups with limited or no
regulatory systems or
incentives for climate
resilience and their
effective implementation | low | National government, 9
subnational
governments and 60
artisanal fisheries and
mangrove management
groups include improved
regulatory systems or
incentives for climate
resilience and their
effective implementation | The project will create
the enabling conditions
for sustaining the
reductions in mangrove
deforestation by
strengthening
governance, climate
change adaptation
strategies, coastal
management policies
and legal enforcement
(see description of
Component 3 in B3 for
details) | Multiple sub-national
areas within a country
Core indicator 7: Degree
to which GCF
Investments contribute
to market
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral,
local, or national level | 50 farms60 have ASC
certification, 10
companies are members
or associates of the SSP
initiative61 and 1
company is
experimenting with CSS
practices62. | low | Increased adoption of
nationally and
internationally
recognized aquaculture
standards and/or
improved practices by
shrimp farms (e.g.,
ASC/SSP or CSS
practices) that include
commitments to no
mangrove deforestation
to cover at least | The project will be
working with the shrimp
aquaculture sector to
encourage the adoption
of standards that include
commitments to no
mangrove deforestation
and practices that
include restoring
mangroves (see
Outcome 2 in section
B3. | National level (one
country)

--- Table 2 on Page 77 ---
Baseline context
(description)

--- Table 3 on Page 77 ---
Rating for current
state (baseline)

--- Table 4 on Page 77 ---
Target scenario
(description)

--- Table 5 on Page 77 ---
How the project will
contribute

=== PAGE 78 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71
E
20,000ha of shrimp
farms.
Low adoption of The project includes
improved standards and three main interventions
practices in shrimp See indicator above for that encourage adoption
farms but there is an shrimp farms. of better practices,
emerging interest. Improved management methods and standards.
in 60,000 ha of existing First is the work with the
mangrove AUSCEMs shrimp aquaculture
Core indicator 8: Degree and good management sector covered also in
to which GCF in 10,000 ha of new the indicator above. The
investments contribute AUSCEMs to put in second is the improved
to effective knowledge place. management of
National level (one
generation and learning low Integration of climate mangroves by
country)
processes, and use of change adaptation community associations
good practices, measures into the through the AUSCEM
methodologies and management plans and mechanism. The third is
standards practices of the 4 PAs through training to
targeted by the project integrate adaptation to
(which cover the climate change into the
majority of protected protected areas that
mangroves in the include mangroves. See
country). details of activities in the
Funding Proposal and/or
Feasibility Study.

--- Table 1 on Page 78 ---
 |  |  | 20,000ha of shrimp
farms. |  | 
Core indicator 8: Degree
to which GCF
investments contribute
to effective knowledge
generation and learning
processes, and use of
good practices,
methodologies and
standards | Low adoption of
improved standards and
practices in shrimp
farms but there is an
emerging interest. | low | See indicator above for
shrimp farms.
Improved management
in 60,000 ha of existing
mangrove AUSCEMs
and good management
in 10,000 ha of new
AUSCEMs to put in
place.
Integration of climate
change adaptation
measures into the
management plans and
practices of the 4 PAs
targeted by the project
(which cover the
majority of protected
mangroves in the
country). | The project includes
three main interventions
that encourage adoption
of better practices,
methods and standards.
First is the work with the
shrimp aquaculture
sector covered also in
the indicator above. The
second is the improved
management of
mangroves by
community associations
through the AUSCEM
mechanism. The third is
through training to
integrate adaptation to
climate change into the
protected areas that
include mangroves. See
details of activities in the
Funding Proposal and/or
Feasibility Study. | National level (one
country)

=== PAGE 79 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72
E
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs). AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed.
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).
Target
Project/programme
Project/programme Means of Verification
results Baseline Assumptions / Note
specific Indicator (MoV) Mid-term Final
(outcomes/ outputs)
Component 1. Mangrove areas under effective and climate-adapted management increased, including through community-based management
(AUSCEMs) and PAs implementing climate adaptation plans.
Number of hectares Registry of active
under community AUSCEMs
Communities and
stewardship and
protected areas
protected areas with Project monitoring system 0
Output 1.1. Reduced 60,000 ha 120,000 ha management motivated
management capacity capacity assessment of
exposure to flood risk to participate.
assessment scores communities and
for vulnerable people
increasing by 50% or protected areas
and reduced GHG
more
emissions from
tCO2e emissions
mangrove restoration Communities motivated
reduced through Forest monitoring data
are achieved by 252,495 tCO2e to participate in
restoration in areas with ground truthing 0 52,673 tCO2e
strengthening restoration.
under community
community-based
stewardship or PAs
management through
Market trends favoring
AUSCEMs and tCO2e emissions
sustainable investment
protected areas. reduced from avoided Forest monitoring data
and climate-smart shrimp,
deforestation over with ground truthing 0 140,005 tCO2e 467,075 tCO2e
as well as political
project
climate, reinforce
implementation period
conservation objectives.

--- Table 1 on Page 79 ---
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs). AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed.
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project/programme
results
(outcomes/ outputs) |  |  |  |  | Means of Verification
(MoV) |  |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  | Assumptions / Note |  | 
 |  |  | Project/programme |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | specific Indicator |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component 1. Mangrove areas under effective and climate-adapted management increased, including through community-based management |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (AUSCEMs) and PAs implementing climate adaptation plans. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 1.1. Reduced
exposure to flood risk
for vulnerable people
and reduced GHG
emissions from
mangrove restoration
are achieved by
strengthening
community-based
management through
AUSCEMs and
protected areas. |  | i | Number of hectares |  |  | Registry of active |  | 0 | 60,000 ha |  | 120,000 ha |  | Communities and
protected areas
management motivated
to participate. |  | 
 |  |  | under community |  |  | AUSCEMs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | stewardship and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | protected areas with |  |  | Project monitoring system |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | management capacity |  |  | capacity assessment of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | assessment scores |  |  | communities and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | ncreasing by 50% or |  |  | protected areas |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | more |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | t
r
r | CO2e emissions |  | Forest monitoring data
with ground truthing |  |  | 0 | 52,673 tCO2e |  | 252,495 tCO2e |  | Communities motivated
to participate in
restoration. |  | 
 |  |  | educed through |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | estoration in areas |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | under community |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | stewardship or PAs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | tCO2e emissions
reduced from avoided
deforestation over
project
implementation period |  |  | Forest monitoring data
with ground truthing |  |  | 0 | 140,005 tCO2e |  | 467,075 tCO2e |  |  | Market trends favoring | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | sustainable investment | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and climate-smart shrimp, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | as well as political | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | climate, reinforce | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | conservation objectives. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 79 ---
Project/programme
results
(outcomes/ outputs)

--- Table 3 on Page 79 ---
Means of Verification
(MoV)

--- Table 4 on Page 79 ---
Communities and
protected areas
management motivated
to participate.


--- Table 5 on Page 79 ---
0


--- Table 6 on Page 79 ---
Output 1.1. Reduced
exposure to flood risk
or vulnerable people
and reduced GHG
emissions from
mangrove restoration
are achieved by
strengthening
community-based
management through
AUSCEMs and
protected areas.

--- Table 7 on Page 79 ---
Communities motivated
to participate in
restoration.


--- Table 8 on Page 79 ---
Forest monitoring data
with ground truthing


--- Table 9 on Page 79 ---
252,495 tCO2e


--- Table 10 on Page 79 ---
CO2e emissions
educed from avoided
deforestation over
project
mplementation period

--- Table 11 on Page 79 ---
Forest monitoring data
with ground truthing


=== PAGE 80 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73
E
Land use planning,
weather events and
Forest monitoring data. socio-economic factors
Number of beneficiaries do not lead to
is derived from mangrove unpredicted, large-scale
People with reduced
coverage using the model shifts in human
exposure to climate 89,600 people
used to make the initial 86,200 87,500 people settlement patterns in the
change related (50%M/50%F)
estimates (see Annex (50%M/50%F) coastal region. Updated
flooding events due to
25) census data may also
the project
affect the estimate.
Improved management of
mangroves ensures that
baseline flood protection
benefits are maintained.
Output 1.2. Improved
Number of males and
livelihood activities and
females in mangrove
more economically
areas benefiting from
productive community
the adoption of Business and livelihood
businesses enable local
diversified, climate 0 males and 0 models will be successful
people to become more Project monitoring system 20,000 people 41,500 people
resilient livelihood females at achieving livelihood
resilient to climate assessment of livelihoods (50%M/50%F) (50%M/50%F)
options and business impacts and conservation
change and incentivized
practices linked to Project Outcomes
to participate in, and
mangrove promoted
maintain, mangrove
by project
conservation and
restoration.
Component 2. The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions and providing financial support to
conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for other coastal populations.
Output 2.1. Shrimp Hectares of shrimp
Aquaculture producers
aquaculture farms farms adopting
Mapping of shrimp motivated by market
adopt practices and practices and
aquaculture areas that signals, technical
production standards production standards 0 8,000 ha
have adopted climate 20,000 ha assistance and economic
that require elimination that eliminate
resilient approaches viability of climate-smart
of deforestation and deforestation (e.g.
practices
active reforestation in ASC or CSS)

--- Table 1 on Page 80 ---
 |  |  | People with reduced
exposure to climate
change related
flooding events due to
the project |  |  | Forest monitoring data.
Number of beneficiaries
is derived from mangrove
coverage using the model
used to make the initial
estimates (see Annex
25) | 86,200 | 87,500 people
(50%M/50%F) | 89,600 people
(50%M/50%F) |  | Land use planning, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | weather events and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | socio-economic factors | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | do not lead to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | unpredicted, large-scale | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | shifts in human | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | settlement patterns in the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | coastal region. Updated | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | census data may also | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | affect the estimate. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Improved management of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mangroves ensures that | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | baseline flood protection | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | benefits are maintained. | 
l
r
t
r | Output 1.2. Improved |  | Number of males and
females in mangrove
areas benefiting from
the adoption of
diversified, climate
resilient livelihood
options and business
practices linked to
mangrove promoted
by project |  |  | Project monitoring system
assessment of livelihoods | 0 males and 0
females | 20,000 people
(50%M/50%F) | 41,500 people
(50%M/50%F) | Business and livelihood
models will be successful
at achieving livelihood
impacts and conservation
Project Outcomes |  | 
 | ivelihood activities and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | more economically |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | productive community |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | businesses enable local |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | people to become more |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | esilient to climate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | change and incentivized |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | o participate in, and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | maintain, mangrove |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | conservation and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | estoration. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component 2. The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions and providing financial support to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for other coastal populations. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 2.1. Shrimp |  | f
t | Hectares of shrimp |  | Mapping of shrimp
aquaculture areas that
have adopted climate
resilient approaches | 0 | 8,000 ha | 20,000 ha | Aquaculture producers
motivated by market
signals, technical
assistance and economic
viability of climate-smart
practices |  | 
 | aquaculture farms |  |  | arms adopting |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | adopt practices and |  |  | practices and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | production standards |  |  | production standards |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | that require elimination |  |  | hat eliminate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of deforestation and |  |  | deforestation (e.g. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | active reforestation in |  |  | ASC or CSS) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 80 ---
Forest monitoring data.
Number of beneficiaries
is derived from mangrove
coverage using the model
used to make the initial
estimates (see Annex
25)




--- Table 3 on Page 80 ---
People with reduced
exposure to climate
change related
looding events due to
he project

--- Table 4 on Page 80 ---
89,600 people
(50%M/50%F)


--- Table 5 on Page 80 ---
86,200


--- Table 6 on Page 80 ---
87,500 people
(50%M/50%F)

--- Table 7 on Page 80 ---
Number of males and
emales in mangrove
areas benefiting from
he adoption of
diversified, climate
esilient livelihood
options and business
practices linked to
mangrove promoted
by project


--- Table 8 on Page 80 ---
Business and livelihood
models will be successful
at achieving livelihood
impacts and conservation
Project Outcomes

--- Table 9 on Page 80 ---
0 males and 0
females


--- Table 10 on Page 80 ---
Project monitoring system
assessment of livelihoods

--- Table 11 on Page 80 ---
20,000 people
(50%M/50%F)

--- Table 12 on Page 80 ---
41,500 people
(50%M/50%F)

--- Table 13 on Page 80 ---
Aquaculture producers
motivated by market
signals, technical
assistance and economic
viability of climate-smart
practices

--- Table 14 on Page 80 ---
Mapping of shrimp
aquaculture areas that
have adopted climate
resilient approaches

--- Table 15 on Page 80 ---

20,000 ha

=== PAGE 81 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74
E
co astal and mangrove Aquaculture producers
areas. motivated by market
Hectares of mangrove
Surveys and ground signals, technical
restoration achieved 0 100 ha 250 ha
truthing assistance and economic
on shrimp farms
viability of climate-smart
practices
tCO2e emissions Technical support and
Forest monitoring data
reduced through market linkages of CSS
with ground truthing 0 22,574 tCO2e 112,870 tCO2e
restoration in areas by sufficient to motivate
shrimp farms shrimp farm investment
Output 2.2.
Sustainable Aquaculture producers
management of and other private sector
Amount of funding
mangroves is improved companies motivated by
provided by the Area details from signed
through agreements USD USD market signals, CSR and
private sector to agreements 0
with the private sector, 150,000/year 300,000/year reputation. Includes
support mangrove
including direct contributions through
conservation.
financial support for PECC.
mangrove conservation
and restoration.
Component 3. Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation and increased mangrove restoration by
strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies, coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.
Output 3.1. Decision
making for mangrove
management by
national government Number of annual
agencies and local reports on mangrove Remote sensing/GIS for
governments is based cover and socio- mangrove coverage Government entities have
on generation and economic data technical capacity, staff
0 4 8
provision of accurate shared with national Surveys for and will to integrate data
and up-to-date data on government agencies socioeconomic generated by project.
mangrove condition and local government information
and socio-economic
information on
mangrove dependent
communities.

--- Table 1 on Page 81 ---
co astal and mangrove
areas. |  |  | Hectares of mangrove
restoration achieved
on shrimp farms |  |  | Surveys and ground
truthing | 0 | 100 ha | 250 ha |  | Aquaculture producers | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | motivated by market | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | signals, technical | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | assistance and economic | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | viability of climate-smart | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | practices | 
 |  |  | t
r
r | CO2e emissions |  | Forest monitoring data
with ground truthing | 0 | 22,574 tCO2e | 112,870 tCO2e |  | Technical support and | 
 |  |  |  | educed through |  |  |  |  |  |  | market linkages of CSS | 
 |  |  |  | estoration in areas by |  |  |  |  |  |  | sufficient to motivate | 
 |  |  |  | shrimp farms |  |  |  |  |  |  | shrimp farm investment | 
 | Output 2.2. |  | Amount of funding
provided by the
private sector to
support mangrove
conservation. |  |  | Area details from signed
agreements | 0 | USD
150,000/year | USD
300,000/year | Aquaculture producers
and other private sector
companies motivated by
market signals, CSR and
reputation. Includes
contributions through
PECC. |  | 
 | Sustainable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | management of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | mangroves is improved |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | through agreements |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | with the private sector, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | including direct |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | financial support for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | mangrove conservation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and restoration. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component 3. Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation and increased mangrove restoration by |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies, coastal management policies, and legal enforcement. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 3.1. Decision |  | Number of annual
reports on mangrove
cover and socio-
economic data
shared with national
government agencies
and local government |  |  | Remote sensing/GIS for
mangrove coverage
Surveys for
socioeconomic
information | 0 | 4 | 8 | Government entities have
technical capacity, staff
and will to integrate data
generated by project. |  | 
 | making for mangrove |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | management by |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | national government |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | agencies and local |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | governments is based |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | on generation and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | provision of accurate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and up-to-date data on |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | mangrove condition |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and socio-economic |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | information on |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | mangrove dependent |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | communities. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 81 ---
co astal and mangrove
areas.

--- Table 3 on Page 81 ---
Hectares of mangrove
estoration achieved
on shrimp farms

--- Table 4 on Page 81 ---
Surveys and ground
truthing

--- Table 5 on Page 81 ---
Forest monitoring data
with ground truthing


--- Table 6 on Page 81 ---
Aquaculture producers
and other private sector
companies motivated by
market signals, CSR and
reputation. Includes
contributions through
PECC.


--- Table 7 on Page 81 ---
Amount of funding
provided by the
private sector to
support mangrove
conservation.

--- Table 8 on Page 81 ---
Area details from signed
agreements


--- Table 9 on Page 81 ---
USD
150,000/year

--- Table 10 on Page 81 ---
USD
300,000/year

--- Table 11 on Page 81 ---
Number of annual
reports on mangrove
cover and socio-
economic data
shared with national
government agencies
and local government


--- Table 12 on Page 81 ---
Remote sensing/GIS for
mangrove coverage

Surveys for
socioeconomic
information

--- Table 13 on Page 81 ---
Government entities have
technical capacity, staff
and will to integrate data
generated by project.

=== PAGE 82 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75
E
Number of local and
provincial
governments with Only 2 local
zoning and governments Willingness of political
development plans Planning and zoning have planning leadership and technical
including criteria and instruments, officially instruments 2 9 staff in governments to
indicators relating to adopted including climate- participate in project
mangrove protection, change across election cycles
Output 3.2. Legal and
climate change measures
regulatory frameworks
mitigation or
at local and sectoral
adaptation
level are harmonized
Number of people
and include climate
living in jurisdictions
resilience and
of local and provincial
mitigation strategies Census data
governments with
and enforcement. Willingness of political
zoning and 1.0M people 3.4 M people
Project assessment of leadership and technical
development plans (50%M/50%F) (50%M/50%F)
whether jurisdictions have 0 staff in governments to
including criteria and (indirect (indirect
zoning/development participate in project
indicators relating to beneficiaries) beneficiaries)
plans including the across election cycles
mangrove protection,
criteria and indicators
climate change
mitigation or
adaptation
Project/programme co-benefit indicators
Assumes the baseline
cover of 156,633 ha
(2018). Baseline to be
Co-benefit 1. Remote sensing analysis revisited once mangrove
Biodiversity and National mangrove (see activity 3.1.1); cover analysis is redone
156,633 ha 159,208 ha 166,110 ha
ecosystem service cover (hectares) reports of mangrove for the project start date.
benefits are increased. restoration. Targets include habitat
restoration areas which
will not yet be detectable
in remote sensing

--- Table 1 on Page 82 ---
Output 3.2. Legal and
regulatory frameworks
at local and sectoral
level are harmonized
and include climate
resilience and
mitigation strategies
and enforcement. | i
i | Number of local and |  | Planning and zoning
instruments, officially
adopted | Only 2 local
governments
have planning
instruments
including climate-
change
measures | 2 | 9 | Willingness of political
leadership and technical
staff in governments to
participate in project
across election cycles |  | 
 |  | provincial |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | governments with |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | zoning and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | development plans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | ncluding criteria and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | ndicators relating to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | mangrove protection, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | climate change |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | mitigation or |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | adaptation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Number of people |  | Census data
Project assessment of
whether jurisdictions have
zoning/development
plans including the
criteria and indicators | 0 | 1.0M people
(50%M/50%F)
(indirect
beneficiaries) | 3.4 M people
(50%M/50%F)
(indirect
beneficiaries) | Willingness of political
leadership and technical
staff in governments to
participate in project
across election cycles |  | 
 |  | living in jurisdictions |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | of local and provincial |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | governments with |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | zoning and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | development plans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | including criteria and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | indicators relating to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | mangrove protection, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | climate change |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | mitigation or |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | adaptation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 1.
Biodiversity and
ecosystem service
benefits are increased. | National mangrove
cover (hectares) |  |  | Remote sensing analysis
(see activity 3.1.1);
reports of mangrove
restoration. | 156,633 ha | 159,208 ha | 166,110 ha |  | Assumes the baseline | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | cover of 156,633 ha | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (2018). Baseline to be | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | revisited once mangrove | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | cover analysis is redone | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | for the project start date. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Targets include habitat | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | restoration areas which | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | will not yet be detectable | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | in remote sensing | 

--- Table 2 on Page 82 ---
Only 2 local
governments
have planning
instruments
including climate-
change
measures

--- Table 3 on Page 82 ---
Willingness of political
leadership and technical
staff in governments to
participate in project
across election cycles

--- Table 4 on Page 82 ---
Planning and zoning
instruments, officially
adopted

--- Table 5 on Page 82 ---
Output 3.2. Legal and
regulatory frameworks
at local and sectoral
level are harmonized
and include climate
resilience and
mitigation strategies
and enforcement.

--- Table 6 on Page 82 ---
Census data

Project assessment of
whether jurisdictions have
zoning/development
plans including the
criteria and indicators

--- Table 7 on Page 82 ---
Willingness of political
leadership and technical
staff in governments to
participate in project
across election cycles

--- Table 8 on Page 82 ---
1.0M people
(50%M/50%F)
(indirect
beneficiaries)

--- Table 9 on Page 82 ---
3.4 M people
(50%M/50%F)
(indirect
beneficiaries)

--- Table 10 on Page 82 ---
Co-benefit 1.
Biodiversity and
ecosystem service
benefits are increased.

--- Table 11 on Page 82 ---
Remote sensing analysis
(see activity 3.1.1);
reports of mangrove
restoration.

--- Table 12 on Page 82 ---
National mangrove
cover (hectares)

=== PAGE 83 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76
E
analysis by end of
project.
Co-benefit 2. Economic See Supplementary
resilience of coastal indicator 2.1 in the
communities is Outcomes indicator
increased. section above
Co-benefit 3. Uptake of See core indicator 7
sustainable shrimp in the enabling
production practices is conditions section
increased. above.
Value is derived from The model assumes that
additional hectares of fisheries benefits are
Economic value of mangrove due to the accrued once the
Co-benefit 4. Economic
fisheries in additional project and the data on restoration is done but
value of fisheries for US$ 12.7
mangroves protected fisheries production 0 US$ 5.1 million there will likely be a delay
artisanal fishers is million
or restored by the collected during project as the mangrove grows
increased.
project design (see Annex 3, so these are longer term
Economic and Financial benefits of the increased
Analysis) mangrove coverage
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables
Activities Description Sub-activities Deliverables
1.1.1.1 Strengthening governance
capacity and planning of existing
Improved governance and management of
AUCEMs
60,000 has of existing AUSCEMS
Support community stewards to better
Activity 1.1.1 Strengthen and expand 1.1.1.2 Expand areas under active
conserve mangroves and their vital Integration of 10,000 has under new
community-based mangrove conservation AUSCEMs
ecosystem services for both climate AUSCEMSs
and management to reduce deforestation
change mitigation and adaptation.
and increase mangrove restoration. 1.1.1.3 Expand areas covered by SA
New Socio Manglar agreements
incentives
covering 20,000 has supported through
planning and preparation
1.1.1.4 Restoration of mangrove areas
within AUSCEMs and PAs

--- Table 1 on Page 83 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | analysis by end of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | project. | 
r
i | Co-benefit 2. Economic |  | i | See Supplementary |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | esilience of coastal |  |  | ndicator 2.1 in the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | communities is |  |  | Outcomes indicator |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ncreased. |  |  | section above |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
i | Co-benefit 3. Uptake of |  | i | See core indicator 7 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | sustainable shrimp |  |  | n the enabling |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | production practices is |  |  | conditions section |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ncreased. |  |  | above. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 4. Economic
value of fisheries for
artisanal fishers is
increased. |  |  | Economic value of
fisheries in additional
mangroves protected
or restored by the
project |  |  |  |  | Value is derived from |  | 0 |  | US$ 5.1 million | US$ 12.7
million |  |  | The model assumes that | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | additional hectares of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | fisheries benefits are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mangrove due to the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | accrued once the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | project and the data on |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | restoration is done but | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | fisheries production |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | there will likely be a delay | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | collected during project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | as the mangrove grows | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | design (see Annex 3, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | so these are longer term | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Economic and Financial |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | benefits of the increased | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Analysis) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mangrove coverage | 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities |  |  |  |  | Description |  |  |  |  |  | Sub-activities |  |  | Deliverables |  |  | 
Activity 1.1.1 Strengthen and expand
community-based mangrove conservation
and management to reduce deforestation
and increase mangrove restoration. |  |  |  |  | Support community stewards to better
conserve mangroves and their vital
ecosystem services for both climate
change mitigation and adaptation. |  |  |  |  |  | 1.1.1.1 Strengthening governance
capacity and planning of existing
AUCEMs
1.1.1.2 Expand areas under active
AUSCEMs
1.1.1.3 Expand areas covered by SA
incentives
1.1.1.4 Restoration of mangrove areas
within AUSCEMs and PAs |  |  | Improved governance and management of
60,000 has of existing AUSCEMS
Integration of 10,000 has under new
AUSCEMSs
New Socio Manglar agreements
covering 20,000 has supported through
planning and preparation |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 83 ---
Economic value of
isheries in additional
mangroves protected
or restored by the
project

--- Table 3 on Page 83 ---
Co-benefit 4. Economic
value of fisheries for
artisanal fishers is
ncreased.

--- Table 4 on Page 83 ---
US$ 12.7
million

=== PAGE 84 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77
E
4,600 ha of additional mangrove
restoration on AUSCEMs and PAs (note
that an additional 250 ha of restoration will
be on farms under Activity 2.1.1)
Management plans and climate change
1.1.2.1 Integrate climate-change scenarios
adaptation plans designed and in
Support management, enforcement and into planning of protected areas and local
Activity 1.1.2 PAs have implemented implementation in 4 MPAs.
planning capacities for 4 MPAs (Cayapas management strategies.
mitigation and adaptation strategies in
Mataje, Churute, El Salado and Estuario
64,913 ha of mangroves Improvement in management
del río Muisne)
effectiveness in 4 MPAs, as reflected in
annual effectiveness assessments.
Provide technical and business
development support to at least 60
community associations linked to
protection of mangroves to design and
implement business plans and strategies,
1.2.1.1 Technical and business Value chain analysis and strategies for 60
Activity 1.2.1 Technical and business including strategies for improving
development assistance to mangrove community associations designed, and 20
development support to mangrove governance and administration, access to
community associations for development in implementation with support of financial
community associations, with an emphasis finance and to markets for more resilient
of enterprises and livelihood activities, with mechanisms (link to 1.2.2) or
on women, youth and other vulnerable livelihood strategies.
an emphasis on women, youth and other independently.
groups.
vulnerable groups.
Activities to strengthen and diversify local
livelihoods to create economic alternatives
aligned with mangrove protection and to
make livelihoods more resilient to impacts
of climate change.
1.2.2.1 Create and implement grant 20 community association enterprises
mechanisms for technical support to supported by grant mechanism with
Structure grant mechanisms and facilitate micro- and small enterprises of mangrove business plans financed and in
Activity 1.2.2 Establish and consolidate access to investments for community community associations. implementation.
financial mechanisms in support of associations supporting mangrove
mangrove community associations (micro- conservation having received technical
and small enterprises) and business development support (link to 1.2.2.2 Support access to mechanisms Credit/investment from at least 2 financial
1.2.1) and institutions providing credit and institutions (public and private banks,
investment to micro- and small enterprises cooperatives and other financial
of mangrove community associations. international funds) accessed
Activity 2.1.1 Technical assistance for
Provide technical assistance to early 2.1.1.1 Sustainable Intensification Improvements in production systems
development and promotion of climate-
adopters and innovators, especially small Practices leading to improved mangrove coverage
smart shrimp aquaculture practices in
and medium producers, for the and management to reduce emissions
20,000 hectares of farms

--- Table 1 on Page 84 ---
 |  |  | 4,600 ha of additional mangrove
restoration on AUSCEMs and PAs (note
that an additional 250 ha of restoration will
be on farms under Activity 2.1.1)
Activity 1.1.2 PAs have implemented
mitigation and adaptation strategies in
64,913 ha of mangroves | Support management, enforcement and
planning capacities for 4 MPAs (Cayapas
Mataje, Churute, El Salado and Estuario
del río Muisne) | 1.1.2.1 Integrate climate-change scenarios
into planning of protected areas and local
management strategies. | Management plans and climate change
adaptation plans designed and in
implementation in 4 MPAs.
Improvement in management
effectiveness in 4 MPAs, as reflected in
annual effectiveness assessments.
Activity 1.2.1 Technical and business
development support to mangrove
community associations, with an emphasis
on women, youth and other vulnerable
groups. | Provide technical and business
development support to at least 60
community associations linked to
protection of mangroves to design and
implement business plans and strategies,
including strategies for improving
governance and administration, access to
finance and to markets for more resilient
livelihood strategies.
Activities to strengthen and diversify local
livelihoods to create economic alternatives
aligned with mangrove protection and to
make livelihoods more resilient to impacts
of climate change. | 1.2.1.1 Technical and business
development assistance to mangrove
community associations for development
of enterprises and livelihood activities, with
an emphasis on women, youth and other
vulnerable groups. | Value chain analysis and strategies for 60
community associations designed, and 20
in implementation with support of financial
mechanisms (link to 1.2.2) or
independently.
Activity 1.2.2 Establish and consolidate
financial mechanisms in support of
mangrove community associations (micro-
and small enterprises) | Structure grant mechanisms and facilitate
access to investments for community
associations supporting mangrove
conservation having received technical
and business development support (link to
1.2.1) | 1.2.2.1 Create and implement grant
mechanisms for technical support to
micro- and small enterprises of mangrove
community associations.
1.2.2.2 Support access to mechanisms
and institutions providing credit and
investment to micro- and small enterprises
of mangrove community associations. | 20 community association enterprises
supported by grant mechanism with
business plans financed and in
implementation.
Credit/investment from at least 2 financial
institutions (public and private banks,
cooperatives and other financial
international funds) accessed
Activity 2.1.1 Technical assistance for
development and promotion of climate-
smart shrimp aquaculture practices in
20,000 hectares of farms | Provide technical assistance to early
adopters and innovators, especially small
and medium producers, for the | 2.1.1.1 Sustainable Intensification
Practices | Improvements in production systems
leading to improved mangrove coverage
and management to reduce emissions

--- Table 2 on Page 84 ---
Value chain analysis and strategies for 60
community associations designed, and 20
in implementation with support of financial
mechanisms (link to 1.2.2) or
independently.

=== PAGE 85 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78
E
development and validation of the 2 .1.1.2 Mangrove Restoration – and/or vulnerability to climate change in
production model. demonstration farms (250 ha of 20,000 ha of farms
restoration)
Mangrove restoration undertaken on at
2.1.1.3 Education, Outreach and Enabling
least 250 ha within Shrimp farms
Conditions Implementation of Sustainable
Shrimp Aquaculture
Public private roundtable for promotion of
climate-smart shrimp practices and market
engagement.
2.1.2.1 Education as a tool to facilitate
At least US$ 5M from financial institutions
Activity 2.1.2 Facilitate partnerships and access to credit and other investment to
Credit to finance working and investment is accessed by farms in support of climate-
access to mechanisms for credit and shrimp farms for expansion and
capital needs will be provided/leveraged smart shrimp practices contributing to
investment in shrimp farms for expansion consolidation of CSS practices
with CI’s support. improved mangrove coverage and
and consolidation of climate-smart
management to reduce emissions and/or
aquaculture practices 2.1.2.2 Project feasibility as a tool to
vulnerability to climate change
mobilize capital towards CSS production
Voluntary partnerships established with Agreements with the private sector result
companies63 to finance restoration and in at least an additional US$ 300,000/year
conservation of mangroves through by the end of the project being available
contributions to the Socio Manglar for incentive payments to AUSCEMs
Activity 2.2.1 Establish agreements with program, including providing capital to the 2.2.1.1 Grow the capital of the Socio involved in the Socio Manglar program.
businesses, including aquaculture Socio Manglar subaccount. Also, US$ 4 Manglar subaccount of the Socio Bosque US$4 million of GCF funds added to Socio
companies, to contribute to mangrove million of GCF funds added to the capital Fund to support long-term community Manglar subaccount (held in an interest-
restoration and financial sustainability of of the Socio Manglar subaccount to be management of mangroves. bearing account) and the interest used in
the national Socio Bosque Incentive held in a dedicated interest-bearing bank accordance with the conditions set out in
Program (Mangrove Chapter). account. See Appendix 12 of Annex 2 for the term sheet, Annex 14 to provide
details of Socio Manglar subaccount incentive payments to AUSCEMs during
management by FIAS and Annex 14 for the project implementation period and in
CI’s supervision and monitoring of use of the long term after the project
GCF funds. implementation ends.
3.1.1.1 Demonstrate the impact of Inventory of blue carbon used by the
Activity 3.1.1 Monitoring of mangrove Improved monitoring of mangrove cover, mangrove conservation and restoration on project M&E and integrated into national
condition and socio-economic impacts in deforestation rates and GHG emissions national mangrove cover, stocks, and REDD+ monitoring and reporting system,
mangrove-dependent communities. related to mangroves. socio-economic indicators through including national forest and emissions
monitoring linked to the national MRV, and inventories and FREL.
build long-term monitoring capacity.
63 Incentives for companies to participate in mangrove conservation and restoration include achieving their own Corporate Social Responsibility aims, achieving carbon neutrality aims through the
PECC program and in some cases, tax in centives. Contributions to mangrove conservation and restoration could be directly with AUSCEMs or through contributions to the Socio Manglar
subaccount. Financial projections for the funds available for the Socio Manglar program incentive payments and growth of the Socio Manglar subaccount capital are provided in Appendix 12 of
Annex 2.

--- Table 1 on Page 85 ---
 | development and validation of the
production model. | 2 .1.1.2 Mangrove Restoration –
demonstration farms (250 ha of
restoration)
2.1.1.3 Education, Outreach and Enabling
Conditions Implementation of Sustainable
Shrimp Aquaculture | and/or vulnerability to climate change in
20,000 ha of farms
Mangrove restoration undertaken on at
least 250 ha within Shrimp farms
Public private roundtable for promotion of
climate-smart shrimp practices and market
engagement.
Activity 2.1.2 Facilitate partnerships and
access to mechanisms for credit and
investment in shrimp farms for expansion
and consolidation of climate-smart
aquaculture practices | Credit to finance working and investment
capital needs will be provided/leveraged
with CI’s support. | 2.1.2.1 Education as a tool to facilitate
access to credit and other investment to
shrimp farms for expansion and
consolidation of CSS practices
2.1.2.2 Project feasibility as a tool to
mobilize capital towards CSS production | At least US$ 5M from financial institutions
is accessed by farms in support of climate-
smart shrimp practices contributing to
improved mangrove coverage and
management to reduce emissions and/or
vulnerability to climate change
Activity 2.2.1 Establish agreements with
businesses, including aquaculture
companies, to contribute to mangrove
restoration and financial sustainability of
the national Socio Bosque Incentive
Program (Mangrove Chapter). | Voluntary partnerships established with
companies63 to finance restoration and
conservation of mangroves through
contributions to the Socio Manglar
program, including providing capital to the
Socio Manglar subaccount. Also, US$ 4
million of GCF funds added to the capital
of the Socio Manglar subaccount to be
held in a dedicated interest-bearing bank
account. See Appendix 12 of Annex 2 for
details of Socio Manglar subaccount
management by FIAS and Annex 14 for
CI’s supervision and monitoring of use of
GCF funds. | 2.2.1.1 Grow the capital of the Socio
Manglar subaccount of the Socio Bosque
Fund to support long-term community
management of mangroves. | Agreements with the private sector result
in at least an additional US$ 300,000/year
by the end of the project being available
for incentive payments to AUSCEMs
involved in the Socio Manglar program.
US$4 million of GCF funds added to Socio
Manglar subaccount (held in an interest-
bearing account) and the interest used in
accordance with the conditions set out in
the term sheet, Annex 14 to provide
incentive payments to AUSCEMs during
the project implementation period and in
the long term after the project
implementation ends.
Activity 3.1.1 Monitoring of mangrove
condition and socio-economic impacts in
mangrove-dependent communities. | Improved monitoring of mangrove cover,
deforestation rates and GHG emissions
related to mangroves. | 3.1.1.1 Demonstrate the impact of
mangrove conservation and restoration on
national mangrove cover, stocks, and
socio-economic indicators through
monitoring linked to the national MRV, and
build long-term monitoring capacity. | Inventory of blue carbon used by the
project M&E and integrated into national
REDD+ monitoring and reporting system,
including national forest and emissions
inventories and FREL.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79
E
Monitoring of social and economic benefits Framework for socio-economic monitoring
and impacts of mangrove conservation of livelihood activities adopted and
providing information to government implemented, including its use to evaluate
agencies to improve policies and the project impacts on livelihoods.
programs.
Activity 3.2.1 Support local governments
(2 provincial governments, 2 municipalities At least 9 subnational governments with
and 5 parishes) to improve and/or Integration of better climate change data 3.2.1.1 Provide technical assistance to mangrove areas have PDOTs and/or
implement Coastal Development and and mangrove conservation measures in subnational governments for improvement budgets that incorporate mangrove climate
Zoning Plans (PDOTs) and other current and proposed Development and of PDOTs to integrate climate-change change strategies aligned with equity
participatory planning instruments that Land Management Plans. adaptation and mangrove management agendas.
incorporate climate change adaptation and measures.
mangrove management applying a gender
approach.
3 proposals for harmonized public policy
3.2.2.1 Provide technical and legal support
instruments for the management of the
for harmonization and adoption of
mangrove ecosystem (e.g., procedures for
improved sectoral policies and regulations
assuring transparency in regulation,
and technical assistance for
decision making and enforcement action,
Coordinated planning and implementation implementation of CODA (Código
inter-agency cooperation for establishing
Activity 3.2.2 Strengthen regulatory of mangrove protection and coastal Orgánico del Ambiente)
technical standards)
framework and law enforcement by adaptation measures through a network of
3.2.2.2 Provide technical and legal support
agencies and institutions responsible for national and provincial institutions
leading to reforms to Ministry of
control of mangroves, with a focus on responsible for coastal management and
Environment and Water processes of
human rights planning This will improve cross-sectoral 140 MAATE staff members trained
complaints, enforcement and sanctions for
planning
infractions affecting mangroves
3.2.2.3 Provide training for judges and
other institutions regarding regulations and
sanctions for crimes involving mangroves

--- Table 1 on Page 86 ---
 | Monitoring of social and economic benefits
and impacts of mangrove conservation
providing information to government
agencies to improve policies and
programs. |  | Framework for socio-economic monitoring
of livelihood activities adopted and
implemented, including its use to evaluate
the project impacts on livelihoods.
Activity 3.2.1 Support local governments
(2 provincial governments, 2 municipalities
and 5 parishes) to improve and/or
implement Coastal Development and
Zoning Plans (PDOTs) and other
participatory planning instruments that
incorporate climate change adaptation and
mangrove management applying a gender
approach. | Integration of better climate change data
and mangrove conservation measures in
current and proposed Development and
Land Management Plans. | 3.2.1.1 Provide technical assistance to
subnational governments for improvement
of PDOTs to integrate climate-change
adaptation and mangrove management
measures. | At least 9 subnational governments with
mangrove areas have PDOTs and/or
budgets that incorporate mangrove climate
change strategies aligned with equity
agendas.
Activity 3.2.2 Strengthen regulatory
framework and law enforcement by
agencies and institutions responsible for
control of mangroves, with a focus on
human rights | Coordinated planning and implementation
of mangrove protection and coastal
adaptation measures through a network of
national and provincial institutions
responsible for coastal management and
planning This will improve cross-sectoral
planning | 3.2.2.1 Provide technical and legal support
for harmonization and adoption of
improved sectoral policies and regulations
and technical assistance for
implementation of CODA (Código
Orgánico del Ambiente) | 3 proposals for harmonized public policy
instruments for the management of the
mangrove ecosystem (e.g., procedures for
assuring transparency in regulation,
decision making and enforcement action,
inter-agency cooperation for establishing
technical standards)
 |  | 3.2.2.2 Provide technical and legal support
leading to reforms to Ministry of
Environment and Water processes of
complaints, enforcement and sanctions for
infractions affecting mangroves | 140 MAATE staff members trained
 |  | 3.2.2.3 Provide training for judges and
other institutions regarding regulations and
sanctions for crimes involving mangroves | 

=== PAGE 87 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
240. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Plan is provided as Annex 11. The plan includes GCF-level Impact and
Outcome indicators based on the IRMF and Project-level Outcome and Activity indicators, metrics for each
indicator, methodology for data collection, baseline information, frequency of data collection, and indicative
resources needed to complete the plan. The Project monitoring and evaluation will be coordinated by a
dedicated M&E specialist at CI-Ecuador in close coordination with subgrantees (notably PUCESE), partners
and other CI units contributing to the project. Project partners will be responsible for providing timely and
comprehensive reporting including technical results and financial data as necessary and appropriate. These
responsibilities will form part of contractual agreements between CI and the project partners and detailed
monitoring requirements will be established based on their roles. All monitoring data being collected by these
partners will be aggregated for project level reporting.
241. The Key Project Indicators, including measures of GHG emissions reductions and vulnerability reduction, as
outlined in sections E2 to E6 will be monitored by the Project’s M&E specialist (in coordination with staff at
partner organizations and with the aid of consultants where necessary) applying the methodologies and
frequencies as outlined in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (Annex 11). The M&E specialist will be assisted
by the project experts to be hired within CI and other CI units on gender and safeguards issues, blue carbon
and project impact evaluation.
242. The M&E Plan is a living document, follows the templates specified by GCF, and focuses on measuring the
project’s delivery of outputs, outcomes and broader paradigm shift. More detail will be added to the M&E Plan
during the inception stage of the project (the first six months of implementation) by the M&E specialist and in
collaboration with government agencies and local partners. Development of the full M&E Plan will ensure that
the M&E requirements are fully assimilated and that the plan is owned by the project staff. The full M&E plan
will build on the information provided in this document but elaborate in more detail on the roles and
responsibilities for data collection and management, information flows and reporting systems, finalized
indicators and means of verification, monitoring protocols and tools, implementation plans and schedules,
alignments and collaborations with existing national M&E systems. The detailed M&E Plan will also include
participatory methods for data collection and learning and an impact evaluation plan that builds on the summary
evaluation plan included in Annex 11.
243. The Project Steering Committee will meet annually to review and approve annual budget and workplans,
discuss implementation issues and identify solutions, and increase coordination and communication between
key project partners. The NDA will participate in these meetings as a member of the project steering committee.
244. CI-GCF Agency staff, as AE, will continuously monitor the work of the EE through quarterly EE reports and
meetings to monitor progress towards deliverables. CI-Ecuador, as EE, will prepare an Annual Performance
Report to monitor project progress and report to the CI-GCF Agency. The report will summarize the annual
project results and progress. CI-Ecuador will also provide a final report at the end of the Project.
245. The Project will undergo an independent Interim Evaluation in Year 4, consistent with GCF’s Evaluation Policy.
The evaluation will determine progress being made towards the achievement of outcomes and outputs and will
identify course correction if needed. The evaluation will incorporate an assessment of the Project’s
contributions to a paradigm shift in the enabling conditions using a three-point scale rating as specified in the
IRMF and with reference to the expected changes in enabling conditions noted in section E4 above.
Recommendations from the Interim Evaluation will be incorporated into the design of the Project to secure
maximum results and sustainability.
246. An independent Final Evaluation will be conducted at the end of the Project and will be undertaken in
accordance with the AE’s guidance and consistent with GCF’s Evaluation Policy. The Final Evaluation will
focus on the delivery of the Project’s results as initially planned (and as corrected after the Interim Evaluation,
if any such correction took place). Once again, it will include an assessment of the project’s contributions to a
paradigm shift in the enabling conditions using a three-point scale rating.

--- Table 1 on Page 87 ---
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 |  | 
 | 240. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Plan is provided as Annex 11. The plan includes GCF-level Impact and | 
 | Outcome indicators based on the IRMF and Project-level Outcome and Activity indicators, metrics for each | 
 | indicator, methodology for data collection, baseline information, frequency of data collection, and indicative | 
 | resources needed to complete the plan. The Project monitoring and evaluation will be coordinated by a | 
 | dedicated M&E specialist at CI-Ecuador in close coordination with subgrantees (notably PUCESE), partners | 
 | and other CI units contributing to the project. Project partners will be responsible for providing timely and | 
 | comprehensive reporting including technical results and financial data as necessary and appropriate. These | 
 | responsibilities will form part of contractual agreements between CI and the project partners and detailed | 
 | monitoring requirements will be established based on their roles. All monitoring data being collected by these | 
 | partners will be aggregated for project level reporting. | 
 |  | 
 | 241. The Key Project Indicators, including measures of GHG emissions reductions and vulnerability reduction, as | 
 | outlined in sections E2 to E6 will be monitored by the Project’s M&E specialist (in coordination with staff at | 
 | partner organizations and with the aid of consultants where necessary) applying the methodologies and | 
 | frequencies as outlined in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (Annex 11). The M&E specialist will be assisted | 
 | by the project experts to be hired within CI and other CI units on gender and safeguards issues, blue carbon | 
 | and project impact evaluation. | 
 |  | 
 | 242. The M&E Plan is a living document, follows the templates specified by GCF, and focuses on measuring the | 
 | project’s delivery of outputs, outcomes and broader paradigm shift. More detail will be added to the M&E Plan | 
 | during the inception stage of the project (the first six months of implementation) by the M&E specialist and in | 
 | collaboration with government agencies and local partners. Development of the full M&E Plan will ensure that | 
 | the M&E requirements are fully assimilated and that the plan is owned by the project staff. The full M&E plan | 
 | will build on the information provided in this document but elaborate in more detail on the roles and | 
 | responsibilities for data collection and management, information flows and reporting systems, finalized | 
 | indicators and means of verification, monitoring protocols and tools, implementation plans and schedules, | 
 | alignments and collaborations with existing national M&E systems. The detailed M&E Plan will also include | 
 | participatory methods for data collection and learning and an impact evaluation plan that builds on the summary | 
 | evaluation plan included in Annex 11. | 
 |  | 
 | 243. The Project Steering Committee will meet annually to review and approve annual budget and workplans, | 
 | discuss implementation issues and identify solutions, and increase coordination and communication between | 
 | key project partners. The NDA will participate in these meetings as a member of the project steering committee. | 
 |  | 
 | 244. CI-GCF Agency staff, as AE, will continuously monitor the work of the EE through quarterly EE reports and | 
 | meetings to monitor progress towards deliverables. CI-Ecuador, as EE, will prepare an Annual Performance | 
 | Report to monitor project progress and report to the CI-GCF Agency. The report will summarize the annual | 
 | project results and progress. CI-Ecuador will also provide a final report at the end of the Project. | 
 |  | 
 | 245. The Project will undergo an independent Interim Evaluation in Year 4, consistent with GCF’s Evaluation Policy. | 
 | The evaluation will determine progress being made towards the achievement of outcomes and outputs and will | 
 | identify course correction if needed. The evaluation will incorporate an assessment of the Project’s | 
 | contributions to a paradigm shift in the enabling conditions using a three-point scale rating as specified in the | 
 | IRMF and with reference to the expected changes in enabling conditions noted in section E4 above. | 
 | Recommendations from the Interim Evaluation will be incorporated into the design of the Project to secure | 
 | maximum results and sustainability. | 
 |  | 
 | 246. An independent Final Evaluation will be conducted at the end of the Project and will be undertaken in | 
 | accordance with the AE’s guidance and consistent with GCF’s Evaluation Policy. The Final Evaluation will | 
 | focus on the delivery of the Project’s results as initially planned (and as corrected after the Interim Evaluation, | 
 | if any such correction took place). Once again, it will include an assessment of the project’s contributions to a | 
 | paradigm shift in the enabling conditions using a three-point scale rating. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 88 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81
In addition to the project specific monitoring of the indicators noted in section E for reporting to GCF, the Project
will also feed relevant information into Ecuadorian government monitoring systems and to CI’s institutional
247. results monitoring. Some of the indicators used for the Project monitoring have direct relevance for the
Government of Ecuador’s reporting to the UNFCCC, the Sustainable Development Goals, targets related to
the Convention on Biological Diversity and national targets.

--- Table 1 on Page 88 ---
 | In addition to the project specific monitoring of the indicators noted in section E for reporting to GCF, the Project | 
 | will also feed relevant information into Ecuadorian government monitoring systems and to CI’s institutional | 
 | 247. results monitoring. Some of the indicators used for the Project monitoring have direct relevance for the | 
 | Government of Ecuador’s reporting to the UNFCCC, the Sustainable Development Goals, targets related to | 
 | the Convention on Biological Diversity and national targets. | 

=== PAGE 89 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82
E
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
Selected Risk Factor 1 A changing climate may impact the feasibility, sustainability or success of the project.
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational High Low
Description
The base line study confirms that Ecuador’s coastal ecosystems are susceptible to climate change impacts. However,
the impact on the project activities themselves is considered limited. Moreover, it is one of the main aims of the project
to increase the resilience of the mangrove ecosystem to the impacts of climate change. The main climate change
impacts that may have a direct bearing on the project activities are those that could change the ability of mangroves to
survive such as SLR and physical changes to mangrove estuaries that could make some areas unsuitable for
mangrove. As noted in section B1, mangroves are dynamic systems and natural changes in mangrove cover can occur
as mud/substrate moves due to erosion or deposition. However, as also noted in section B1, projected SLR rates are
below the rates at which mangroves can adapt to the change by expanding into newly created suitable habitat.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Several aspects of the design of the project will address the potential threat that some areas will become less suitable
for mangroves over time due to climate change. First, the restoration approach that the project will follow will include
consideration of the hydrology of restoration sites to consider the current and future suitability of areas for mangrove
survival and growth. Second, the activities to develop adaptation plans for the PAs are intended to build resilience for
these areas, and mangroves in particular, by ensuring that potential impacts for each of the PAs are identified and
adaptation measures are integrated into management plans and current management. Finally, the work on PDOTs with
subnational governments includes land-use planning in which potential climate impacts will be identified and used to
identify appropriate land-use planning adaptations. For example, this would include identifying areas unsuitable for
development as they may be needed for mangrove ‘retreat’ under future SLR scenarios.
Selected Risk Factor 2 A changing climate may impact the adaptation opportunities provided by the project.
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Low
Description
One climate change impact that could influence the adaptation opportunities provided by the project is SLR, as this
could influence the area available for reforestation. The base line study included an assessment of the vulnerability of
the entire project area to rising sea levels. SLR is expected in all parts of the project area, but the River Guayas Estuary
was identified as having the highest risk.
The vulnerability assessment included in the baseline study included the factor of SLR, particularly in the development
of maps prioritizing areas for mangrove reforestation. In fact, areas with high vulnerability to SLR (in combination with
other factors) were prioritized for reforestation. This is because experience with mangrove reforestation projects has
shown that successful reforestation can lead to increased sediments, allowing the young mangrove trees to form a
protective barrier against further climate change impacts, such as coastal erosion, and even protecting themselves
against future SLR (Spalding et al. 2014; Van Lavieren et al. 2012).
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project addresses this risk through Activity 1.1.1 under which stakeholder meetings will be conducted as part of
the detailed planning of restoration activities to record local knowledge on climate change impacts and potential
future impacts on mangrove reforestation, considering the views of men and women, for use in the final confirmation
of sites for reforestation, especially in the Guayas River Estuary.
Selected Risk Factor 3 There are risks to the project area from potential third parties’ action.

--- Table 1 on Page 89 ---
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  | 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  | 
 |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 1 A changing climate may impact the feasibility, sustainability or success of the project. |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | High | Low
Description |  | 
The base line study confirms that Ecuador’s coastal ecosystems are susceptible to climate change impacts. However,
the impact on the project activities themselves is considered limited. Moreover, it is one of the main aims of the project
to increase the resilience of the mangrove ecosystem to the impacts of climate change. The main climate change
impacts that may have a direct bearing on the project activities are those that could change the ability of mangroves to
survive such as SLR and physical changes to mangrove estuaries that could make some areas unsuitable for
mangrove. As noted in section B1, mangroves are dynamic systems and natural changes in mangrove cover can occur
as mud/substrate moves due to erosion or deposition. However, as also noted in section B1, projected SLR rates are
below the rates at which mangroves can adapt to the change by expanding into newly created suitable habitat. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Several aspects of the design of the project will address the potential threat that some areas will become less suitable
for mangroves over time due to climate change. First, the restoration approach that the project will follow will include
consideration of the hydrology of restoration sites to consider the current and future suitability of areas for mangrove
survival and growth. Second, the activities to develop adaptation plans for the PAs are intended to build resilience for
these areas, and mangroves in particular, by ensuring that potential impacts for each of the PAs are identified and
adaptation measures are integrated into management plans and current management. Finally, the work on PDOTs with
subnational governments includes land-use planning in which potential climate impacts will be identified and used to
identify appropriate land-use planning adaptations. For example, this would include identifying areas unsuitable for
development as they may be needed for mangrove ‘retreat’ under future SLR scenarios. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2 A changing climate may impact the adaptation opportunities provided by the project. |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Low
Description |  | 
One climate change impact that could influence the adaptation opportunities provided by the project is SLR, as this
could influence the area available for reforestation. The base line study included an assessment of the vulnerability of
the entire project area to rising sea levels. SLR is expected in all parts of the project area, but the River Guayas Estuary
was identified as having the highest risk.
The vulnerability assessment included in the baseline study included the factor of SLR, particularly in the development
of maps prioritizing areas for mangrove reforestation. In fact, areas with high vulnerability to SLR (in combination with
other factors) were prioritized for reforestation. This is because experience with mangrove reforestation projects has
shown that successful reforestation can lead to increased sediments, allowing the young mangrove trees to form a
protective barrier against further climate change impacts, such as coastal erosion, and even protecting themselves
against future SLR (Spalding et al. 2014; Van Lavieren et al. 2012). |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The project addresses this risk through Activity 1.1.1 under which stakeholder meetings will be conducted as part of
the detailed planning of restoration activities to record local knowledge on climate change impacts and potential
future impacts on mangrove reforestation, considering the views of men and women, for use in the final confirmation
of sites for reforestation, especially in the Guayas River Estuary. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 3 There are risks to the project area from potential third parties’ action. |  | 

=== PAGE 90 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83
E
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Low
Description
The project area suffers from pollution from cities and their productive activities, agrochemicals, the proximity of large
ports and water contamination by ballast water. These forms of pollution could impact mangrove survival in parts of the
project area although they are likely to be very localized and involve small areas (with respect to the scale of the overall
project size). The potential impact is therefore considered to be low. These influences are largely outside of the control
of the project, at the same time, they further emphasize the need to increase the resilience of the mangrove ecosystem.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project already addresses these issues:
• Activities 1.2.1, 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 aim to introduce climate-smart approaches to existing economic activities
or new bio-enterprises based on climate-smart approaches, which would both lead to less contamination
from harmful substances currently in use, e.g., in shrimp cultivation.
• Activity 3.2.1 includes work with local governments, municipalities and prefectures that are responsible for
territorial management and planning in the context of improved management of contamination.
Selected Risk Factor 4 Project staff could be at risk due to tensions between certain actors within the project
area that exist or may worsen as a result of project implementation.
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
In the project area, there are tensions between shrimp farmers and fishermen, because some do not accept the existing
rules. The project aims to work especially with local associations, which may lead to a further divide between members
and non-members. Tensions between stakeholders within the project could disrupt activities if some stakeholders
decide they do not want to participate.
Furthermore, there is the risk of criminal gangs operating in remote mangrove areas. Ecuador’s remote coastal areas
are used to ship cocaine produced in neighboring countries further up the coast to Central America to the United States
and to Europe. The risk exists throughout the project area but is more acute in the northern estuaries and some areas
of the Guayas estuary. Violence between rival criminal gangs and with law enforcement is common, making it important
that project staff and partners operating in the mangroves are not mistaken as being from rival gangs or being
associated with law enforcement agencies.
Despite recent gang violence in Guayaquil, the risk to project staff as a result of existing tensions is considered to be
low and in case of actual security issues, CI’s Security and Protection Plan applies to CI staff as well as project partners.
CI already has a presence in the region, and there have been no gaps in operations, even with additional security
precautions that were put into place (i.e. no travel after dark). CI Ecuador benefits from strong and experienced
leadership, with a close relationship with the government and also with local partners, including communities where
this project will work. CI Ecuador has regional and office level Security Focal Points, which helps to identify and assess
risks quickly, efficiently, with the safety of CI, partners and beneficiaries the first priority. CI and partners also have
strong relationships with the communities, which not only makes it easier to operate during uncertain times and provides
CI with early warnings when conditions begin to deteriorate.
In addition, the project is likely to reduce existing tensions through its planned activities. The established project-specific
Grievance Redress Mechanism, if used by stakeholders as foreseen, can be used to track where tensions are
aggravated, and responses will be identified on a case-by-case basis to address these tensions.
Mitigation Measure(s)
For the potential risk of tensions between stakeholders: CI will implement the project-specific Grievance Redress
Mechanism to track grievances related to tensions between stakeholders and between stakeholders and the project
team. The team will initiate spaces and procedures for stakeholder dialogue where tensions between stakeholders and
the project team appear to have intensified as a result of the project and provide mediation to ensure improvement over
time. The project ESMP also includes the requirement to screen all the community grant support that will be provided

--- Table 1 on Page 90 ---
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Medium | Low | 
Description |  |  |  | 
The project area suffers from pollution from cities and their productive activities, agrochemicals, the proximity of large
ports and water contamination by ballast water. These forms of pollution could impact mangrove survival in parts of the
project area although they are likely to be very localized and involve small areas (with respect to the scale of the overall
project size). The potential impact is therefore considered to be low. These influences are largely outside of the control
of the project, at the same time, they further emphasize the need to increase the resilience of the mangrove ecosystem. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
The project already addresses these issues:
• Activities 1.2.1, 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 aim to introduce climate-smart approaches to existing economic activities
or new bio-enterprises based on climate-smart approaches, which would both lead to less contamination
from harmful substances currently in use, e.g., in shrimp cultivation.
• Activity 3.2.1 includes work with local governments, municipalities and prefectures that are responsible for
territorial management and planning in the context of improved management of contamination. |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 4 Project staff could be at risk due to tensions between certain actors within the project |  |  | 
 | area that exist or may worsen as a result of project implementation. |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Medium | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
In the project area, there are tensions between shrimp farmers and fishermen, because some do not accept the existing
rules. The project aims to work especially with local associations, which may lead to a further divide between members
and non-members. Tensions between stakeholders within the project could disrupt activities if some stakeholders
decide they do not want to participate.
Furthermore, there is the risk of criminal gangs operating in remote mangrove areas. Ecuador’s remote coastal areas
are used to ship cocaine produced in neighboring countries further up the coast to Central America to the United States
and to Europe. The risk exists throughout the project area but is more acute in the northern estuaries and some areas
of the Guayas estuary. Violence between rival criminal gangs and with law enforcement is common, making it important
that project staff and partners operating in the mangroves are not mistaken as being from rival gangs or being
associated with law enforcement agencies.
Despite recent gang violence in Guayaquil, the risk to project staff as a result of existing tensions is considered to be
low and in case of actual security issues, CI’s Security and Protection Plan applies to CI staff as well as project partners.
CI already has a presence in the region, and there have been no gaps in operations, even with additional security
precautions that were put into place (i.e. no travel after dark). CI Ecuador benefits from strong and experienced
leadership, with a close relationship with the government and also with local partners, including communities where
this project will work. CI Ecuador has regional and office level Security Focal Points, which helps to identify and assess
risks quickly, efficiently, with the safety of CI, partners and beneficiaries the first priority. CI and partners also have
strong relationships with the communities, which not only makes it easier to operate during uncertain times and provides
CI with early warnings when conditions begin to deteriorate.
In addition, the project is likely to reduce existing tensions through its planned activities. The established project-specific
Grievance Redress Mechanism, if used by stakeholders as foreseen, can be used to track where tensions are
aggravated, and responses will be identified on a case-by-case basis to address these tensions. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
For the potential risk of tensions between stakeholders: CI will implement the project-specific Grievance Redress
Mechanism to track grievances related to tensions between stakeholders and between stakeholders and the project
team. The team will initiate spaces and procedures for stakeholder dialogue where tensions between stakeholders and
the project team appear to have intensified as a result of the project and provide mediation to ensure improvement over
time. The project ESMP also includes the requirement to screen all the community grant support that will be provided |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 91 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84
E
and consideration of tensions that the grant could create are to be assessed in the screening and mitigation measures
developed if the risks are considered medium or high level.
For the work with AUSCEM organizations, CI and PUCESE will also be encouraging AUSCEM organizations to include
more members to maximize participation of fishers within the associations and reduce the potential for conflict between
members and non-members.
To address safety risks posed by criminal activity, CI’s director for Safety and Security will conduct a thorough security
assessment and mitigation plan during project start-up. Example mitigation measures include pre-activity community
engagement to ensure local communities understand the project objectives and that there is no link to government
efforts to combat criminal gangs; Hostile Environment Awareness training and guidance on avoiding and reporting
criminal activity; and ensuring that it is easy to identify CI staff and partners as contributing to project objectives (rather
than criminal or law-enforcement activity).
An additional mitigation measure will be an emphasis on selection of consultants and subgrantees who have a
demonstrated history of operating in the project areas. PUCESE, the main project partner that will lead activities in the
two northern sites, is well known in the northern areas and familiar with working in those regions and with local
communities.
A Security Plan has been developed for this project and is included as Appendix 11 of the ESMP (Annex 6).
Selected Risk Factor 5 The project area is susceptible to earthquakes, subsidence, landslides, erosion, flooding
or extreme climatic conditions.
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational High Low
Description
The project area is sensitive to erosion, flooding or extreme weather conditions, for example in El Niño or La Niña
years. These natural extreme events have the potential to disrupt project operations; however, the impacts on project
operations are expected to be low since the issues are likely to be relatively short-term by comparison to the length of
the project.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project includes several activities that are mitigation measures themselves, i.e., they can jointly reduce the overall
impact of such extreme weather events or help improve the management of their impacts:
• Local people’s livelihoods will be improved through the development of new bio-enterprises (sub-activity 1.2.1);
and,
• The resilience and extent of the mangrove ecosystem will be increased, thus reducing the risk of impacts from
extreme weather events (sub-activity 1.1.1), specifically coastal flooding.
• Improve local planning, including identification of areas at risk of flooding and identification of priority natural
infrastructure to protect and restore.
Linked to the restoration activities (and related to risk factor 2 above), CI and PUCESE will consult with local
stakeholders to ensure their knowledge about the influence of extreme weather events is taken into consideration in
the establishment of bio-enterprises, if relevant (e.g. regarding the selection of sites to establish mangrove nurseries),
as well as in the final confirmation of sites for mangrove reforestation.
Selected Risk Factor 6 Political instability and changes in government agencies
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium Low
Description
The political stability index has shown a steady improvement over the last decade and was at - 0.02 in 2014. The index
measures perceptions of the likelihood of Ecuador's government becoming destabilized.

--- Table 1 on Page 91 ---
and consideration of tensions that the grant could create are to be assessed in the screening and mitigation measures
developed if the risks are considered medium or high level.
For the work with AUSCEM organizations, CI and PUCESE will also be encouraging AUSCEM organizations to include
more members to maximize participation of fishers within the associations and reduce the potential for conflict between
members and non-members.
To address safety risks posed by criminal activity, CI’s director for Safety and Security will conduct a thorough security
assessment and mitigation plan during project start-up. Example mitigation measures include pre-activity community
engagement to ensure local communities understand the project objectives and that there is no link to government
efforts to combat criminal gangs; Hostile Environment Awareness training and guidance on avoiding and reporting
criminal activity; and ensuring that it is easy to identify CI staff and partners as contributing to project objectives (rather
than criminal or law-enforcement activity).
An additional mitigation measure will be an emphasis on selection of consultants and subgrantees who have a
demonstrated history of operating in the project areas. PUCESE, the main project partner that will lead activities in the
two northern sites, is well known in the northern areas and familiar with working in those regions and with local
communities.
A Security Plan has been developed for this project and is included as Appendix 11 of the ESMP (Annex 6). |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 5 The project area is susceptible to earthquakes, subsidence, landslides, erosion, flooding |  |  | 
 | or extreme climatic conditions. |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | High | Low | 
Description |  |  |  | 
The project area is sensitive to erosion, flooding or extreme weather conditions, for example in El Niño or La Niña
years. These natural extreme events have the potential to disrupt project operations; however, the impacts on project
operations are expected to be low since the issues are likely to be relatively short-term by comparison to the length of
the project. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
The project includes several activities that are mitigation measures themselves, i.e., they can jointly reduce the overall
impact of such extreme weather events or help improve the management of their impacts:
• Local people’s livelihoods will be improved through the development of new bio-enterprises (sub-activity 1.2.1);
and,
• The resilience and extent of the mangrove ecosystem will be increased, thus reducing the risk of impacts from
extreme weather events (sub-activity 1.1.1), specifically coastal flooding.
• Improve local planning, including identification of areas at risk of flooding and identification of priority natural
infrastructure to protect and restore.
Linked to the restoration activities (and related to risk factor 2 above), CI and PUCESE will consult with local
stakeholders to ensure their knowledge about the influence of extreme weather events is taken into consideration in
the establishment of bio-enterprises, if relevant (e.g. regarding the selection of sites to establish mangrove nurseries),
as well as in the final confirmation of sites for mangrove reforestation. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 6 Political instability and changes in government agencies |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Governance |  | Medium | Low | 
Description |  |  |  | 
The political stability index has shown a steady improvement over the last decade and was at - 0.02 in 2014. The index
measures perceptions of the likelihood of Ecuador's government becoming destabilized. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 92 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85
E
Political risk in Ecuador is characterized by possible changes in government personnel in key positions or changing
mandates of different ministries because of elections. One example is that the administration of mangrove concessions
could be transferred from the MAATE to another Ministry, which could result in changes to concession regulations.
Since some of the Outcome 3 activities relate to working at the subnational governments, changes at those levels could
also impact the project operations. The main risk is that changes in personnel and/or government structures could
cause delays in project operations. Another example is that a new administration may seek to alter FIAS’s governing
structure or rules, which may impact its independence of operations. FIAS has taken several steps to enhance good
governance practices, including the expansion of its Board to provide for greater independence, consistent with best
practice standards for conservation trust funds. A risk remains that some of these practices could be changed under a
new administration.
A snap general election for both the executive and legislative branches took place in August 2023. All the leading
political parties and candidates embraced environmental issues as key pillars of their platform so it seems unlikely that
there would be backtracking on climate change commitments or support for mangrove conservation and restoration,
the key focus areas of this proposal. The regulatory frameworks and programs around which the proposed project is
built (Sustainable Use and Custody Agreements/AUSCEM and the Socio Manglar program) are enshrined in the
constitution and regulatory frameworks and are unlikely to be impacted. Although ministers may change following the
elections, ministerial level turn-over is not new for Ecuador and CI Ecuador has maintained strong relations at these
levels throughout numerous previous administrations and through many different ministers. Local and provincial officials
were not impacted by the 2023 elections, meaning that CI Ecuador’s strong relations with government at those levels
remained in place. Local and provincial elections will happen during the project implementation period but CI Ecuador’s
strong relations with those governments are expected to provide continuity for the project. A new administration has
been in place in Ecuador since December 2023 and the engagement of the government, local associations and private
sector remains.
Mitigation Measure(s)
CI has been able to maintain its activities during the last 20 years in the political context of Ecuador and has been able
to collaborate consistently with successive administrations and with subnational governments. Elections were held in
August 2023 and resulted in a presidential change in December 2023, however, not a change in the majority party.
All relevant ministries have been involved in the development of this project, including participation during Project
Preparation Funding activities of Funding Proposal development. The project has been designed to address
government priorities related to climate change, nature conservation and economic development and enjoys support
from the ministries involved. MAATE is even providing co-financing for the project. In the case of any changes in
mandate or personnel, CI will continue its extensive engagement with the government to ensure a smooth transition
and to address possible changes as needed.
The risk that a new administration would alter FIAS’s governing structure or rules is considered low risk and in the due
diligence there are some measures highlighted to design and implement before the granting process. There are internal
processes and policies that will be included in the grant to ensure compliance of use of GCF funds. The project budget
also includes support for capacity building and enforcement support to FIAS.
The risk presented by changing priorities and approaches from new administrations warrants monitoring, although it
has been reduced since FIAS’s inception due to concerted outreach by FIAS and engagement with the donor
community, resulting in reforms to FIAS’s governance. It is unlikely that there would be dramatic additional reforms to
FIAS so soon after the Government of Ecuador helped restructure it in 2017.
Of note, the vast majority of Fund decisions are made by an Administrative Board (“Junta Administrativa” or “JA”) for
each of FIAS’s subsidiary funds (such as the Socio Bosque Fund). These JAs were created during financing
agreements with donors, are largely determined according to the requirements in such agreements, and largely operate
independent of the FIAS Board of Directors. The governance structure of each of these JAs is defined in their governing
rules / operations manuals which may be subject to modification based on FIAS and donor agreements. The JAs are
primarily responsible for supporting the execution of projects, making decisions on fund allocations and disbursements,
consistent with the terms of any donor agreement. The JAs are responsible for the evaluation and oversight of donor

--- Table 1 on Page 92 ---
Political risk in Ecuador is characterized by possible changes in government personnel in key positions or changing
mandates of different ministries because of elections. One example is that the administration of mangrove concessions
could be transferred from the MAATE to another Ministry, which could result in changes to concession regulations.
Since some of the Outcome 3 activities relate to working at the subnational governments, changes at those levels could
also impact the project operations. The main risk is that changes in personnel and/or government structures could
cause delays in project operations. Another example is that a new administration may seek to alter FIAS’s governing
structure or rules, which may impact its independence of operations. FIAS has taken several steps to enhance good
governance practices, including the expansion of its Board to provide for greater independence, consistent with best
practice standards for conservation trust funds. A risk remains that some of these practices could be changed under a
new administration.
A snap general election for both the executive and legislative branches took place in August 2023. All the leading
political parties and candidates embraced environmental issues as key pillars of their platform so it seems unlikely that
there would be backtracking on climate change commitments or support for mangrove conservation and restoration,
the key focus areas of this proposal. The regulatory frameworks and programs around which the proposed project is
built (Sustainable Use and Custody Agreements/AUSCEM and the Socio Manglar program) are enshrined in the
constitution and regulatory frameworks and are unlikely to be impacted. Although ministers may change following the
elections, ministerial level turn-over is not new for Ecuador and CI Ecuador has maintained strong relations at these
levels throughout numerous previous administrations and through many different ministers. Local and provincial officials
were not impacted by the 2023 elections, meaning that CI Ecuador’s strong relations with government at those levels
remained in place. Local and provincial elections will happen during the project implementation period but CI Ecuador’s
strong relations with those governments are expected to provide continuity for the project. A new administration has
been in place in Ecuador since December 2023 and the engagement of the government, local associations and private
sector remains.
Mitigation Measure(s)
CI has been able to maintain its activities during the last 20 years in the political context of Ecuador and has been able
to collaborate consistently with successive administrations and with subnational governments. Elections were held in
August 2023 and resulted in a presidential change in December 2023, however, not a change in the majority party.
All relevant ministries have been involved in the development of this project, including participation during Project
Preparation Funding activities of Funding Proposal development. The project has been designed to address
government priorities related to climate change, nature conservation and economic development and enjoys support
from the ministries involved. MAATE is even providing co-financing for the project. In the case of any changes in
mandate or personnel, CI will continue its extensive engagement with the government to ensure a smooth transition
and to address possible changes as needed.
The risk that a new administration would alter FIAS’s governing structure or rules is considered low risk and in the due
diligence there are some measures highlighted to design and implement before the granting process. There are internal
processes and policies that will be included in the grant to ensure compliance of use of GCF funds. The project budget
also includes support for capacity building and enforcement support to FIAS.
The risk presented by changing priorities and approaches from new administrations warrants monitoring, although it
has been reduced since FIAS’s inception due to concerted outreach by FIAS and engagement with the donor
community, resulting in reforms to FIAS’s governance. It is unlikely that there would be dramatic additional reforms to
FIAS so soon after the Government of Ecuador helped restructure it in 2017.
Of note, the vast majority of Fund decisions are made by an Administrative Board (“Junta Administrativa” or “JA”) for
each of FIAS’s subsidiary funds (such as the Socio Bosque Fund). These JAs were created during financing
agreements with donors, are largely determined according to the requirements in such agreements, and largely operate
independent of the FIAS Board of Directors. The governance structure of each of these JAs is defined in their governing
rules / operations manuals which may be subject to modification based on FIAS and donor agreements. The JAs are
primarily responsible for supporting the execution of projects, making decisions on fund allocations and disbursements,
consistent with the terms of any donor agreement. The JAs are responsible for the evaluation and oversight of donor

=== PAGE 93 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86
E
supported projects / funds. Accordingly, CI will ensure in its grant agreement with FIAS that the JA managing the Socio
Manglar subaccount meets best practices, including any GCF requirements.
Selected Risk Factor 7 Prohibited Practices, including ML/FT
Category Probability Impact
Prohibited practices Low Medium
Description
The Project involves a wide array of actors, including government, sub-grantees, vendors and service providers, and
beneficiaries. Based on a calculation using multiple international risk indicators, CI assesses Ecuador to be a low-risk
country for GCF prohibited practices, including terrorist financing and money laundering. CI Ecuador follows and is
subject to CI‘s Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism-Financing (AML/CFT) Policy and related procedures,
which have been assessed as effective by the GCF. In addition, CI-Ecuador is subject to national laws related to
AML/CFT, for which it has a country-specific Manual for Prevention of ML and FT. In compliance with the Organic
Regulation to the Law of Prevention and Detection of Laundering Money and Financing Terrorism, CI-Ecuador’s
AML/CFT practices are supervised by a public entity, the Financial Analysis Unit (Unidad de Análisis Financiero
[UAFE]), which conducts a thorough review of financial procedures related to AML/CFT and to which CI-Ecuador must
submit monthly reports. Finally, the project’s major non-EE recipients of GCF funds, sub-grantees PUCESE and FIAS,
were screened and cleared against international sanctions lists.
Concerning impact, serious breaches in prohibited practices, including ML/FT, would impact the reputation of CI and
the project.
Mitigation Measure(s)
CI has several procedures and controls in place to prevent, mitigate, and identify risk. In order to comply with CI
AML/CTF, U.S. law, and GCF fiduciary standards, CI applies rigorous CFT/AML screening to all CI funding recipients.
CI also conducts an assessment of Prohibited Practices (PP) risks of grant recipients and includes any required
mitigation measures in its legally binding grant agreements. All EE staff and subgrantees must also undergo training
on PP (including red flags and how to report violations), and all grant and services agreements (used by both CI and
sub-grantees) must include language on compliance with the GCF Policy on Prohibited Practices, including AML/CFT.
Sub-grantees PUCESE and FIAS will receive capacity-building related to AML/CFT and prohibited practices from CI
Ecuador, and compliance with PP policies and mitigation measures is part of project monitoring, including site visits
and CI audits, throughout implementation.
To report and remedy risks, any CI employee; employee of an executing entity, grantee, partner, or vendor; or
beneficiary may report a grievance or violation of these policies anonymously online or by telephone through CI’s
Ethics Hotline. All reported grievances will be investigated and addressed per CI’s Anti-Fraud Policy & Guidelines for
Investigations. Full details can be found on CI’s website at https://www.conservation.org/about/our-policies/reporting-
illegal-or-unethical-conduct-statement.
Selected Risk Factor 8 Unrealized or delayed co-financing
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Low
Description
Co-financing plays an important part in achieving the full impact of the proposed project. There is a medium risk of
delayed or unrealized co-financing for the project, because MAATE’s grant co-financing depends on the approval
processes for government budgets. However, the committed co-financing is proposed for activity A.1.1.1 and therefore,
the negative impact to the project would be limited to this activity. In addition, a portion of the co-financing committed
by MAATE is ‘in-kind’ and related to staff salaries and therefore poses a low risk of not materializing.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project team will periodically assess the degree of risk (both likelihood and impact) that co-financing will be funded
and its associated impact on project implementation. CI will also conduct regular engagement with co-financing sources
to understand and manage this risk. In the event that co-financing is not realized, CI will try to identify alternative
sources. If that is not possible, CI would work with GCF within the framework of the project’s FAA to propose adaptive

--- Table 1 on Page 93 ---
supported projects / funds. Accordingly, CI will ensure in its grant agreement with FIAS that the JA managing the Socio
Manglar subaccount meets best practices, including any GCF requirements. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 7 Prohibited Practices, including ML/FT |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Prohibited practices | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
The Project involves a wide array of actors, including government, sub-grantees, vendors and service providers, and
beneficiaries. Based on a calculation using multiple international risk indicators, CI assesses Ecuador to be a low-risk
country for GCF prohibited practices, including terrorist financing and money laundering. CI Ecuador follows and is
subject to CI‘s Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism-Financing (AML/CFT) Policy and related procedures,
which have been assessed as effective by the GCF. In addition, CI-Ecuador is subject to national laws related to
AML/CFT, for which it has a country-specific Manual for Prevention of ML and FT. In compliance with the Organic
Regulation to the Law of Prevention and Detection of Laundering Money and Financing Terrorism, CI-Ecuador’s
AML/CFT practices are supervised by a public entity, the Financial Analysis Unit (Unidad de Análisis Financiero
[UAFE]), which conducts a thorough review of financial procedures related to AML/CFT and to which CI-Ecuador must
submit monthly reports. Finally, the project’s major non-EE recipients of GCF funds, sub-grantees PUCESE and FIAS,
were screened and cleared against international sanctions lists.
Concerning impact, serious breaches in prohibited practices, including ML/FT, would impact the reputation of CI and
the project. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
CI has several procedures and controls in place to prevent, mitigate, and identify risk. In order to comply with CI
AML/CTF, U.S. law, and GCF fiduciary standards, CI applies rigorous CFT/AML screening to all CI funding recipients.
CI also conducts an assessment of Prohibited Practices (PP) risks of grant recipients and includes any required
mitigation measures in its legally binding grant agreements. All EE staff and subgrantees must also undergo training
on PP (including red flags and how to report violations), and all grant and services agreements (used by both CI and
sub-grantees) must include language on compliance with the GCF Policy on Prohibited Practices, including AML/CFT.
Sub-grantees PUCESE and FIAS will receive capacity-building related to AML/CFT and prohibited practices from CI
Ecuador, and compliance with PP policies and mitigation measures is part of project monitoring, including site visits
and CI audits, throughout implementation.
To report and remedy risks, any CI employee; employee of an executing entity, grantee, partner, or vendor; or
beneficiary may report a grievance or violation of these policies anonymously online or by telephone through CI’s
Ethics Hotline. All reported grievances will be investigated and addressed per CI’s Anti-Fraud Policy & Guidelines for
Investigations. Full details can be found on CI’s website at https://www.conservation.org/about/our-policies/reporting-
illegal-or-unethical-conduct-statement. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 8 Unrealized or delayed co-financing |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Low
Description |  | 
Co-financing plays an important part in achieving the full impact of the proposed project. There is a medium risk of
delayed or unrealized co-financing for the project, because MAATE’s grant co-financing depends on the approval
processes for government budgets. However, the committed co-financing is proposed for activity A.1.1.1 and therefore,
the negative impact to the project would be limited to this activity. In addition, a portion of the co-financing committed
by MAATE is ‘in-kind’ and related to staff salaries and therefore poses a low risk of not materializing. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The project team will periodically assess the degree of risk (both likelihood and impact) that co-financing will be funded
and its associated impact on project implementation. CI will also conduct regular engagement with co-financing sources
to understand and manage this risk. In the event that co-financing is not realized, CI will try to identify alternative
sources. If that is not possible, CI would work with GCF within the framework of the project’s FAA to propose adaptive |  | 

=== PAGE 94 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87
E
management measures that may include reducing the scope of affected activities with minimal negative impact to
project objectives.
Selected Risk Factor 9 Risk of inflation
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Low
Description
Although currently decreasing, Ecuador’s inflation rate for 2022 was 3.7% according to the International Monetary
Fund’s Data Mapper (April 2023). Ecuador’s average inflation rate over the period 2013 to 2022 was 1.8% with a
maximum of 4.2% in 201764. This period includes several turbulent years for Ecuador’s economy due to fluctuations in
the global price of oil, on which Ecuador’s economy is highly reliant. The IMF’s forecast for inflation in Ecuador is 1.34%
in 2025, rising to 1.54% in 2026 through to 202865. However, given the increases in inflation globally, the risk of rising
inflation is considered a ‘medium’ risk to this project as it could impact the budget, co-financing and activity
implementation. Higher than expected inflation would increase costs across the whole project, making it harder to
achieve all of the project activities. High inflation rates would be accompanied by high interest rates at financial
institutions, which could impact the likelihood of private sector shrimp farm companies taking loans to invest in climate
smart shrimp practices (Activity 2.1.2).
Mitigation Measure(s)
To mitigate for the impacts of inflation, CI has included inflation considerations into its budget figures. The budget has
been prepared assuming an inflation rate of 3%. The 3% figure is above the IMF’s forecast but given the challenges of
inflation forecasting and recent global increases in inflation, CI has used the 3% figure out of precaution. In addition, CI
will regularly monitor inflation pressures on the project budget and continually seek to identify cost savings where
possible.
64 https://datos.bancomundial.org/indicator/FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG?locations=EC; accessed 2 June 2023
65 https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Ec uador/inflation_outlook_imf/; accessed 2 June 2023

--- Table 1 on Page 94 ---
management measures that may include reducing the scope of affected activities with minimal negative impact to
project objectives. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 9 Risk of inflation |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Low
Description |  | 
Although currently decreasing, Ecuador’s inflation rate for 2022 was 3.7% according to the International Monetary
Fund’s Data Mapper (April 2023). Ecuador’s average inflation rate over the period 2013 to 2022 was 1.8% with a
maximum of 4.2% in 201764. This period includes several turbulent years for Ecuador’s economy due to fluctuations in
the global price of oil, on which Ecuador’s economy is highly reliant. The IMF’s forecast for inflation in Ecuador is 1.34%
in 2025, rising to 1.54% in 2026 through to 202865. However, given the increases in inflation globally, the risk of rising
inflation is considered a ‘medium’ risk to this project as it could impact the budget, co-financing and activity
implementation. Higher than expected inflation would increase costs across the whole project, making it harder to
achieve all of the project activities. High inflation rates would be accompanied by high interest rates at financial
institutions, which could impact the likelihood of private sector shrimp farm companies taking loans to invest in climate
smart shrimp practices (Activity 2.1.2). |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
To mitigate for the impacts of inflation, CI has included inflation considerations into its budget figures. The budget has
been prepared assuming an inflation rate of 3%. The 3% figure is above the IMF’s forecast but given the challenges of
inflation forecasting and recent global increases in inflation, CI has used the 3% figure out of precaution. In addition, CI
will regularly monitor inflation pressures on the project budget and continually seek to identify cost savings where
possible. |  | 

=== PAGE 95 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88
F
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
248. The Environmental and Social risk screening for the project indicated that a limited and adequate Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) be conducted to identify potential project risks. This assessment resulted
in the following:
249. The project is risk category B (moderate risk).
250. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP),
included as Annex 6, includes a summary of the project and the applicable legal and institutional framework,
the risks identified, the action plan with mitigation measures and implementation modalities. Also included are a
Grievance Redress Mechanism as well as:
• Natural Habitat Protection Plan;
• Process Framework for Restriction of Access to Natural Resources;
• Plan for Afro-descendant Communities and Cholos Pescadores;
• Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7); and
• Gender Action Plan (Annex 8).
251. The project does not intend to cause negative environmental or social impacts; on the contrary, it aims to
increase the resilience of the mangrove ecosystem and benefit local communities. It is based on rights-based
and inclusive approaches, including measures to ensure the participation of vulnerable groups, such as women,
youth and others.
252. Some risks are, by their nature, beyond the control of the project. For example, climate change may impact the
project area and there are localized impacts on the mangrove ecosystem from pollution in some places. The
project includes a variety of activities to address these issues.
253. Some details of activities will be defined during the project and therefore risk screening and appropriate
mitigation measures for these will be identified as part of the project activities. Screened activities that result in
a category B risk rating will require further limited ESIAs and ESMPs to be developed as per the guidance
provided in Annex 6. This applies to:
• Activities 1.2.1 and 1.2.2: It is necessary to identify which community livelihoods activities and small-scale
enterprises to be supported in various locations near the time of the work. Once the options and locations for
their development have been prioritized, their potential impacts must be assessed.
• Activities 1.1.1: Project preparation included the identification of areas with potential for reforestation. The
resulting map (see Annex 2) defines a potential of 10,000 ha while the project includes 4,850 ha as a target, so
the detailed selection of sites for reforestation is pending. To address this, detailed reforestation plans will be
developed as part of the reforestation activities including assessment of risks and measures to avoid
environmental damage and negative social impacts.
254. Apart from those mentioned above, the most important risks and their mitigation measures are:
Environmental or Mitigation Measures
Social Risk Factor
Community • Identify all stakeholders affected by these restrictions, with special attention to
Management groups members of Afro-descendant communities, Cholos Pescadores and women-led
(AUSCEMs) could households.
impose restrictions • Consult with stakeholders on the need/measures for conservation and identify those
on access to or use measures that can lead to restrictions/economic displacement.
of natural resources • Consult with any affected stakeholders, applying a culturally appropriate and gender-
sensitive approach, to develop a socioeconomic assessment and analysis showing
and result in
quantifiable impact of restrictions on their livelihoods that can be used to inform,
economic
negotiate and identify solution options for inclusion in the refined Process Framework
displacement (see
and the Plan for Afro-Descendent Communities and Cholos Pescadores.
• Explore opportunities to maintain engagement of affected stakeholders in project
activity 1.2.1.

--- Table 1 on Page 95 ---
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
248. The Environmental and Social risk screening for the project indicated that a limited and adequate Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) be conducted to identify potential project risks. This assessment resulted
in the following:
249. The project is risk category B (moderate risk).
250. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP),
included as Annex 6, includes a summary of the project and the applicable legal and institutional framework,
the risks identified, the action plan with mitigation measures and implementation modalities. Also included are a
Grievance Redress Mechanism as well as:
• Natural Habitat Protection Plan;
• Process Framework for Restriction of Access to Natural Resources;
• Plan for Afro-descendant Communities and Cholos Pescadores;
• Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7); and
• Gender Action Plan (Annex 8).
251. The project does not intend to cause negative environmental or social impacts; on the contrary, it aims to
increase the resilience of the mangrove ecosystem and benefit local communities. It is based on rights-based
and inclusive approaches, including measures to ensure the participation of vulnerable groups, such as women,
youth and others.
252. Some risks are, by their nature, beyond the control of the project. For example, climate change may impact the
project area and there are localized impacts on the mangrove ecosystem from pollution in some places. The
project includes a variety of activities to address these issues.
253. Some details of activities will be defined during the project and therefore risk screening and appropriate
mitigation measures for these will be identified as part of the project activities. Screened activities that result in
a category B risk rating will require further limited ESIAs and ESMPs to be developed as per the guidance
provided in Annex 6. This applies to:
• Activities 1.2.1 and 1.2.2: It is necessary to identify which community livelihoods activities and small-scale
enterprises to be supported in various locations near the time of the work. Once the options and locations for
their development have been prioritized, their potential impacts must be assessed.
• Activities 1.1.1: Project preparation included the identification of areas with potential for reforestation. The
resulting map (see Annex 2) defines a potential of 10,000 ha while the project includes 4,850 ha as a target, so
the detailed selection of sites for reforestation is pending. To address this, detailed reforestation plans will be
developed as part of the reforestation activities including assessment of risks and measures to avoid
environmental damage and negative social impacts.
254. Apart from those mentioned above, the most important risks and their mitigation measures are:
Environmental or Mitigation Measures
Social Risk Factor
Community • Identify all stakeholders affected by these restrictions, with special attention to
Management groups members of Afro-descendant communities, Cholos Pescadores and women-led
(AUSCEMs) could households.
impose restrictions • Consult with stakeholders on the need/measures for conservation and identify those
on access to or use measures that can lead to restrictions/economic displacement.
of natural resources • Consult with any affected stakeholders, applying a culturally appropriate and gender-
sensitive approach, to develop a socioeconomic assessment and analysis showing
and result in
quantifiable impact of restrictions on their livelihoods that can be used to inform,
economic
negotiate and identify solution options for inclusion in the refined Process Framework
displacement (see
and the Plan for Afro-Descendent Communities and Cholos Pescadores.
• Explore opportunities to maintain engagement of affected stakeholders in project
activity 1.2.1.

--- Table 2 on Page 95 ---
 | Environmental or |  | Mitigation Measures
 | Social Risk Factor |  | 
Community
Management groups
(AUSCEMs) could
impose restrictions
on access to or use
of natural resources
and result in
economic
displacement (see |  |  | • Identify all stakeholders affected by these restrictions, with special attention to
members of Afro-descendant communities, Cholos Pescadores and women-led
households.
• Consult with stakeholders on the need/measures for conservation and identify those
measures that can lead to restrictions/economic displacement.
• Consult with any affected stakeholders, applying a culturally appropriate and gender-
sensitive approach, to develop a socioeconomic assessment and analysis showing
quantifiable impact of restrictions on their livelihoods that can be used to inform,
negotiate and identify solution options for inclusion in the refined Process Framework
and the Plan for Afro-Descendent Communities and Cholos Pescadores.
• Explore opportunities to maintain engagement of affected stakeholders in project
activity 1.2.1.

=== PAGE 96 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89
F
ESMP, risks R3.1, • In cases where economic displacement is unavoidable, ensure that stakeholders
R4.1 and RHR2). remain involved throughout the process of defining and implementing the Process
Framework for Restricting Access to Natural Resources (see Annex 6), including in the
process for obtaining FPIC.
• Seek FPIC from affected stakeholders, following an FPIC procedure that has been
previously agreed in a participatory manner and in line with CI and GCF’s ESMF
guidelines for Applying FPIC.
• Implement a Process Framework that has been agreed upon by local communities to
which it applies, including the Afro-descendent communities and Cholos Pescadores
(see Annex 6).
• Implement the project-specific Grievance Redress Mechanism and trace complaints in
the context of economic displacement to ensure satisfactory follow up and conclusion of
complaints.
Women and other • Investigate in more detail the potential adverse effects of the project on non-partners,
vulnerable groups, with special attention to vulnerable groups such as women, youth, elderly fishermen,
including those not non-affiliates of AUSCEMS, members of Afro-descendant communities and Cholos
affiliated with Pescadores.
AUSCEMs, could be • Conduct informational and awareness-raising sessions to clarify the potential benefits
of joining an AUSCEM group, especially in the context of this project.
negatively impacted
• Identify ways to ensure that the project does not cause harm to local people unwilling to
by not being able to
join an AUSCEM group and clearly communicate the efforts made to ensure this.
participate in the
same way as other
stakeholders (see More mitigation measures specifically to ensure gender equity are included in the gender
ESMP, risks RHR1 action plan. The ESMP also includes mitigation measures to address the risk of Sexual
and RHR3). Exploitation, Sexual Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEAH).
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
255. During Project preparation, a gender assessment (see Annex 8) was undertaken to understand the differential
vulnerability to, and impact of, climate change on women and men in the project area. From the findings of this
assessment and an analysis of the proposed project design, a Gender Action Plan (GAP) was developed. The
process to produce these components included a desktop review and analysis of available literature and relevant
legislation, policy and programs in the country, as well as key informant interviews, household questionnaires,
focus group discussions and consultation workshops with project stakeholders and beneficiaries.
256. The GAP (see Annex 8) identifies opportunities to close gender gaps, reduce gender-based violence (GBV) and
the included actions are largely concentrated in the support of mangrove associations where direct collaboration
with the women and men who depend on, and manage, the mangroves will occur. These include mangrove use
agreements that integrate gender considerations, tailored and specific support to women in mangrove
associations (including the two women’s associations), setting targets (50/50) for women’s and men’s benefit
from the adoption of diversified and climate resilient livelihoods options linked to mangroves, and ensuring that
project staff and delivery partners are trained on gender equity principles and the importance of mitigating gender
inequalities in the project, including gender-based violence.
257. To support implementation of the GAP, CI will employ a full-time Gender Manager to ensure robust gender
analysis and lead the mainstreaming of gender into the project. The Gender Manager will develop and deliver
appropriate capacity building for colleagues and delivery partners that is well-designed, clear, tailored to the
context, and practical. The Gender Manager will accompany project teams to the field to ground truth progress
on gender outcomes: meet with women/women’s groups, collect qualitative information, help project teams to
problem solve, propose adaptive changes and participate in report preparation. The manager will support the four
estuaries and, in particular, the social coordinators in the implementation of the GAP. The manager will also
collaborate with CI’s global gender program to ensure consistency in gender approach across the institution and
will be supported by CI’s global Gender Advisor. The Gender Manager position will be based in Guayaquil city.
258. A complex set of historical, social, cultural, and economic factors influence the project sites’ current gender norms
and inequalities. There is a lack of political representation by women in decision-making, time deficit due to mostly
reproductive labor impinging on their ability to engage in community, organizational, and project activities, and
finally high rates of gender-based violence that further highlights inequalities and is an important barrier that

--- Table 1 on Page 96 ---
ESMP, risks R3.1, • In cases where economic displacement is unavoidable, ensure that stakeholders
R4.1 and RHR2). remain involved throughout the process of defining and implementing the Process
Framework for Restricting Access to Natural Resources (see Annex 6), including in the
process for obtaining FPIC.
• Seek FPIC from affected stakeholders, following an FPIC procedure that has been
previously agreed in a participatory manner and in line with CI and GCF’s ESMF
guidelines for Applying FPIC.
• Implement a Process Framework that has been agreed upon by local communities to
which it applies, including the Afro-descendent communities and Cholos Pescadores
(see Annex 6).
• Implement the project-specific Grievance Redress Mechanism and trace complaints in
the context of economic displacement to ensure satisfactory follow up and conclusion of
complaints.
Women and other • Investigate in more detail the potential adverse effects of the project on non-partners,
vulnerable groups, with special attention to vulnerable groups such as women, youth, elderly fishermen,
including those not non-affiliates of AUSCEMS, members of Afro-descendant communities and Cholos
affiliated with Pescadores.
AUSCEMs, could be • Conduct informational and awareness-raising sessions to clarify the potential benefits
of joining an AUSCEM group, especially in the context of this project.
negatively impacted
• Identify ways to ensure that the project does not cause harm to local people unwilling to
by not being able to
join an AUSCEM group and clearly communicate the efforts made to ensure this.
participate in the
same way as other
stakeholders (see More mitigation measures specifically to ensure gender equity are included in the gender
ESMP, risks RHR1 action plan. The ESMP also includes mitigation measures to address the risk of Sexual
and RHR3). Exploitation, Sexual Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEAH).
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
255. During Project preparation, a gender assessment (see Annex 8) was undertaken to understand the differential
vulnerability to, and impact of, climate change on women and men in the project area. From the findings of this
assessment and an analysis of the proposed project design, a Gender Action Plan (GAP) was developed. The
process to produce these components included a desktop review and analysis of available literature and relevant
legislation, policy and programs in the country, as well as key informant interviews, household questionnaires,
focus group discussions and consultation workshops with project stakeholders and beneficiaries.
256. The GAP (see Annex 8) identifies opportunities to close gender gaps, reduce gender-based violence (GBV) and
the included actions are largely concentrated in the support of mangrove associations where direct collaboration
with the women and men who depend on, and manage, the mangroves will occur. These include mangrove use
agreements that integrate gender considerations, tailored and specific support to women in mangrove
associations (including the two women’s associations), setting targets (50/50) for women’s and men’s benefit
from the adoption of diversified and climate resilient livelihoods options linked to mangroves, and ensuring that
project staff and delivery partners are trained on gender equity principles and the importance of mitigating gender
inequalities in the project, including gender-based violence.
257. To support implementation of the GAP, CI will employ a full-time Gender Manager to ensure robust gender
analysis and lead the mainstreaming of gender into the project. The Gender Manager will develop and deliver
appropriate capacity building for colleagues and delivery partners that is well-designed, clear, tailored to the
context, and practical. The Gender Manager will accompany project teams to the field to ground truth progress
on gender outcomes: meet with women/women’s groups, collect qualitative information, help project teams to
problem solve, propose adaptive changes and participate in report preparation. The manager will support the four
estuaries and, in particular, the social coordinators in the implementation of the GAP. The manager will also
collaborate with CI’s global gender program to ensure consistency in gender approach across the institution and
will be supported by CI’s global Gender Advisor. The Gender Manager position will be based in Guayaquil city.
258. A complex set of historical, social, cultural, and economic factors influence the project sites’ current gender norms
and inequalities. There is a lack of political representation by women in decision-making, time deficit due to mostly
reproductive labor impinging on their ability to engage in community, organizational, and project activities, and
finally high rates of gender-based violence that further highlights inequalities and is an important barrier that

--- Table 2 on Page 96 ---
ESMP, risks R3.1,
R4.1 and RHR2). | • In cases where economic displacement is unavoidable, ensure that stakeholders
remain involved throughout the process of defining and implementing the Process
Framework for Restricting Access to Natural Resources (see Annex 6), including in the
process for obtaining FPIC.
• Seek FPIC from affected stakeholders, following an FPIC procedure that has been
previously agreed in a participatory manner and in line with CI and GCF’s ESMF
guidelines for Applying FPIC.
• Implement a Process Framework that has been agreed upon by local communities to
which it applies, including the Afro-descendent communities and Cholos Pescadores
(see Annex 6).
• Implement the project-specific Grievance Redress Mechanism and trace complaints in
the context of economic displacement to ensure satisfactory follow up and conclusion of
complaints.
Women and other
vulnerable groups,
including those not
affiliated with
AUSCEMs, could be
negatively impacted
by not being able to
participate in the
same way as other
stakeholders (see
ESMP, risks RHR1
and RHR3). | • Investigate in more detail the potential adverse effects of the project on non-partners,
with special attention to vulnerable groups such as women, youth, elderly fishermen,
non-affiliates of AUSCEMS, members of Afro-descendant communities and Cholos
Pescadores.
• Conduct informational and awareness-raising sessions to clarify the potential benefits
of joining an AUSCEM group, especially in the context of this project.
• Identify ways to ensure that the project does not cause harm to local people unwilling to
join an AUSCEM group and clearly communicate the efforts made to ensure this.
More mitigation measures specifically to ensure gender equity are included in the gender
action plan. The ESMP also includes mitigation measures to address the risk of Sexual
Exploitation, Sexual Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEAH).

=== PAGE 97 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90
F
keeps women from exercising their voice and agency in mangrove conservation. This situation is compounded
by a number of structural problems associated with education, health, the provision of utilities and limited
employment opportunities.
259. In these mangrove-dependent communities, women are more vulnerable and experience higher rates of poverty
than men. Men tend to control the main economic activity in the communities: the harvesting and sale of seafood.
Often it is men who hold formal positions of leadership within communities and fishing associations.
260. There are distinct gender differences in mangrove use and management in the northern sites versus those in the
south. In the north, women walk (often collectively) to the mangroves and are therefore more actively engaged;
Mangrove associations in the north also have ~60% women members. The south is more male dominated;
women’s access and use of the mangrove areas is constrained by distance as the mangroves are far from the
community and must be accessed by boat (often individually). Because they are not familiar with the mangroves,
they are largely absent from the associations; mangrove associations in the south have ~15% women members.
261. Women living in mangroves work long days, which include family caregiving responsibilities, harvesting or fishing
activities, cooking for the family and looking after the children. The average working day for women is around 14
hours and little societal value is placed on their caregiving or reproductive tasks. By contrast, men have much
shorter days, fishing or harvesting for between four and five hours. This means that once their day’s fishing or
harvesting is over, they are relieved from work.
262. Rates of GBV are very high (67% in project sites) and could be perpetuated/increased by climate change impacts
that result in economic disruption.
263. As a result of gender norms, men and women are impacted differently by climate related events. Rising sea levels
and flooding – the two major effects cited in justifying climate change adaptation action in these project sites –
can also have consequences like an increase in water salinity and water-borne diseases, which are likely to affect
primarily women, who tend to be responsible for collecting water for the household and caring for sick family
members. Furthermore, existing gender inequalities may be exacerbated by the dynamics of climate change in
the project area.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
264. The project will be executed by CI-Ecuador, and therefore, financial management and procurement for this project
will follow relevant CI policies and procedures, as well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master
Agreement (AMA) signed between CI and the GCF.
Financial management:
265. CI uses Unit4 Business World software suite as its enterprise resource planning (ERP) system for financial
accounting and monitoring in all its global operations. This system supports financial monitoring, reporting, human
resources, procurement, and record-keeping in line with the requirements of CI’s AMA. It supports a system of
ledger accounts to separate and track income and expenditure by donor, project, and subaward. It also provides
a coding system for monitoring and reporting of projects. In addition, all EEs and sub-grantees will be required to
submit quarterly financial reports that will be systematically reviewed by the AE and EE, respectively.
266. An annual audit of the project will be conducted by an independent external audit firm in accordance with audit
standards under U.S. GAAP and furnished to the GCF in accordance with CI’s AMA.
267. Disbursements made to CI will be recorded to the ledger account for this GCF project, which can be tracked using
the Business World system. Disbursements from the EE to sub-grantee will be made upon CI’s receipt of
acceptable progress and financial reports and any other requirements as included in the applicable grant
agreement.
268. CI has procedures and controls in place to prevent risk of prohibited practices, including ML/FT (collectively, ‘PP’).
CI applies rigorous CTF/AML screening to all CI funding recipients. CI also assesses PP risks of grant recipients
and includes mitigation measures in its grant agreements. All CI staff and subgrantees must also undergo training
on PP (including red flags and how to report violations), and all grant and services agreements (used by both CI
and sub-grantees) must include language on compliance with the GCF Policy on Prohibited Practices.
Compliance with PP policies and mitigation measures is part of project monitoring, including site visits and CI

--- Table 1 on Page 97 ---
keeps women from exercising their voice and agency in mangrove conservation. This situation is compounded
by a number of structural problems associated with education, health, the provision of utilities and limited
employment opportunities.
259. In these mangrove-dependent communities, women are more vulnerable and experience higher rates of poverty
than men. Men tend to control the main economic activity in the communities: the harvesting and sale of seafood.
Often it is men who hold formal positions of leadership within communities and fishing associations.
260. There are distinct gender differences in mangrove use and management in the northern sites versus those in the
south. In the north, women walk (often collectively) to the mangroves and are therefore more actively engaged;
Mangrove associations in the north also have ~60% women members. The south is more male dominated;
women’s access and use of the mangrove areas is constrained by distance as the mangroves are far from the
community and must be accessed by boat (often individually). Because they are not familiar with the mangroves,
they are largely absent from the associations; mangrove associations in the south have ~15% women members.
261. Women living in mangroves work long days, which include family caregiving responsibilities, harvesting or fishing
activities, cooking for the family and looking after the children. The average working day for women is around 14
hours and little societal value is placed on their caregiving or reproductive tasks. By contrast, men have much
shorter days, fishing or harvesting for between four and five hours. This means that once their day’s fishing or
harvesting is over, they are relieved from work.
262. Rates of GBV are very high (67% in project sites) and could be perpetuated/increased by climate change impacts
that result in economic disruption.
263. As a result of gender norms, men and women are impacted differently by climate related events. Rising sea levels
and flooding – the two major effects cited in justifying climate change adaptation action in these project sites –
can also have consequences like an increase in water salinity and water-borne diseases, which are likely to affect
primarily women, who tend to be responsible for collecting water for the household and caring for sick family
members. Furthermore, existing gender inequalities may be exacerbated by the dynamics of climate change in
the project area. |  | 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 264. The project will be executed by CI-Ecuador, and therefore, financial management and procurement for this project | 
 | will follow relevant CI policies and procedures, as well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master | 
 | Agreement (AMA) signed between CI and the GCF. | 
 |  | 
 | Financial management: | 
 |  | 
 | 265. CI uses Unit4 Business World software suite as its enterprise resource planning (ERP) system for financial | 
 | accounting and monitoring in all its global operations. This system supports financial monitoring, reporting, human | 
 | resources, procurement, and record-keeping in line with the requirements of CI’s AMA. It supports a system of | 
 | ledger accounts to separate and track income and expenditure by donor, project, and subaward. It also provides | 
 | a coding system for monitoring and reporting of projects. In addition, all EEs and sub-grantees will be required to | 
 | submit quarterly financial reports that will be systematically reviewed by the AE and EE, respectively. | 
 |  | 
 | 266. An annual audit of the project will be conducted by an independent external audit firm in accordance with audit | 
 | standards under U.S. GAAP and furnished to the GCF in accordance with CI’s AMA. | 
 |  | 
 | 267. Disbursements made to CI will be recorded to the ledger account for this GCF project, which can be tracked using | 
 | the Business World system. Disbursements from the EE to sub-grantee will be made upon CI’s receipt of | 
 | acceptable progress and financial reports and any other requirements as included in the applicable grant | 
 | agreement. | 
 |  | 
 | 268. CI has procedures and controls in place to prevent risk of prohibited practices, including ML/FT (collectively, ‘PP’). | 
 | CI applies rigorous CTF/AML screening to all CI funding recipients. CI also assesses PP risks of grant recipients | 
 | and includes mitigation measures in its grant agreements. All CI staff and subgrantees must also undergo training | 
 | on PP (including red flags and how to report violations), and all grant and services agreements (used by both CI | 
 | and sub-grantees) must include language on compliance with the GCF Policy on Prohibited Practices. | 
 | Compliance with PP policies and mitigation measures is part of project monitoring, including site visits and CI | 

=== PAGE 98 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91
F
internal audits, throughout project implementation. Violations of PPs, fraud, or financial misuse may be reported
anonymously online or by telephone through CI’s Ethics Hotline. All reported grievances will be investigated and
addressed per CI’s Anti-Fraud Policy & Guidelines for Investigations.
269. Violations of Prohibited Practices, fraud, or financial misuse may be reported anonymously online or by telephone
through CI’s Ethics Hotline. All reported grievances will be investigated and addressed per CI’s Anti-Fraud Policy
& Guidelines for Investigations.
Procurement:
270. All procurement for this project must follow the Procurement Process Standards as defined in the CI Procurement
Policy, which requires that all procurements of goods or services ensure the best value and comply will all donor
funding terms and conditions, and that all goods be used only for their intended purposes and consistent with
CI’s Code of Ethics and suite of anti-fraud policies. CI’s procurement standards are in line with GCF fiduciary
standards.
271. All procurement done by the EE will follow CI’s internal procurement controls and risk-mitigation measures,
including procurement planning, multi-level purchasing approvals (including AE approval over a set threshold),
quarterly reporting on procurement & equipment, periodic inventories, and post-award reviews. CI’s Grant and
Contracts Unit must approve contracts of US$ 20,000 or more awarded by CI’s Ecuador office, including for this
project.
272. CI will assess the procurement policies of any subgrantee organization conducting procurement for this project.
Consistent with CI’s Procurement Policy, Project sub-grantees that meet CI’s Procurement Process Standards
as defined in the CI Procurement Policy will use with their own procurement policy and procedures for the project;
otherwise, they will be required to use CI’s Procurement Policy for the project in whole or in part. Detailed
procurement requirements consistent with CI and GCF standards will be included in the grant agreement signed
between CI and the grantee organization. The Project’s sub-grantee PUCESE will conduct procurement to
support the implementation of its Project activities, in line with these requirements and as described in Annexes
10 and 19.
273. CI will apply mitigation measures and monitor all procurement for this Project to ensure that any procured goods
are used only for their intended purposes. It will provide training on procurement and prohibited practices for CI
staff and subgrantees and will approve annual procurement plans and all procurements over a set threshold. It
will also conduct monitoring through quarterly reporting on procurement & equipment and through periodic site
visits.
274. An indicative plan for maintenance, operation, and disposition of GCF-funded equipment procured by CI
Ecuador is found in Annex 21.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential
information.

--- Table 1 on Page 98 ---
 | internal audits, throughout project implementation. Violations of PPs, fraud, or financial misuse may be reported | 
 | anonymously online or by telephone through CI’s Ethics Hotline. All reported grievances will be investigated and | 
 | addressed per CI’s Anti-Fraud Policy & Guidelines for Investigations. | 
 |  | 
 | 269. Violations of Prohibited Practices, fraud, or financial misuse may be reported anonymously online or by telephone | 
 | through CI’s Ethics Hotline. All reported grievances will be investigated and addressed per CI’s Anti-Fraud Policy | 
 | & Guidelines for Investigations. | 
 |  | 
 | Procurement: | 
 |  | 
 | 270. All procurement for this project must follow the Procurement Process Standards as defined in the CI Procurement | 
 | Policy, which requires that all procurements of goods or services ensure the best value and comply will all donor | 
 | funding terms and conditions, and that all goods be used only for their intended purposes and consistent with | 
 | CI’s Code of Ethics and suite of anti-fraud policies. CI’s procurement standards are in line with GCF fiduciary | 
 | standards. | 
 |  | 
 | 271. All procurement done by the EE will follow CI’s internal procurement controls and risk-mitigation measures, | 
 | including procurement planning, multi-level purchasing approvals (including AE approval over a set threshold), | 
 | quarterly reporting on procurement & equipment, periodic inventories, and post-award reviews. CI’s Grant and | 
 | Contracts Unit must approve contracts of US$ 20,000 or more awarded by CI’s Ecuador office, including for this | 
 | project. | 
 |  | 
 | 272. CI will assess the procurement policies of any subgrantee organization conducting procurement for this project. | 
 | Consistent with CI’s Procurement Policy, Project sub-grantees that meet CI’s Procurement Process Standards | 
 | as defined in the CI Procurement Policy will use with their own procurement policy and procedures for the project; | 
 | otherwise, they will be required to use CI’s Procurement Policy for the project in whole or in part. Detailed | 
 | procurement requirements consistent with CI and GCF standards will be included in the grant agreement signed | 
 | between CI and the grantee organization. The Project’s sub-grantee PUCESE will conduct procurement to | 
 | support the implementation of its Project activities, in line with these requirements and as described in Annexes | 
 | 10 and 19. | 
 |  | 
 | 273. CI will apply mitigation measures and monitor all procurement for this Project to ensure that any procured goods | 
 | are used only for their intended purposes. It will provide training on procurement and prohibited practices for CI | 
 | staff and subgrantees and will approve annual procurement plans and all procurements over a set threshold. It | 
 | will also conduct monitoring through quarterly reporting on procurement & equipment and through periodic site | 
 | visits. | 
 |  | 
 | 274. An indicative plan for maintenance, operation, and disposition of GCF-funded equipment procured by CI | 
 | Ecuador is found in Annex 21. | 
 |  | 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal |  | 
 |  | 
 | No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be | 
 | disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | ☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited | 
 | entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 | • full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with | 
 | an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the | 
 | accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and | 
 | • redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential | 
 | information. | 

=== PAGE 99 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92
H
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☒ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study
☒ Annex 3 Economic analysis in spreadsheet and narrative format
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Others (specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, etc.)
☐
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project-level action plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☒ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letters (template provided)
☒ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☒ Annex 14b Term sheet for the Socio Manglar subaccount and appendices
☒ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☒ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☐ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence/evaluation report for proposals that up-scale/replicate a pilot project
☒ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed by
the entity
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)
☒ Annex 22 Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and cross cutting-
projects)66
☒ Annex 23 Implementation arrangements
☒ Annex 25 Adaptation Beneficiaries
☒ Annex 26 Example of an AUSCEM Agreement
66 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.

--- Table 1 on Page 99 ---
ANNEXES |  |  |  | 
H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study | 
☒ |  | Annex 3 | Economic analysis in spreadsheet and narrative format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 6 | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Others (specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, etc.)
☐ | 
☒ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☒ |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project-level action plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letters (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule | 
 | H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 14b | Term sheet for the Socio Manglar subaccount and appendices | 
☒ |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☐ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence/evaluation report for proposals that up-scale/replicate a pilot project | 
☒ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed by
the entity | 
☒ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment | 
☒ |  | Annex 21 | Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 22 | Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and cross cutting-
projects)66 | 
☒ |  | Annex 23 | Implementation arrangements | 
☒ |  | Annex 25 | Adaptation Beneficiaries | 
☒ |  | Annex 26 | Example of an AUSCEM Agreement | 

=== PAGE 100 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)
Oficio Nro. MAATE-SCC-2023-0535-0
Quito, D.M., 15 de noviembre de 2023
Asunto: Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Conservation International Foundation
regarding Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community Partnerships for
Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador
Señora
Mafalda duarte
Executive Director
GREEN CLIMATE FUND
En su Despacho
Dear Madam,
We refer to the project titled Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community
Partnerships for Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador in Ecuador as included in the
funding proposal submitted by Conservation International Foundation to us on October 6th,
2023.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Ministry of Environment, Water
and Ecological Transition, the National Designated Authority of Ecuador.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
1. The government of Ecuador has no-objection to the project as included in the funding
proposal;
2. The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
priorities, strategies and plans of Ecuador;
3. In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the project as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Atentamente,
Min isterio del Ambiente, Agua y Transición Ecológica
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec
1/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux

=== PAGE 101 ===
Oficio Nro. MAATE-SCC-2023-0535-0
Quito, D.M., 15 de noviembre de 2023
Documento firmado electrónicamente
Mgs. Karina Maribel Barrera Moncayo
SUBSECRETARIA DE CAMBIO CLIMÁTICO
Copia:
Señor Magíster
Diego Gonzalo Quishpe Landeta
Director de Adaptación al Cambio Climático
Señorita Ingeniera
Gabriela Jeanneth Vargas Luna
Especialista de Políticas de Cambio Climático 3
Señora Secretaria
Teresa Del Pilar Pérez Toscano
Secretaria de la Subsecretaria
gv/db
Firmado electrónicamente por:
KARINA MARIBEL
BARRERA MONCAYO
Min isterio del Ambiente, Agua y Transición Ecológica
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec
2/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux

=== PAGE 102 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Project or
programme title
Existence of Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community Partnerships for
subproject(s) to Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador
be identified
after GCF Board
approval Yes
Sector (public
or private)
Accredited
Public
entity
Environmental
Conservation International Foundation (CI)
and social
safeguards
(ESS) category
Category B
Location –
specific
location(s) of
project or target Republic of Ecuador.
country or The project activities focus on the four main estuaries with mangroves:
location(s) of Cayapas Mataje, Muisine Cojimies, Guayas and Jambeli. The project area
programme includes eight municipalities: El Guabo, Machala, Santa Rosa, Eloy Alfaro,
Muisine, San Lorenzo, Guayaquil and Naranjal.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Date of
disclosure on
Thursday, June 13, 2024
accredited
entity’s website
Language(s) of
English and Spanish
disclosure
Explanation on
Spanish is the official language of Ecuador.
language
English:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci-
ecuador---esmp---
disclosure95b281f63c7b42deb3eb7e37496adf0a.pdf?sfvrsn=d7c9c322_
0
Link to disclosure
Spanish:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci-
ecuador---esmp---es---
dCiIs Wcloesbusriete1:a 80a7f4b9754b23a43f17cb7a678828.pdf?sfvrsn=b4f5ecff_0
English:
https://www.conservation.org/gcf/projects/mangroves-for-climate
Other link(s)
Spanish:
https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro-
trabajo/programas/marino-y-costero

--- Table 1 on Page 102 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  | 
 | Project or |  |  | 
 | programme title |  |  | 
 | Existence of |  | Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community Partnerships for
Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador
Yes | 
 | subproject(s) to |  |  | 
 | be identified |  |  | 
 | after GCF Board |  |  | 
 | approval |  |  | 
 | Sector (public |  |  | 
 | or private) |  |  | 
 | Accredited |  | Public | 
 | entity |  |  | 
 | Environmental |  | Conservation International Foundation (CI)
Category B | 
 | and social |  |  | 
 | safeguards |  |  | 
 | (ESS) category |  |  | 
 | Location – |  | Republic of Ecuador.
The project activities focus on the four main estuaries with mangroves:
Cayapas Mataje, Muisine Cojimies, Guayas and Jambeli. The project area
includes eight municipalities: El Guabo, Machala, Santa Rosa, Eloy Alfaro, | 
 | specific |  |  | 
 | location(s) of |  |  | 
 | project or target |  |  | 
 | country or |  |  | 
 | location(s) of |  |  | 
 | programme |  |  | 
 | Muisine, San Lorenzo, Guayaquil and Naranjal.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Thursday, June 13, 2024 | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of |  |  | 
 | disclosure on |  |  | 
 | accredited |  |  | 
 | entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of |  | English and Spanish | 
 | disclosure |  |  | 
Explanation on
language
Link to disclosure |  |  | Spanish is the official language of Ecuador.
English:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci-
ecuador---esmp---
disclosure95b281f63c7b42deb3eb7e37496adf0a.pdf?sfvrsn=d7c9c322_
0
Spanish:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci-
ecuador---esmp---es--- | 
Other link(s) |  |  | dCiIs Wcloesbusriete1:a 80a7f4b9754b23a43f17cb7a678828.pdf?sfvrsn=b4f5ecff_0
English:
https://www.conservation.org/gcf/projects/mangroves-for-climate
Spanish: | 

=== PAGE 103 ===
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B project is
Remarks contained in “Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
(ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)”.
Date of
disclosure on
Thursday, June 13, 2024
accredited
entity’s website
Language(s) of
English and Spanish
disclosure
Explanation on
Spanish is the official language of Ecuador.
language
English:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci-
ecuador---esmp---
disclosure95b281f63c7b42deb3eb7e37496adf0a.pdf?sfvrsn=d7c9c322_
0
Link to disclosure
Spanish:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci-
eCcI uWadeobrs-i-t-ee:s m p---es---
d isclosure1a80a7f4b9754b23a43f17cb7a678828.pdf?sfvrsn=b4f5ecff_0
English:
https://www.conservation.org/gcf/projects/mangroves-for-climate
Other link(s)
Spanish:
https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro-
trabajo/programas/marino-y-costero
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B project is
Remarks contained in the “Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)
(ESIA)and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)”.
Date of
disclosure on
N/A
accredited
entity’s website
Language(s) of
N/A
disclosure
Explanation on
N/A
language
Link to disclosure N/A
OAtnhye or tlihnekr( sr)e levantN E/SAS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement
RPeomlicayr kFsr amework N(R/PAF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)
Description of
report/disclosur
Indigenous People Plan (IPP) / Thursday, June 13, 2024
e on accredited
entity’s website

--- Table 1 on Page 103 ---
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B project is | 
 | Remarks contained in “Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)”.
Thursday, June 13, 2024 | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of |  |  | 
 | disclosure on |  |  | 
 | accredited |  |  | 
 | entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of |  | English and Spanish | 
 | disclosure |  |  | 
Explanation on
language
Link to disclosure |  |  | Spanish is the official language of Ecuador.
English:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci-
ecuador---esmp---
disclosure95b281f63c7b42deb3eb7e37496adf0a.pdf?sfvrsn=d7c9c322_
0
Spanish:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci- | 
Other link(s) |  |  | eCcI uWadeobrs-i-t-ee:s m p---es---
d isclosure1a80a7f4b9754b23a43f17cb7a678828.pdf?sfvrsn=b4f5ecff_0
English:
https://www.conservation.org/gcf/projects/mangroves-for-climate
Spanish:
https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro- | 
 |  |  | trabajo/programas/marino-y-costero
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B project is | 
 | Remarks contained in the “Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | (ESIA)and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)”.
N/A | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of |  |  | 
 | disclosure on |  |  | 
 | accredited |  |  | 
 | entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of |  | N/A | 
 | disclosure |  |  | 
 | Explanation on |  | N/A | 
 | language |  |  | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | OAtnhye or tlihnekr( sr)e levantN E/SAS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement |  |  | 
 | RPeomlicayr kFsr amework N(R/PAF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Indigenous People Plan (IPP) / Thursday, June 13, 2024 | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Description of |  |  | 
 | report/disclosur |  |  | 

=== PAGE 104 ===
Language(s) of
English and Spanish
disclosure
Spanish is the official language of Ecuador, and the Government uses
Explanation on
Spanish to communicate government publications (reports, policies,
language
laws, minutes etc.) with the communities in the coastal areas.
English:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci-
ecuador---esmp---
disclosure95b281f63c7b42deb3eb7e37496adf0a.pdf?sfvrsn=d7c9c322_
0
Link to disclosure
Spanish:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci-
eCcI uWadeobrs-i-t-ee:smp---es---
d isclosure1a80a7f4b9754b23a43f17cb7a678828.pdf?sfvrsn=b4f5ecff_0
English:
https://www.conservation.org/gcf/projects/mangroves-for-climate
Other link(s)
Spanish:
https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro-
t rabajo/programas/marino-y-costero
The Plan for Afro-descendent Communities and Cholos Pescadores is
included as Appendix 5 of “Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact
Remarks Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP)”, which is the document published on the AE and CI-Ecuador’s
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
websites.
Date T hursday, June 13, 2024
The ESS documents were published in Spanish on the CI Ecuador website
on June 13, 2024. CI-Ecuador website link:
https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro-
trabajo/programas/marino-y-costero
All stakeholders who participated in the stakeholder consultation (see
Annex 7, Summary of Consultations) have been informed by email that
the document is available for consultation. An email address has been
provided where comments can be sent to the project development team.
To accommodate for those who may not have access to the internet, a
Place computer, or a reliable power source, or would prefer to consult a
physical copy of the document, CI and the Ministry of Environment,
Water and Transition of Ecuador (MAATE) will be sharing the ESS
document (Annex 6 of the Funding Proposal) by June 14, 2024 in the
following locations:
Marine, Coastal and Oceanic Direction office of MAATE. Av. Francisco de
Orellana y Justino Cornejo, Guayaquil.
nd
2 Zonal Direction of MAATE. Av. Jaime Roldos Aguilera y Jr. Coronel
centro de atención Ciudadana. Esmeraldas.

--- Table 1 on Page 104 ---
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
Language(s) of
disclosure
Explanation on |  |  | English and Spanish
Spanish is the official language of Ecuador, and the Government uses | 
language
Link to disclosure |  |  | Spanish to communicate government publications (reports, policies,
laws, minutes etc.) with the communities in the coastal areas.
English:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci-
ecuador---esmp---
disclosure95b281f63c7b42deb3eb7e37496adf0a.pdf?sfvrsn=d7c9c322_
0
Spanish:
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default-source/gcf/annex-06---ci- | 
Other link(s) |  |  | eCcI uWadeobrs-i-t-ee:smp---es---
d isclosure1a80a7f4b9754b23a43f17cb7a678828.pdf?sfvrsn=b4f5ecff_0
English:
https://www.conservation.org/gcf/projects/mangroves-for-climate
Spanish: | 
Remarks |  |  | https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro-
t rabajo/programas/marino-y-costero
The Plan for Afro-descendent Communities and Cholos Pescadores is
included as Appendix 5 of “Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan | 
 | (ESMP)”, which is the document published on the AE and CI-Ecuador’s
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
 |  |  | websites. | 
Date
Place |  |  | T hursday, June 13, 2024
The ESS documents were published in Spanish on the CI Ecuador website
on June 13, 2024. CI-Ecuador website link:
https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro-
trabajo/programas/marino-y-costero
All stakeholders who participated in the stakeholder consultation (see
Annex 7, Summary of Consultations) have been informed by email that
the document is available for consultation. An email address has been
provided where comments can be sent to the project development team.
To accommodate for those who may not have access to the internet, a
computer, or a reliable power source, or would prefer to consult a
physical copy of the document, CI and the Ministry of Environment,
Water and Transition of Ecuador (MAATE) will be sharing the ESS
document (Annex 6 of the Funding Proposal) by June 14, 2024 in the
following locations:
Marine, Coastal and Oceanic Direction office of MAATE. Av. Francisco de
Orellana y Justino Cornejo, Guayaquil.
nd
2 Zonal Direction of MAATE. Av. Jaime Roldos Aguilera y Jr. Coronel | 

--- Table 2 on Page 104 ---
disclosure


=== PAGE 105 ===
7th Zonal Direction of MAATE. Calle Vela 1323 entre 25 de Junio y Sucre
Edificio Ex Predesur - 3er piso. Machala.
Provincial Government office of Esmeraldas. Avenida 10 de Agosto entre
Bolívar y Pedro Vicente Maldonado. Esmeraldas.
Provincial Government office of Guayas. Av. Juan Illingworth 108 y Av.
Simón Bolívar. Guayaquil.
Provincial Government office of El Oro. Avenida Junin s/n y Av. 25 de
Junio. Machala.
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
Date of
accredited
N/A
entity’s Board
meeting
Date of GCF’s
Monday, July 15, 2024
NBootear: dT hmiese ftoinrmg was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

--- Table 1 on Page 105 ---
 |  |  | 7th Zonal Direction of MAATE. Calle Vela 1323 entre 25 de Junio y Sucre
Edificio Ex Predesur - 3er piso. Machala.
Provincial Government office of Esmeraldas. Avenida 10 de Agosto entre
Bolívar y Pedro Vicente Maldonado. Esmeraldas.
Provincial Government office of Guayas. Av. Juan Illingworth 108 y Av.
Simón Bolívar. Guayaquil.
Provincial Government office of El Oro. Avenida Junin s/n y Av. 25 de
Junio. Machala. | 
 | Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered |  |  | 
 |  |  | N/A | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of |  |  | 
 | accredited |  |  | 
 | entity’s Board |  |  | 
 | meeting |  |  | 

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 106
Secretariat’s assessment of FP235
Proposal name: Mangroves for Climate: Public, Private and Community
Partnerships for Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador
Accredited entity: Conservation International Foundation (CI)
Country: Ecuador
Project/programme size: Small
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
Strengths Points of caution
remarks:
Mangroves model:
The project involves
government, local communities and the
private sector in supporting community-
based enterprises and community mangrove
management teams undertaking income
generation while restoring and sustainably
managing mangroves based on a results-
based payment scheme. In addition to
mitigation benefits, the mangroves provide
ecosystem services that protect coastal
communities and upstream communities
from salinization caused by floods and sea
Community grants:
level rise.
The project is working
with a trust fund and government finance
that aims to empower local communities to
sustainably manage large areas of mangroves
via community management agreements that
grant reward payments for their
Transformation of the private sector:
management activities.
The
project will accelerate the transformation of
the shrimp industry from being a driver of
mangrove deforestation to a driver of
preservation, while shrimp farmers will be
able to access a premium price for certified
shrimp cultivation.

--- Table 1 on Page 106 ---
r | Strengths
emarks: |  |  | Points of caution | 
 | Mangroves model: |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | The project involves |  |  |  | 
 | government, local communities and the |  |  |  | 
 | private sector in supporting community- |  |  |  | 
 | based enterprises and community mangrove |  |  |  | 
 | management teams undertaking income |  |  |  | 
 | generation while restoring and sustainably |  |  |  | 
 | managing mangroves based on a results- |  |  |  | 
 | based payment scheme. In addition to |  |  |  | 
 | mitigation benefits, the mangroves provide |  |  |  | 
 | ecosystem services that protect coastal |  |  |  | 
 | communities and upstream communities |  |  |  | 
 | from salinization caused by floods and sea
Community grants:
level rise. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | The project is working |  |  |  | 
 | with a trust fund and government finance |  |  |  | 
 | that aims to empower local communities to |  |  |  | 
 | sustainably manage large areas of mangroves |  |  |  | 
 | via community management agreements that |  |  |  | 
 | grant reward payments for their
Transformation of the private sector: |  |  |  | 
 | management activities. |  |  |  | 
 | The |  |  |  | 
 | project will accelerate the transformation of |  |  |  | 
 | the shrimp industry from being a driver of |  |  |  | 
 | mangrove deforestation to a driver of |  |  |  | 
 | preservation, while shrimp farmers will be |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 107
Financial sustainability model:
The project
will help to capitalize the trust fund
subaccount on results-based payments for
community mangrove management, with
additional funding to be contributed annually
from private and government sources. The
trust fund is expected to run in perpetuity,
hence generating impact beyond project
implementation and even beyond the 20-year
Scalability and replicability:
project lifespan.
The project
may allow Ecuador to become a
demonstration site for climate-smart shrimp
farming that can be scaled and replicated
across different regions, especially due to the
project’s link with the Global Mangrove
A lliance.
2.
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal in accordance with the
term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity, and, if considered
appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in Annex II of document GCF/B.39/02.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2 .1 Project background
3.
The project background, as set out in the funding proposal, underscores the pressing
need to address the impacts of climate change on Ecuador’s coastal regions. Climate change
projections indicate increasing risks, such as sea level rise, extreme weather events and coastal
flooding, that threaten local communities and economic activities. Mangroves play a crucial role
as natural barriers against erosion and flooding, yet ongoing deforestation exacerbates these
risks. Despite recent conservation efforts, mangrove loss continues, with adverse consequences
fo r carbon sequestration and biodiversity.
4.
The proposed interventions aim to address these challenges by engaging local
communities, the private sector and government entities in the protection and restoration of the
mangroves. Through effective mangrove management and restoration, the project seeks to
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, to enhance flood protection for vulnerable coastal
populations and to improve livelihoods. It aligns with Ecuador’s national climate change
st rategies and contributes to global initiatives such as the Global Mangrove Alliance.
5.
The project’s components focus on increasing the area of mangroves under community-
based management, engaging the private sector in sustainable practices and strengthening
governance frameworks. By integrating these efforts, the project aims to achieve multiple
climate mitigation and adaptation goals, including reducing GHG emissions, protecting
ec osystems and enhancing infrastructure resilience.
6.
Moreover, the project’s alignment with the objectives of the Global Mangrove Alliance
underscores its potential for knowledge-sharing and global impact. By leveraging international
partnerships and best practices, the project aims to contribute significantly to global efforts to

--- Table 1 on Page 107 ---
 | Financial sustainability model: |  | 
 |  |  | 
 | The project |  | 
 | will help to capitalize the trust fund |  | 
 | subaccount on results-based payments for |  | 
 | community mangrove management, with |  | 
 | additional funding to be contributed annually |  | 
 | from private and government sources. The |  | 
 | trust fund is expected to run in perpetuity, |  | 
 | hence generating impact beyond project |  | 
 | implementation and even beyond the 20-year
Scalability and replicability: |  | 
 | project lifespan. |  | 
 | The project |  | 
 | may allow Ecuador to become a |  | 
 | demonstration site for climate-smart shrimp |  | 
 | farming that can be scaled and replicated |  | 
 | across different regions, especially due to the |  | 

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 108
conserve and restore mangroves, ultimately benefiting both Ecuador’s coastal communities and
th e broader global environment.
7.
The project will directly benefit 89,600 individuals through enhanced access to climate
finance, adoption of climate-smart aquaculture practices, and mangrove restoration to mitigate
landslide and flooding risks. Moreover, the long-term conservation and sustainable
management of mangroves will indirectly benefit 3.4 million people, spanning 44 per cent of
coastal provinces and 20.1 per cent of the country’s population, as a result of the climate-
re silient practices.
8.
The total mitigation impact from mangrove conservation, restoration and preservation
amounts to an estimated GHG emission reduction of 732,111 tonnes of carbon dioxide
2 2
equivalent (t CO eq) by the end of the implementation period and 4,609,470 t CO eq over the
2
project’s 20-year lifespan, equivalent to USD 3.2 per t CO eq for GCF finance. This project’s
2
estimated contribution to the nationally determined contribution (NDC) stands at 732,111 t CO
2
eq or 1.2 per cent over the project implementation period, rising to 4,609,470 t CO eq or 7.4 per
ce nt over the 20-year project duration.
9.
The proposal includes a comprehensive budget totalling USD 45.9 million, with a
significant portion (USD 36.4 million) sought from the GCF as a grant. The remaining USD 9.5
million is anticipated to be sourced from co-financing by the Ministry of Environment, Water
and Transition of Ecuador and the Conservation International Foundation (CI), in the form of
both in-kind contributions and grants.
2Co.2mponCenotm 1:p Moannegrnotv-eb ayre-caso umndpeor nefefenctti vaen aanldy csliism ate-adapted management increased,
including through community-based management (AUSCEMs), and with protected areas
implementing climate adaptation plans (total cost: USD 26 million; GCF cost: USD 19.5 million)
10.
Component 1 of the project aims to increase mangrove areas under effective and
climate-adapted management (AUSCEMs), including through community-based management
and protected areas implementing climate adaptation plans. Despite the effectiveness of
community-based stewardship in protecting mangroves, there are gaps in coverage that can be
addressed through outreach and providing assistance in organizing, planning and strengthening
relationships with government programmes that recognize AUSCEMs. The component is crucial
to ensure that existing AUSCEM associations have the organizational capacity to sustain their
ste wardship efforts.
11.
Community-based mechanisms for mangrove conservation are often economically
precarious; therefore, generating stronger local economic benefits based on mangrove
conservation is essential for ensuring sustainability. Restoration efforts under community
ste wardship will contribute to enhancing mangrove coverage and associated benefits.
12.
To achieve these goals, output 1.1 focuses on reducing flood risk for vulnerable
populations and reducing GHG emissions, through strengthening community-based mangrove
management. Activities include providing training, technical assistance and equipment to
AUSCEM groups, supporting the expansion of AUSCEMs, and assisting with the application
pr ocess for incentives under the country’s Socio Manglar (SM) programme.
13.
Output 1.2 aims to improve livelihood activities and economically productive
community businesses to incentivize participation in mangrove conservation and restoration.
This involves providing technical and business development support to mangrove community
associations, particularly focusing on women, youth and other vulnerable groups. In addition,
financial mechanisms will be established and consolidated to support micro- and small-scale

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 109
enterprises, including cash grants and assistance in accessing credit and investment from
ex isting financial institutions.
14.
Overall, these efforts seek to strengthen community-based mangrove conservation and
management, reduce deforestation, increase economic benefits for local communities and
Component 2: The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG
enhance resilience to climate change.
emissions and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase
climate resilience for other coastal populations (total cost: USD 10.2 million; GCF cost: USD 8.9
million)
15.
The project aims to engage the private sector in promoting improved shrimp production
methods to reduce mangrove deforestation and advance mangrove conservation and
restoration in Ecuador. CI is the accredited entity (AE), and it will collaborate with Ecuador’s
National Conservation Agency to provide training on sustainable shrimp production (SSP) and
promote climate-smart shrimp (CSS) farming methods, including mangrove restoration on
farms. CI will also engage consultants to help small- and medium-sized shrimp farms access
pr ivate finance.
16.
Seed funding will be provided by the Aquaculture Stewardship Council and CI to
establish a subaccount within Ecuador’s Socio Bosque Fund to support the SM programme for
the incentive payment. The project aims to catalyse investment in CSS farming methods, leading
to reduced GHG emissions, increased profitability and mangrove restoration.
17.
Technical assistance will be provided to shrimp farms for adopting SSP and CSS
standards, with a focus on sustainable intensification and mangrove restoration. The project
will facilitate partnerships and access to finance for shrimp farms transitioning to sustainable
practices, including through the Eco Business Fund. It will also establish agreements with
bu sinesses to contribute to mangrove conservation and to finance the SM programme.
18.
In addition, the project will disseminate knowledge through various platforms and
workshops, develop a marketing strategy for CSS farming, and seek to mobilize private
investment into the SM subaccount, supported by funds from the GCF. These efforts aim to
strengthen private sector engagement in mangrove conservation and restoration while
promoting SSP practices in Ecuador. With successful management, the SM subaccount is
expected to create a long-term financial mechanism that attracts private sector investment and
Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation
provides incentive payments for sustainable mangrove conservation and restoration.
and increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate change adaptation
strategies, coastal management policies and legal enforcement (total cost: USD 6.2 million; GCF
cost: USD 5.5 million)
19.
Actions by local communities and the private sector to protect mangroves and maintain
flood protection benefits as a nature-based climate change adaptation and mitigation strategy
are contingent upon the Government of Ecuador establishing the necessary governance,
regulatory and enabling conditions. These conditions are essential for deterring and controlling
illegal activities and ensuring that climate considerations are integrated into planning and
inv estment decisions.
20.
By providing better climate change and mangrove forest information to decision-makers
and stakeholders, particularly focusing on public entities, the project will directly contribute to
increasing climate knowledge for decision-making, laying the groundwork for achieving project
ou tcomes related to mangrove management and climate resilience.
21.
Improved legal and regulatory capacity, focusing on planning, preparedness and
enforcement, will support sustaining mangroves and enhancing awareness and resilience

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 110
among beneficiaries, primarily in the eight priority municipalities of the project area. This will
directly contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive
pla nning and development.
22.
To achieve these objectives, the project includes several activities under output 3.1, such
as monitoring mangrove conditions and socioeconomic impacts, integrating remote sensing and
community participation for emissions reduction monitoring, and conducting socioeconomic
impact evaluations. Output 3.2 entails harmonizing legal and regulatory frameworks at the local
and sectoral level, incorporating climate resilience and mitigation strategies, and enforcing
reg ulations with a focus on human rights.
23.
Activities under output 3.2 include supporting local governments to improve planning
instruments that integrate climate change adaptation and mangrove management,
strengthening regulatory frameworks and law enforcement by relevant agencies, and
generating proposals for regulatory changes in various sectors. This will involve analysing legal
frameworks, facilitating discussions on legal reforms and providing training to judiciary staff. In
addition, the project will develop an online and mobile communications application (app) for
reporting deforestation and other impacts on mangroves, thereby enhancing transparency and
enforcement efforts.
III. Assessment against investment criteria
Scale: N/A
3. 1 Impact potential
24.
The project aims to directly benefit 89,600 individuals, with an additional 3.4 million
indirect beneficiaries. Furthermore, it targets an estimated GHG emission reduction of
4,6 09,470 t CO
2
eq over its 20-year duration.
25.
The AUSCEM project seeks to address both adaptation and mitigation challenges posed
by climate change, particularly in vulnerable coastal regions. By leveraging the protective
capacities of mangrove ecosystems, the project endeavours to yield significant benefits for both
local communities and the global environment. This project represents a multifaceted approach
to addressing climate change impacts at both the local and the global scale, highlighting the
crucial role of mangrove ecosystems in fostering resilience and mitigating environmental
degradation. The project offers both adaptation and mitigation benefits, focusing on reducing
flo oding
A
r
d
is
a
k
p
s
t a
an
ti
d
o n
en
i
h
m
a
p
n
a
ci
c
n
t
g
s:
l ivelihoods through improved mangrove management.
26.
Direct adaptation benefits include reduced flooding risk and
increased resilience for vulnerable populations, while there are a number of indirect adaptation
benefits for selected municipalities with high mangrove cover and populations at risk of
flo oding, including:
(a)
Potential benefits for 89,600 people in mitigating flood risks, according to flood risk
modelling estimates;
(b)
A USD 280 million per year reduction in economic asset losses caused by extreme
climate-related disasters;
(c)
Approximately 3.4 million indirect beneficiaries from improved planning processes in
mangrove-rich municipalities;
(d)
41,500 individuals (50 per cent female, 50 per cent male) expected to adopt climate-
resilient livelihoods or experience reduced flood risk;
(e)
156,633 hectares of mangroves protected and strengthened, covering all of Ecuador’s
mangroves; and

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 111
(f)
Restoration efforts covering protected areas, sustainable land-use programmes and
s
M
h
i
r
t
i
i
m
ga
p
t i
fa
o
r
n
m
im
s.
pacts:
27.
Mitigation benefits arise from the decreased GHG emissions
resulting from a reduction in mangrove deforestation and an increase in carbon sequestration
2
from restored mangroves, amounting to an estimated GHG emission reduction of 732,111 t CO
2
eq during the implementation period and 4,609,470 t CO eq over the 20-year project lifespan.
Scale: N/A
3. 2 Paradigm shift potential
28.
This project aims to transform Ecuador’s approach to valuing and utilizing critical
natural infrastructure, particularly mangrove ecosystems, to protect coastal communities from
flooding. By integrating the adaptation and mitigation benefits of mangroves into governance
and economic frameworks, the project offers an innovative solution to reducing GHG emissions
and enhancing the livelihoods of vulnerable populations. It addresses the current
undervaluation of climate risks and ecosystem services provided by mangroves, which is the
res ult of inadequate information, institutional coordination and private sector investment.
29.
The project employs a multifaceted strategy, including strengthening public sector
frameworks, fostering public–private partnerships and empowering local communities, with a
focus on leveraging the “green infrastructure” of mangroves. This approach is cost-effective and
scalable, and includes lessons, guidance and tools that can be used for other coastal
communities threatened by climate change. Comprehensive monitoring and reporting
mechanisms will facilitate learning and knowledge-sharing throughout the project, with mid-
ter m and final evaluations to identify lessons learned and disseminate findings.
30.
The project aims to create an enabling environment and policy framework by
strengthening regulatory frameworks and fostering dialogue and collaboration across sectors at
the national and subnational level. Capacity-building initiatives will empower local communities
to participate in innovative business models and to engage in land-use planning processes with
local government. The project emphasizes consensus-building among stakeholders through
participatory processes, facilitating agreements for the sustainable management of mangroves.
Private sector participation will be enhanced through support for land-use planning and the
ad option of climate-smart practices, particularly mangrove conservation and restoration.
31.
The project focuses on scaling up successful mangrove conservation and restoration
activities in Ecuador, addressing the lack of basic land-use planning instruments in the project
area. Participatory planning processes will be facilitated, documented and shared with the
national government, with recommendations for legal and regulatory adjustments as needed.
Scale: N/A
3. 3 SEnuvsitraoinnmaebnleta dl ceov-beelonpefmitse: nt potential
32.
The project aims to reduce deforestation, enhance
restoration and improve management practices across Ecuador’s entire mangrove area, which
spans 156,633 hectares. In addition to mitigating climate change and reducing flood risks,
mangroves offer further ecosystem services; for example, they support biodiversity
conservation, acting as habitats for numerous plant and bird species. Mangroves also serve as
vital nursing grounds for fisheries, fostering the spawning, breeding and early development of
various fish species. Thus mangroves play a significant role in fish production and provide
substantial economic value through fisheries-related ecosystem services. The total ecosystem
service value of mangroves, including biodiversity and other services, is estimated to be
substantial, providing essential benefits to local economies.

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 112
Social co-benefits:
33.
In addition to mitigating flood risks, the project will yield various
social co-benefits, particularly for mangrove-dependent communities and associations, as
fol lows:
(a)
Improved social cohesion and organizational capacity among 60 associations with
AUSCEMs, which will enhance the ability of communities to engage with government
stakeholders, resolve internal conflicts and develop additional community activities;
(b)
Enhanced mangrove management and planning are likely to integrate social and
environmental considerations, including water management and waste disposal,
benefiting human health and well-being; and
(c)
Collaborative efforts to control illegal activities in mangrove areas between community-
based associations and government authorities will enhance local security, generating
c
E
o
c
l
o
la
n
t
o
e
m
ra
i
l
c
b
c
e
o
n
-
e
b
fi
e
t
n
s.
e fits:
34.
Mangrove conservation and restoration offer a cost-effective
solution for climate change adaptation, generating economic benefits for the national and local
government, the private sector and communities by avoiding the costs of extreme climate
events. The shrimp production sector stands to benefit by accessing new markets through
sustainable and CSS production, leading to increased export revenue and employment
op portunities.
35.
Communities will experience reduced flooding, along with minimized impacts on
infrastructure, housing, crops and livelihoods. Diversification of livelihoods and adoption of
adaptive fishing techniques will enhance the resilience, economic stability and food security of
marginalized coastal fishing communities. Mangrove ecosystems form the foundation for
diversified local economies, with artisanal fishing playing a significant role in sustaining
liv elihoo
G
d
e
s
n
a
d
n
e
d
r -
c
s
o
e
n
n
t
s
ri
i
b
ti
u
v
t
e
in
d
g
e
t
v
o
e
m
lo
a
p
r
m
in
e
e
n
fi
t
s
i
h
m
er
p
i
a
es
c
.
t :
36.
The project will directly contribute to
empowering women and other vulnerable groups in economic activities and advancing their
participation and leadership in organizations and enterprises, ensuring a gender-sensitive
approach to development initiatives.
Scale: N/A
3. 4 Needs of the recipient
37.
Ecuador has experienced notable economic growth from 2007 and 2018, resulting in a
reduction in the levels of poverty and inequality and the ongoing expansion of the middle class.
However, the economy’s heavy reliance on the oil sector presents a significant vulnerability,
pa rticularly evident during periods of low oil prices and the appreciation of the US dollar.
38.
With over 3,630 km of coastline, Ecuador’s five coastal provinces are home to
approximately 54 per cent of the population. These areas face significant risks from sea level
rise, saltwater intrusion, storm surges, flooding and storms. Coastal regions of Ecuador are
disproportionately affected by poverty, with 45 per cent of the population in the project area
living below the extreme poverty line. Unsafe housing conditions persist due to rapid
ur banization and persistent poverty.
39.
The challenges of coastal development are compounded by the threats of climate
change, yet Ecuador lacks an integrated plan to protect mangroves and wetlands from the
combined impacts of sea level rise and intensified storms. The project addresses these pressing
needs by aligning with Ecuador’s national climate change strategy and plan, with the aim of
supporting the national and local government, coastal communities and crucial economic
sectors such as shrimp farming and fisheries.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 113
Scale: N/A
3. 5 Country ownership
40.
The project is in alignment with the NDC in terms of contributing to both mitigation and
adaptation goals through the aim of protecting mangrove ecosystems. The project is also aligned
to other national policies, including the national climate change strategy, the conservation of the
national forest estate, and REDD+ efforts. Moreover, the project is linked to the national
measurement, reporting and verification and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems for
NDC implementation; thus the results will be aggregated into the national biennial transparency
reports that the national government will submit under the United Nations Framework
Co nvention on Climate Change.
41.
In addition, country ownership is firmly established through active government
participation in project management structures. Both the Ministry of Environment, Water and
Ecological Transition and the Vice-ministry of Aquaculture and Fisheries will be part of the
project management advisory committee and the technical committees guiding each project
component. This involvement enhances ownership and promotes awareness of the
technological solutions proposed by the project, setting the foundation for replication and
scalability in the future.
Scale: N/A
3. 6 Efficiency and effectiveness
42.
The project provides the most value of the scenarios considered over both the project
implementation period (6.5 years) and the project lifespan (20 years), and it gives a high
benefit-to-cost ratio (8:1). The project is expected to generate USD 299 million of economic
value over and above the “without project” scenario over the 20-year project lifespan. As such,
the project as designed provides excellent value for money because it will generate significant
benefits to society over both the implementation period (6.5 years) and the expected project
lifespan (20 years).
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies
4. 1 Environmental and social safeguards
43.
The project aims to achieve GHG emission reductions while providing flood protection
and enhancing the livelihoods of the communities through coordinated efforts to protect and
restore the mangrove ecosystem in Ecuador. The project interventions are intended to have
positive impacts on people and the environment. Any unintended adverse impacts are expected
to be minor and site-specific, and can be managed through careful design and standard
mitigation measures. The environmental co-benefits due to reduced deforestation, restoration
and management of the mangrove ecosystem include enhanced habitats, particularly for bird
and fish species, and enhanced biodiversity and ecosystem services. The social co-benefits
include reduced flood risks, improved capacity for mangrove management and better human
he alth a
E
n
n
d
v
w
ir
e
o
ll
n
-b
m
e
e
in
n
g
t
.
a l and social risk category and safeguards instrument.
44.
The project has
been classified as environmental and social (E&S) risk category B. The Secretariat confirms the
categorization and that it is within the AE’s E&S risk accreditation level. Since the interventions
are several and located in multiple sites involving various communities and development
partners, and are not yet identified, the AE has prepared an environmental and social impact
assessment and an environmental and social management plan (ESMP) which together identify
the potential risks and impacts and possible mitigation measures and set out the procedures for
assessing and managing E&S risks and impacts of the individual interventions (subprojects).

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 114
45.
Compliance with GCF’s Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) Standards
46.
The following paragraphs describe the project’s compliance with the GCF interim ESS
sta ndar
E
ds
S
:
S 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and
impacts.
47.
An environmental and social impact assessment and ESMP (included as annex 6 to the
funding proposal) provide a summary of the project activities and outcomes and the applicable
legal and institutional framework, the biophysical and social environment, the identified
potential risks and impacts, the mitigation measures and action plan, and the implementation
and monitoring mechanisms by which the project will be implemented. The main risk pertains
to potential restriction or loss of access to mangrove resources for some groups or individuals
resulting in economic displacement. However, economic displacement, if any, is expected to be
minor because the planning and management of mangrove areas will be undertaken by the
co mmun
E
i
S
ti
S
e
2
s
:
t
L
h
a
e
b
m
o
s
u
e
r
lv
a
e
n
s,
d
w
w
h
o
o
r
a
k
r
i
e
n
t
g
h
c
e
o
t
n
ra
d
d
it
it
i
i
o
o
n
n
s
a
.
l users and beneficiaries of the resource.
48.
The project will mostly involve the community
members themselves implementing the activities under the project. However, those who will be
working on the subprojects may be exposed to drowning hazards, poisonous animals and
disease vectors. Mitigation measures will include assessing the health and safety risks to
workers and developing prevention and emergency response planning for these activities. The
project’s screening procedure also includes questions regarding whether the subproject has a
risk of potentially involving or lead to working conditions that do not meet national or
international labour laws and regulations. In this regard, the project will ensure the health and
safety of subproject-related workers and protect workers’ rights. Further, the project also
ex clude
E
s
S
a
S
ct
3
i
:
v i
R
ti
e
e
s
s
o
t
u
h
r
a
c
t
e
m
e
i
f
g
f
h
ic
t
i
i
e
n
n
c
c
lu
y
d
a
e
n
t
d
h e
p
u
o
s
ll
e
u
o
ti
f
o
fo
n
r
p
ce
r
d
e v
la
e
b
n
o
ti
u
o
r
n
o
.
r child labour.
49.
The project is not expected to
contribute to pollution but rather will support farms to reduce the use of materials that could
generate and discharge pollutants to the ecosystem. Hence, the project’s activities are expected
to lessen the pollution caused by the shrimp aquaculture farms and improve their resource
efficiency approaches. The project’s activities include technical assistance for the development
an d pro
E
m
S
o
S
t
4
io
:
n
C o
o
m
f C
m
SS
u
a
n
q
it
u
y
a c
h
u
e
l
a
tu
lt
r
h
e
,
p
s
r
a
a
fe
ct
t
i
y
c e
a
s
n
.
d security.
50.
The mangrove
restoration/reforestation activity of the project may expose community members to physical
hazards, poisonous animals and disease vectors, given that mangrove forests are home to some
potentially dangerous animals and vectors that may result in diseases such as malaria, dengue,
leptospirosis and vibriosis. Community health, safety and security risk assessments will be
conducted, and community health, safety and security plans will be implemented on each of the
subprojects. The measures that will be implemented include first aid training for all project staff
an d guid
E
a
S
n
S
c
5
e
:
o
L
n
a n
h
d
o w
ac
t
q
o
u
a
i
d
s
d
it
r
i
e
o
s
n
s
a
c
n
om
d
m
in
u
v
n
o
i
l
t
u
ie
n
s
t
’
a
s
r
a
y
fe
r
t
e
y
s
r
e
e
t
l
t
a
l
t
e
e
m
d
e
c
n
on
t.
cerns.
51.
The AE has determined that
the project would not involve acquisition of land but could potentially result to restriction or
loss of access for some groups or individuals to mangrove resources. A process framework for
restriction of access to natural resources is included as procedural guidance should community
associations put in place restrictions on access to the mangrove resources for both members
and non-members of these associations. The framework includes eligibility criteria, measures to
ass ist af
E
fe
S
c
S
t
6
ed
: B
p
i
e
o
o
d
p
i
l
v
e
e
,
r
a
s
n
i
d
ty
a
c
c
o
o
n
n
s
fl
e
i
r
c
v
t
a
re
ti
s
o
o
n
lu
a
ti
n
o
d
n
s
a
u
n
s
d
t
c
a
o
in
m
a
p
b
l
l
a
e
in
m
t m
an
e
a
c
g
h
e
a
m
ni
e
sm
nt
.
of living natural
resources.
52.
The AE has determined the applicability of ESS6 given that the project will support
various forest use and conservation activities that may take place in and/or around protected
areas and buffer zones. The project is not expected to result in the introduction of invasive
species of flora and fauna, since the project aims to use only native species and enhance the
ecosystem services that mangrove forests provide. The project includes mangrove restoration

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 115
activities using native and locally sourced species within the areas managed by the AUSCEMs,
some of which are within protected areas. Additional restoration activities will also take place
on private shrimp farms. The project will sign conservation agreements with the local
communities that are to be supported by the project, particularly those that will oversee
establishing forestry units and conduct reforestation activities. Assessment of the
environmental, social and economic viability of the restoration/reforestation activities will be
conducted to ensure that the activities are not only technical feasible but are environmentally
ap propriate, socially beneficial and economically viable.
53.
The application of the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy takes into consideration Afro-
Ecuadorians and cholo artisanal fisher communities who are located within the project area. In
addition to mainstreaming their engagement throughout the main funding proposal documents,
the Plan for Afro-descendent Communities and Cholos Pescadores provides a specific
instrument for ensuring that the rights of these groups are considered and strengthened
throughout and beyond the project life cycle. In the preparation of the funding proposal,
consultations were undertaken with both Indigenous Peoples and local communities, with
outcomes included in the plan. In line with their roles and functions, the Indigenous Peoples
Ad visor
E
y
S
G
S
r
8
o
:
u
C
p
u
i
l
s
t u
av
r
a
a
i
l
l a
h
b
e
l
r
e
i t
t
a
o
g
p
e
r
.
ovide advice to the AE and executing entities (EEs).
54.
The project is not expected to implement activities that might
affect cultural heritage. As part of its exclusion list, it will also not support activities that will
“involve the removal, alteration, or disturbance of any non-replicable or critical cultural
heritage, or the use of intangible cultural heritage without the free, prior and informed consent
of the co
S
m
ex
m
u
u
a
n
l
i
e
ti
x
e
p
s
l
t
o
o
i t
w
at
h
i
o
o
m
n,
i
a
t
b
b
u
e
s
lo
e
n
a
g
n
s.
d
”
harassment (SEAH).
55.
The revised GCF Environmental
and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 requires safeguarding from SEAH in GCF-
financed activities. The AE provided information on SEAH safeguards during the proposal
development and outlined the SEAH risks in the ESMP, as well as providing some SEAH
mitigation measures in the gender action plan. The AE is committed to ensuring a safe, trusted
and respectful environment within its organization and global offices, as well as in its
programmes and projects. This is in alignment with the CI SEAH policy which is applicable to its
projects. The project recognizes potential SEAH risks, especially community engagements that
will involve working directly with marginalized and vulnerable groups/communities. The AE
will ensure that, in cases where SEAH incidents occur (or have a high probability of occurri ng),
the rights and dignity of survivors are upheld in a confidential and gender-responsive manner.
Th e AE h
Im
as
p
t
l
h
e
e
m
re
e
f
n
o
t
r
a
e
t
i
i
d
o
e
n
n
a
ti
r
f
r
ie
a
d
n
p
ge
o
m
ten
e
t
n
ia
ts
l SEAH risks and mitigation measures in the ESMP.
56.
. The project will have a project steering committee
that will provide guidance and support management regarding project implementation. A
project management advisory committee will also be established to provide advice on technical
matters. CI Ecuador will be the EE for all activities of this project and will be responsible for
project execution, management and reporting of project’s activities. A project management unit
will also be established and will be responsible for overall coordination, management and
implementation of the project on the ground. The project will have dedicated full-time staff,
including a safeguards manager and a gender manager among other full-time staff who will be
responsible for safeguards and gender-related matters. An estuary field unit will be established
in each of the project’s four target estuaries to be directly involved in the daily activities of the
loc al ass
S
o
t
c
a
i
k
a
e
ti
h
o
o
n
l
s
d
.
er engagement and information disclosure.
57.
The AE has engaged
stakeholders through workshops and targeted meetings at the national and local level. The
consultation process involved key project stakeholders such as the men and women of local
mangrove associations and other disadvantaged or vulnerable stakeholders. Community
organizations managing AUSCEMs were also involved. The issues raised in the consultation
process were considered in the development of the project. A stakeholder engagement plan has

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 116
been prepared to identify stakeholders, define participation strategies, establish procedures and
me thod
G
ol
r
o
i
g
e
i
v
e
a
s
n
, a
c
n
e
d
r
i
e
d
d
e
r
n
e
t
s
if
s
y
m
is
e
su
ch
es
a n
an
is
d
m
c o
(
n
G
c
R
e
M
rn
)
s
.
that could affect project implementation.
58.
The project has described a project-level GRM
that will be promoted during the awareness-raising and capacity-building activities of the
project. It describes the types of complaints that can be addressed, who can raise a complaint,
the contact points at the community level, and the responsible authorities in handling
complaints. The GRM also describes the ability for stakeholders to access CI’s Ethics Hotline that
employees, grantees and other partners and beneficiaries can access to report incidents
anonymously. The GRM also allows for stakeholders to access the GCF’s Independent Redress
Mechanism. In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF Indigenous Peoples Focal
Point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made.
4. 2 Gender policy
59.
The AE provided a gender assessment and action plan with the funding proposal, and
therefore complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy. The assessment report
presents information on the differential impact of and vulnerability to climate change for
women and men in the targeted project area. The gender assessment is based on secondary
data, as well as consultation workshops that were held between 2016 and 2019. However, the
majority of the secondary data is from outdated sources (i.e. 2010–2012). The Secretariat
therefore recommends that, during early project implementation, the AE may need to make
some revisions to the documents in annex 8 of the funding proposal if there are any major
changes in the demographics and/or socioeconomic statuses that may have a bearing on this
sp ecific project.
60.
The gender action plan for the project outlines various interventions in order to ensure
that anticipated gender outcomes are realized. The emphasis is on interventions that will aim at
increasing women’s participation in ensuring diversified and climate-resilient livelihood
options in mangroves, as well as increasing women’s leadership, skills building within
associations and gender quotas, among other things. The Secretariat recommends and suggests
that the AE include the following provisions: (i) engage local women and fisherwomen in
participatory project planning and implementation, including utilizing their knowledge of
marine and coastal resources in assessments, and their traditional practices in natural resource
management; (ii) ensure that women-led businesses have improved financial and market access
and profitability, and address barriers within families and households by involving men; (iii)
build critical awareness among women and disadvantaged groups on their rights as women and
fisherfolk; and (iv) define common goals and develop strategic alliances between women’s
groups and other organizations/associations for more effective advocacy for policy change.
Gender balance should be considered when forming stakeholder groups; this may involve
including female minority leaders and managers to encourage participation and capacity-
building. Also, the AE needs to ensure that financial leakage is eliminated and that financial
resources actually reach the needy, poor, vulnerable and disadvantaged communities including
women and girls.
44.3.3.1. ROvisekrasl l programme assessment (medium risk)
61.
The project aims to coordinate efforts across the public, private and community sectors
to protect and restore mangroves in Ecuador. This initiative plans to reduce mangrove loss,
2
resulting in a reduction in GHG emissions amounting to 4.6 Mt CO eq over the project lifespan.
It will also accelerate mangrove recovery to enhance flood protection for 89,600 people and

--- Table 1 on Page 116 ---
 | 
nonymously. The GRM also allows for stakeholders to access the GCF’s Independent Red | 

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 117
improve the livelihoods of 41,500 people. The project activities are structured around three
main components: (i) reducing flood risks and increasing resilience while also reducing GHG
emissions and increasing sequestration; (ii) engaging the private sector in emission reductions
and providing financial support for mangrove conservation; and (iii) creating conditions to
sustain reductions in mangrove deforestation and increase restoration efforts by strengthening
governance and coastal management policies. The project, with a total cost of USD 45.93 million,
will be funded by USD 36.4 million from the GCF as grant, with additional co-financing totalling
4 U .3 S . D 2. 9.5A3 cmcrilelidointe (dgr eannttist yan/edx ienc-kuitnidn)g feonr tai tcyo c-fainpaanbciilnitgy r taot ieox oefc 1u:t0e.2 t6h.e current programme
(low risk)
62.
CI, through its CI-GCF agency, will serve as the AE with CI Ecuador overseeing project
execution. With a track record in conservation spanning three decades and covering Galapagos,
marine/coastal regions, Andes Choco and the Amazon, CI has a history of supporting the
creation and management of protected areas and collaborating with artisanal fisher
associations for sustainable resource management. GCF has collaborated with CI through
previous projects (i.e. FP158 and FP026) in addressing mitigation, adaptation and sustainable
4 li . v 3. e 3 l . ihooPdrso ignr aAmfrimcae. -specific execution risks (medium risk)
Security risk
63.
: The Secretariat notes that there are reports of threats from criminal
gangs engaging in violent crimes and illicit activities across Ecuador. The coastal areas,
particularly Guayaquil, are reportedly entangled in the cocaine trade, with drug traffickers
exploiting weak law enforcement and port vulnerabilities to smuggle drugs, exacerbating
security concerns in the country, potentially disrupting project implementation. The AE also
acknowledges these challenges posed by criminal gangs operating in remote mangrove areas
and the exploitation of Ecuador’s coastal areas for cocaine trafficking, underscoring potential
impacts on project activities. In its mitigation plan, the AE has developed a security plan (annex
6, ESMP appendix 11), and CI’s Safety and Security Director will conduct a security assessment
and develop a mitigation plan during project startup. The mitigation measures will include pre-
activity community engagement, hostile environment awareness training and ensuring easy
ide ntific
P
a
o
ti
l
o
it
n
i c
o
a
f
l
C
i
I
n
’s
s t
s
a
ta
b
f
i
f
l
.
i ty:
64.
The political landscape in Ecuador has been characterized by
instability in the past and remains unstable following the October 2023 election. Newly elected
President Noboa was voted into office without a majority in the National Assembly. To secure
political stability, the President formed a coalition with two other political parties in the radical
left and conservatives. Nonetheless, CI’s 20 years of experience operating in Ecuador’s political
context provide a robust foundation for implementing mitigation measures. CI has strong
relationships with local and provincial government officials, and it is expected that this will help
to deliver proactive engagement with various stakeholders, including local communities, project
pa rtners
P r
a
o
n
j
d
e
r
c
e
t
l
v
e
i
v
a
a
b
n
i
t
l i
a
t
u
y
t
(
h
a
o
n
ri
d
t i
c
e
o
s,
n
t
c
o
e
h
s
e
s
l
i
p
o n
a
a
d
l
d
i
r
ty
es
)
s
:
political challenges.
65.
The use of grants (i.e. 100 per cent
concessionality) is justified given the country context where public and private funding for
mangrove conservation and restoration efforts is limited and insufficient. Vulnerable
populations in Ecuador are directly exposed to heightened flood risks exacerbated by climate
change, and they lack adaptive capacity due to poverty. Grant funding is therefore warranted to
create the enabling conditions for sustaining capacity and incentivizing private sector
investments in mangroves, ensuring the integration of climate resilience measures and fostering
long-term sustainability.

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 118
4.3.4. Compliance risk (medium risk)
66.
Ecuador is not currently subject to United Nations Security Council resolutions, nor is it
currently identified on the Financial Action Task Force lists of high-risk jurisdictions or
jurisdictions under increased monitoring relating to anti-money laundering (AML) and
co untering the financing of terrorism (CFT).
67.
The funding proposal noted a risk of criminal gangs operating in project areas and rated
the probability as “medium”. The mitigating measures described in the security plan include
staff training, mapping of high-risk areas, and a country threat and vulnerability assessment, as
well as cooperation with local partners and authorities. The funding proposal also noted that
project areas are located along a drug shipping route. The AE provided further information on
its AML/CFT controls in annex 20 to the funding proposal and confirmed that its AML/CFT
po licies include sanctions screening of subgrantees and EE (CI Ecuador) employees.
68.
Furthermore, as the political and security situation in Ecuador has evolved since the
proposal was first submitted, the AE confirmed that the security plan has been updated
acc ordingly, with additional security costs including in the budget.
69.
Given the aforementioned risks, as well as the ongoing uncertainty within Ecuador, this
p
4.
r
3
o
.5
j
.
e ct iGsC dFe epmoretdf otoli ob ec omnecdeinutmra rtiisokn f rroismk a( lcoowm rpilsiakn)c e perspective.
70.
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in
t
4
e
.3
r
.6
m
.
s ofR reecsoumlt mareena daantdi osnin gle proposal is immaterial.
71. Summary risk assessment Rationale
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.
Overall programme Medium
The funding proposal has an overall risk
Accredited entity (AE)/executing assessment of Medium based on the issues
Low
entity (EE) capability highlighted. It is recommended that the Board
Project-specific execution Medium consider the above factors in its decision.
GCF portfolio concentration Low
Compliance Medium
4. 4 Fiduciary
72.
CI, through its CI-GCF agency, will serve as the AE for the project. CI-GCF will also be
responsible for providing support and guidance to the EE; monitoring project results and
ou tputs; reporting to the GCF; and project closure and evaluation.
73.
CI will self-execute this project, acting through its country office in Ecuador (referred to
in this proposal as “CI” or “CI Ecuador”), which will be the EE for all project activities.
74.
Therefore, financial management and procurement for this project will follow relevant
CI policies and procedures, as well as relevant provisions in the accreditation master agreement
(A MA) between CI and the GCF.
75.
An annual audit of the project will be conducted by an independent external audit firm
in accordance with audit standards under United States Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles and provided to the GCF in accordance with CI’s AMA.

--- Table 1 on Page 118 ---
7 | 1. Summary risk assessment
It is recommended that the Board con |  | si | d | Rationale
er the above factors in its decision. | 
 |  |  |  | The funding proposal has an overall risk
assessment of Medium based on the issues
highlighted. It is recommended that the Board
consider the above factors in its decision. |  | 
Overall programme |  | Medium |  |  |  | 
Accredited entity (AE)/executing
entity (EE) capability |  | Low |  |  |  | 
Project-specific execution |  | Medium |  |  |  | 
GCF portfolio concentration |  | Low |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 119
76.
Disbursements made to CI will be recorded to the ledger account for this GCF project,
which can be tracked using the Business World system. Disbursements from the EE to
subgrantees will be made upon CI’s receipt of acceptable progress and financial requirements as
inc luded in the applicable grant agreement.
77.
All procurement for this project must follow the procurement process standards defined
in CI’s procurement policy, which requires that all procurement of goods or services ensures the
best value and complies with all donor funding terms and conditions, and that all goods will be
used only for their intended purposes and consistently with CI’s code of ethics and suite of anti-
fraud policies. CI’s procurement standards are in line with the GCF fiduciary standards.
4. 5 Results monitoring and reporting
78.
As a cross-cutting project, the funding proposal aims to achieve a combination of
mitigation and adaptation outcomes spanning three GCF results areas: forestry and land use for
mitigation; most vulnerable people and communities, and ecosystems and ecosystems services
for adaptation. The expected mitigation outcome is an estimated GHG emission reduction of
2 2
4,609,470 t CO eq over the project’s 20-year lifespan and 732,111 t CO eq by the end of the
implementation period. The expected adaptation beneficiaries amount to 89,600 and 3.4 million
direct and indirect beneficiaries respectively. The AE submitted the necessary annex to
de monstrate the calculation methods used for these estimates.
79.
The theory of change has been improved and refined to clearly articulate the results
chain that connects the proposed activities, outputs, outcomes and impact. It covers pathways
tha t will lead to the expected climate outcomes and co-benefits.
80.
The logical framework is consistent with the requirements of the Integrated Results
Management Framework. The project is expected to realize its paradigm shift potential through
a combination of building community knowledge and resources for mangrove management and
livelihoods, strengthening the enabling environment for mangrove management, and
strengthening collaboration between the private sector and government on mangrove
protection and restoration. Core indicator 2 (adaptation beneficiaries), supplementary indicator
2.1 (adoption of climate-resilient livelihood options), supplementary indicator 3.1 (change in
expected losses), core indicator 4 (natural resources brought under improved management
practices), supplementary indicator 4.1(natural resources restored) and core indicator 1 (GHG
emissions reduced) have all been incorporated into the logical framework and relevant means
of verification, targets and assumptions have been specified.
81.
The M&E plan, which includes indicator-specific approaches for data collection and data
sources, and an evaluation plan, are well provided for in the project budget and AE fees
respectively. The budget allocation for the M&E activities is consistent with the requirements of
the GCF Evaluation Policy.
4. 6 Legal assessment
82.
The AMA was signed with the AE on 13 July 2017, and was amended and restated on 15
Au gust 2022, which became effective on 17 August 2022, for the second accreditation term.
83.
The AE has provided a legal certificate confirming that it has obtained all internal
approvals, and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project pursuant to clause
4.1 3 of the AMA.
84.
The proposed project will be implemented in Ecuador, a country in which GCF is not
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 10
Page 120
assessed. The GCF Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities and a
ba ckground note to the Government of the Republic of Ecuador on 23 February 2023.
85.
It is recommended that any approval by the Board is made subject to the following
co nditions:
(a)
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and
(b)
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page 121
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP235
Proposal name: Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community
Partnerships for Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador
Accredited entity: Conservation International Foundation
Country: Ecuador
Project/programme size: Small
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1 .1 Overview
1.
The Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community Partnerships for Mitigation
and Adaptation in Ecuador project is a cross-cutting project aimed at strengthening the
resilience of Ecuador’s coastal areas to the negative impacts of climate change, while also
significantly reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Over an implementation period of six-
and-a-half years, this small-sized project will bring together the public, private, and community
sectors to focus on the conservation and restoration of mangrove ecosystems, which are crucial
for coastal protection, biodiversity, and local livelihoods. This project meets the urgent need for
climate adaptation and mitigation in regions prone to extreme weather and rising sea levels,
pr oviding direct benefits to Ecuador’s most vulnerable coastal communities.
2.
T
Co
h
m
e p
m
ro
u
j
n
ec
it
t
y
i n
e
t
m
er
p
v
o
e
w
nt
e
io
r
n
m
s
e
a
n
r
t
e centered around three main components:
(a)
: Enhance the management and restoration of mangroves
through community-led initiatives, thereby improving local livelihoods and ensuring
s
P
u
r
s
iv
ta
a
i
t
n
e
a
-
b
s
l
e
e
c
e
to
co
r
s
e
y
n
s
g
te
a
m
ge
s
m
er
e
v
n
ic
t
es;
(b)
: Mobilize the shrimp farming sector to adopt and finance
c
C
l
r
im
ea
a
t
t
e
e -
a
s
n
m
d
a
e
rt
n
p
a
r
b
a
l
c
in
ti
g
ce
e
s
n
t
v
h
i
a
r
t
o
a
n
li
m
gn
e n
w
t
ith mangrove conservation efforts; and
(c)
: Develop and enforce policies that integrate
mangrove conservation into broader climate strategies, supported by improved
governance and legal frameworks.
3.
The execution of the proposed project is expected to i) protect and manage 156,633 ha
of mangrove ecosystems; ii) reduce GHG emissions by 4.6 million tonnes of carbon dioxide
2
equivalent (Mt CO eq) over its 20-year lifespan; and iii) enhance the climate resilience of
89 ,600 people by reducing flood risks through ecosystem-based adaptations.
4.
The total budget for the proposed project is USD 45.9 million. A substantial portion of
this budget, USD 36.4 million, is requested as a grant from GCF. Co-financing of USD 9.5 million
will be provided by Ecuador’s Ministry of the Environment, Water and Ecological Transition
(Ministerio del Ambiente, Agua y Transición del Ecuador (MAATE)), and Conservation
In ternational (CI) in the form of grants and in-kind contributions.
5.
This project is vital not only for its environmental, economic, and social benefits but also
as a model for integrated, multisectoral climate action. It aligns with the national climate
strategies of Ecuador and supports global efforts under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and its Paris Agreement.

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page 122
6.
With CI as the accredited entity (AE) and executing entity (EE), the proposed project will
be implemented through a structured management approach involving a steering committee, a
management unit, and localized implementation teams, ensuring efficient delivery and
adherence to the planned outcomes.
Scale: High
1 .2 Impact potential
7.
The project aims to significantly reduce vulnerability for the 89,600 direct and 3.4
million indirect project beneficiaries, which represents about 1.8 per cent and 20.1 per cent of
Ecuador’s coastal and total populations, respectively. This wide reach focuses on the most
vulnerable groups, particularly in impoverished rural coastal areas. However, detailing
strategies to ensure that the project benefits reach the most marginalized people within these
groups, including tailored measures for varying vulnerability levels, could have enhanced the
pr oject’s adaptation impact.
8.
From a climate-change mitigation perspective, the proposed project can reduce 4.6 Mt
2
CO eq over its 20-year lifespan, primarily through the restoration and conservation of
m angrove forests, which are significant carbon sinks.
9.
By prioritizing natural mangrove barriers, the proposed project avoids the long-term
liabilities of climate-change-vulnerable constructions. Mangroves’ inherent resilience and flood
mitigation capabilities boost the adaptive capacity of the exposed communities. The
continuation of activities initiated by the proposed project could integrate hybrid approaches,
co mbining green and grey infrastructure where natural solutions might fall short.
10.
The proposed project directly causes GHG emission reductions from mangrove
deforestation and carbon enhancement through restoration. Both activities combined aim to
2
result in a mitigation impact of 732,11 t CO eq during the project’s six-and-a-half year
2
implementation and 4.6 Mt CO eq during its 20-year lifespan. The proposal includes a clear
project method and details the calculations behind the proposed project, clarifies measurement,
reporting and verification (MRV) at the project scale as well as how it is linked to the national
MR V system.
11.
Furthermore, the proposed project indirectly supports low-emission practices by
pr omoting sustainable shrimp-farming techniques within the private sector.
12.
The proposed project will bolster institutional frameworks and regulatory systems by
embedding climate resilience in local and national governance. This involves improving the
community management of mangroves and supporting legal frameworks that encourage
pr ivate-sector conservation efforts.
13.
The proposed project promotes the generation and use of climate information in
decision-making by partnering with scientific entities like the International Research Centre on
El Niño Southern Oscillation. However, establishing robust feedback mechanisms to adapt and
up date practices based on the latest climate data could have further solidified this aspect.
14.
By emphasizing community-based management and partnerships, the project raises
awareness and adaptive capacity among local populations. Educating communities on climate
threats and sustainable practices is key to the project’s strategy, empowering stakeholders to
act ively engage in conservation and adaptation efforts.
15.
Overall, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) considers the impact potential
for both adaptation and mitigation of the proposed project to be high.
Scale: Medium to High
1.3 Paradigm shift potential

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page 123
16.
The proposed project advocates a collaborative approach, engaging public, private, and
community partnerships in mangrove management and restoration. By integrating the
adaptation and mitigation benefits of mangrove ecosystems into economic and governance
frameworks, the proposed project will create new market opportunities, especially in the
sh rimp aquaculture sector, to promote sustainable practices.
17.
The project’s theory of change is coherent and well-structured, focusing on increasing
mangrove coverage for carbon sequestration and enhanced coastal resilience, directly
su pporting global low-carbon development pathways.
18.
Furthermore, the iTAP welcomes the inclusion in activity 3.1.1. of an explicit system for
MRV of mangrove cover and carbon stocks, including remote sensing, community participation
and making subgrants to competitively selected universities or non-governmental organizations
to collaboratively generate geospatial data and capacity that will be integrated both into the
project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plan and the national REDD+ MRV systems. This
enhanced capacity should form an important building block for any future private and/or public
sec tor efforts to mobilize resources based on mangrove carbon sequestration.
19.
The M&E plan targets the ecological, social, and economic impacts of the proposed
project. However, the documentation (the funding proposal and its annex 11) lacks extensive
details on this plan. Improving this aspect, notably establishing a clear and fit-for-purpose
feedback mechanism, could better ensure that lessons learned are captured and effectively
dis seminated, promoting adaptive management and replication in other contexts.
20.
The proposed project involves creating a USD 4 million endowment in the Socio Manglar
subaccount (a new financing window under the Socio Bosque Fund), securing long-term
financial support for mangrove conservation. This strategic financial planning ensures the
continuation of project benefits beyond the funding period. However, ongoing contributions and
fin ancial sustainability will require continuous reinforcement.
21.
The proposed project promotes new business activities and markets, particularly in
climate-smart shrimp farming. The potential for market creation could have been further
expanded by exploring additional ecosystem services provided by mangroves that could be
monetized (if the legal and regulatory framework in Ecuador allows it). By incorporating
mangrove conservation into shrimp-farming practices, the project alters incentives for market
participants by decreasing the environmental impact of shrimp farming, a major contributor to
mangrove loss. Increasing awareness and highlighting the benefits of these changes among the
broader industry could further shift market incentives. In addition, greater diversification of
economic activities could also offer communities greater flexibility, which would not only help
reduce their dependence on climate-sensitive sectors, but would also increase their resilience to
ad verse climatic conditions, including extreme events such as intense rainfall.
22.
The proposed project will address barriers such as the lack of coordinated management
and inadequate enforcement of environmental regulations. However, barriers such as those
relating to communities’ legal rights seem to be beyond the project’s reach. Furthermore, long-
term financing depends to some extent on private-sector participation, and the project’s
str ategy for achieving this is lacking in detail.
23.
Overall, the iTAP rates the paradigm shift potential of the proposed project as medium
to high.
Scale: High
1. 4 Sustainable development potential
24.
The proposed project demonstrates significant potential for improving environmental
quality and conservation. It emphasizes the restoration and preservation of mangrove
ecosystems, which are vital for carbon sequestration, biodiversity conservation, and acting as

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page 124
natural defences against coastal erosion and flooding. This aligns with Sustainable Development
2
Goal (SDG) 13 (Climate action) and 15 (Life on land). The project aims to reduce 4.6 Mt CO eq
over its duration, thereby enhancing air quality and soil stability through increased mangrove
coverage. Given that the impacts of the project’s planned activities on air quality are less well
do cumented, the M&E plan could incorporate this aspect.
25.
The proposed project is designed to directly benefit around 41,500 individuals by
supporting climate-resilient livelihoods through improved fisheries management and other
ecosystem services provided by mangroves. It places special emphasis on gender-specific
impacts, aiming to empower women by improving their access to resources and decision-
making processes, aligning with SDG 5 (Gender equality). However, ongoing efforts in gender-
foc used capacity-building and ensuring equitable access to benefits are crucial.
26.
This project also promotes economic externalities by creating jobs, enhancing local
industries (especially fisheries and ecotourism), and encouraging sustainable practices such as
climate-smart shrimp farming. It is expected to bolster local and national economic resilience,
aligning with SDG 8 (Decent work and economic growth). By integrating local industries with
conservation efforts, the project aims to establish a sustainable development model that can
attract private investment, thereby enhancing the financial sustainability of conservation
initiatives. Achieving long-term economic benefits will require strong partnerships and ongoing
engagement with the private sector. Furthermore, to foster innovation and skills development
within the local job market, the proposed project could have also considered strengthening
fra meworks for collaboration between industry and academia.
27.
The proposed project caters to the needs of both women and men by promoting gender
equality through inclusive participation in activities and decision-making processes. It places
special emphasis on empowering women in the community, acknowledging their role in the
economy, and in managing natural resources. Interventions are specifically designed to reduce
women’s vulnerability to climate-change impacts by improving their access to resources and
information. However, the proposed project could also have developed more tailored
interventions that address the specific vulnerabilities of women in coastal communities,
po tentially by expanding gender-focused educational and economic opportunities.
28.
The proposed project effectively addresses multiple facets of sustainable development,
including environmental protection, social inclusion, and economic growth, with a particular
focus on gender equality. To fully realize these potentials, continuous monitoring and adaptive
management, robust local participation, and sustained funding and technical support will be
ess ential.
29.
Overall, the iTAP rates the sustainable development potential of the proposed project as
high.
Scale: High
1. 5 Needs of the recipient
30.
Ecuador’s coastal region, especially its extensive mangrove ecosystems, faces significant
climate hazards such as sea-level rise, extreme El Niño events, and increased precipitation
variability. These factors amplify coastal flooding risks, endangering local communities and
economic activities that rely heavily on fisheries and aquaculture. This vulnerability is
intensified by the ongoing deforestation of mangroves, which are crucial for flood control and
erosion prevention. The project’s focus on restoring and conserving mangrove areas directly
ad dresses these vulnerabilities and risks.
31.
The proposed project focuses on areas that encompass a significant portion of Ecuador’s
coastal population, which is directly threatened by climate-induced flooding. Approximately 3.4
million people in coastal provinces are indirectly affected by these climate risks, with
substantial assets at stake, including the shrimp aquaculture industry, a major economic driver

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page 125
of the targeted coastal communities. Thus, the project’s interventions are essential in protecting
the se populations and economic resources.
32.
The project identifies and aims to support groups particularly vulnerable to climate
impacts, integrating strategies that address their needs into the broader national climate and
development frameworks. However, the effectiveness of these strategies should be closely
ev aluated to ensure that they result in tangible benefits.
33.
The targeted regions experience high poverty rates and limited economic
diversification, making them more vulnerable to climate impacts. By enhancing mangrove
ecosystems that support fisheries and local economies, the proposed project promotes
sustainable livelihoods and economic development, thereby reducing the socioeconomic
vu lnerability of these communities.
34.
The project is well-aligned with the needs of Ecuador’s climate-vulnerable coastal
populations, addressing both immediate and long-term climate change related risks. Its
co mprehensive approach to enhancing both human and ecological resilience is promising.
35.
Therefore, the iTAP evaluates the need of the recipient for the proposed project as high.
Scale: High
1. 6 Country ownership
36.
The proposed project directly supports Ecuador’s objectives for low-emission and
climate-resilient development as outlined in its national adaptation plan and nationally
determined contributions. It aims to help achieve Ecuador's nationally determined contribution
targets by reducing GHG emissions and promoting community-managed mangrove
conservation through the Agreements for Sustainable Use and Custody of the Mangrove
Ec osystem.
37.
The Organic Environmental Code of Ecuador and local regulations offer a solid policy
foundation for the proposed project. However, these policies require strengthening to ensure
effective mangrove conservation and restoration. The project aims to foster a supportive
environment for reducing mangrove deforestation and enhancing restoration through improved
go vernance and climate adaptation strategies.
38.
CI has extensive experience in managing climate-change initiatives. Alongside local
partners, they have participated in previous mangrove conservation efforts, further enhancing
their credibility and capability. The proposed project offsets a new opportunity to enhance local
capacities further to ensure long-term sustainability and scalability of mangrove conservation
an d restoration initiatives in the country.
39.
The project development process included consultations with civil society, local
communities, the private sector, and other stakeholders, with a focus on gender equality and
sustainable livelihoods. It intends to maintain engagement with these groups throughout the
project, adhering to environmental and social safeguards. However, creating more explicit
mechanisms for continuous stakeholder input and feedback during implementation could
im prove adaptiveness and inclusiveness.
40.
The project engages in in-country institutions such as MAATE, along with local
governments and community organizations, fostering local ownership and accountability.
Strengthening these local institutions to effectively manage increased responsibilities will be
cru cial for successful project outcomes.
41.
The proposed project is designed to complement and synergize with other national and
international initiatives. This ensures that the project’s activities are integrated and contribute
to broader conservation and climate-resilience efforts.

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page 126
42.
The proposed project showcases strong country ownership by aligning with national
priorities, receiving institutional support, engaging stakeholders, and integrating with national
sys tems. The track record of the AE/executing entity further reinforces this assessment.
43.
Overall, the iTAP considers the country ownership of the proposed project to be high.
Scale: Medium to High
1. 7 Efficiency and effectiveness
44.
The proposed financial structure, with a USD 36.4 million GCF grant and total funding of
USD 45.9 million (co-financing ratio is 1:0.21), aims to tackle major obstacles like insufficient
financing for long-term mangrove conservation and community engagement. However, the
heavy dependence on grant funding indicates a need for a more diversified financial approach to
en sure sustainability after the project’s completion.
45.
The project’s reliance on grants reflects high concessionality, which is essential due to
its focus on vulnerable communities and ecosystem services that offer public benefits. However,
the proposed project could have more clearly outlined the steps taken to minimize the level of
co ncessionality needed to ensure viability.
46.
The proposed project is designed to leverage additional private and public investment
rather than replace it. Specifically, it seeks to attract private-sector investment in sustainable
shrimp farming and mangrove conservation. However, it would benefit from clearer metrics on
the expected investment amounts and sources.
47. 2
The project expects to reduce 4.6 Mt CO eq over its lifetime, with an investment cost of
2
roughly USD 10 per t CO eq based on total funding. To fully evaluate its relative efficiency, this
co st-effectiveness could have been more explicitly compared to similar projects.
48.
The proposed project shows a commitment to long-term financial sustainability and
technological integration, particularly through the use of the best available technologies and
practices in mangrove restoration and shrimp farming. Furthermore, the M&E methodology on
which MAATE, universities and community monitors will be trained goes beyond measuring the
area replanted with propagules, and the survival rate of propagules, to include the complex
hydrological dynamics of mangrove ecosystems as a contributor to mangrove losses and gains.
This reflects global best practice in mangrove monitoring, and will hopefully be shared by CI
with other AEs overseeing GCF projects involving mangrove restoration. However, providing
more detail on financial planning for the post-GCF phases would offer stronger assurance of
lon g-term viability.
49.
Overall, the iTAP assesses the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project as
medium to high.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
50.
The proposed project is well-structured with a solid theory of change to ensure long-
term results and impact. In order to improve it, the iTAP suggests that the AE takes into account
the follo
D
w
i
i
v
n
e
g
r s
a
i
s
f
p
ic
e
a
c
t
ts
io
:
n of financial strategies for long-term sustainability
(a)
: While the
project’s dependence on grant funding is understandable given its focus, it is crucial to
develop a more diversified financial approach. This could involve establishing
partnerships with private-sector investors, and exploring other sustainable financing
mechanisms. Providing clearer metrics on expected investment amounts and sources
will strengthen financial planning and ensure the project’s viability beyond its initial
funding period;

--- Table 1 on Page 126 ---
technological integration, particularly through the use of the best available technologies and
practices in mangrove restoration and shrimp farming. Furthermore, the M&E methodolog
which MAATE, universities and community monitors will be trained goes beyond measuring th
area replanted with propagules, and the survival rate of propagules, to include the complex
hydrological dynamics of mangrove ecosystems as a contributor to mang

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page 127
Promotion of economic diversification to enhance long-term resilience and
mitigation impact
(b)
: To further enhance the project’s impact and financial viability, it is
essential to promote economic diversification within the targeted regions. This can be
accomplished by developing and supporting alternative livelihood opportunities beyond
fisheries and shrimp farming. By fostering a more diversified local economy, the
proposed project can reduce communities’ dependence on climate-sensitive sectors and
increase their resilience to adverse climatic conditions. Additionally, providing training
and resources for these alternative economic activities can help create more stable and
s
In
u
t
s
e
ta
g
i
r
n
a
a
t
b
io
le
n
i n
o
c
f
o
c
m
om
e s
p
o
r
u
e
r
h
c
e
e
n
s
s
fo
iv
r
e
l o
m
ca
o
l
n
p
i
o
to
p
r
u
i
l
n
a
g
ti
,
o
e
n
v
s
a
;
l
a
u
n
a
d
t ion and learning plans
(c)
:
Establishing a clear and fit-for-purpose feedback mechanism within the M&E framework
will help capture lessons learned and disseminate them effectively. This will promote
adaptive management, enabling the project to adjust strategies as needed and enhance
replicability in other regions and sectors.
51.
Based on the analyses presented in the above paragraphs, the iTAP recommends that
the Board approve this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page 128
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP235)
Proposal name: Mangroves for Climate: Public, Private and Community
Partnerships for Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador
Accredited entity: Conservation International Foundation (CI)
Country: Ecuador
Project/programme size: Small
Impact potential
iTAP evaluation: High
CI notes iTAP’s positive assessment with thanks.
CI acknowledges that further work can be done during implementation to ensure that the
project benefits for coastal communities planned under Component 1 reach the most
vulnerable people within the target communities. The project design allows for this flexibility
especially through the activities planned under Project Output 1.2 “Improved livelihood
activities and more economically productive community businesses”.
Paradigm shift potential
iTAP evaluation: Medium to High
CI agrees with the importance placed on the long-term financial sustainability of the project
activities to ensure long-term benefits. This particularly applies to continuing to support
community efforts to manage mangroves. Activity 2.2.1 is designed to address this need by
engaging with the private sector to increase the support companies operating in Ecuador
provide for mangrove conservation and restoration.
Sustainable development potential
iTAP evaluation: High
CI agrees with the need for gender-focused capacity-building and ensuring equitable access to
project benefits. These issues are highlighted in Annex 8, the Gender Assessment and Action
Plan. The Plan highlights how activities are designed to ensure that women and men can
equitably benefit from community-based management and local economic development
initiatives.
CI also notes the suggestion to strengthen collaboration between industry and academia.
Activity 2.1.1, on the promotion of climate-smart aquaculture, includes a sub-activity to
disseminate knowledge gathered by the project with partners, including in academia. CI will
examine ways of strengthening this sub-activity during implementation.

--- Table 1 on Page 128 ---
Impact potential
iTAP evaluation: High
CI notes iTAP’s positive assessment with thanks.
CI acknowledges that further work can be done during implementation to ensure that the
project benefits for coastal communities planned under Component 1 reach the most
vulnerable people within the target communities. The project design allows for this flexibility
especially through the activities planned under Project Output 1.2 “Improved livelihood
activities and more economically productive community businesses”.
Paradigm shift potential
iTAP evaluation: Medium to High
CI agrees with the importance placed on the long-term financial sustainability of the project
activities to ensure long-term benefits. This particularly applies to continuing to support
community efforts to manage mangroves. Activity 2.2.1 is designed to address this need by
engaging with the private sector to increase the support companies operating in Ecuador
provide for mangrove conservation and restoration.
Sustainable development potential
iTAP evaluation: High
CI agrees with the need for gender-focused capacity-building and ensuring equitable access to
project benefits. These issues are highlighted in Annex 8, the Gender Assessment and Action
Plan. The Plan highlights how activities are designed to ensure that women and men can
equitably benefit from community-based management and local economic development
initiatives.
CI also notes the suggestion to strengthen collaboration between industry and academia.
Activity 2.1.1, on the promotion of climate-smart aquaculture, includes a sub-activity to

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page 129
Needs of the recipient
iTAP evaluation: High
CI notes iTAP’s positive assessment with thanks.
CI notes the recommendation to evaluate the effectiveness of strategies to address the needs
of the most vulnerable to climate change. Activity 3.1.1. includes a sub-activity to evaluate the
socio-economic impact of project activities.
Country ownership
iTAP evaluation: High
CI notes iTAP’s positive assessment with thanks.
CI acknowledges the recommendation to create explicit mechanisms for continuous
stakeholder input and feedback during implementation to improve adaptiveness and
inclusiveness. Annex 7 includes the Stakeholder Engagement Plan, which explains how
stakeholders will be engaged in each activity during project implementation. CI will examine
ways of further strengthening mechanisms for stakeholder input and feedback during project
implementation.
Efficiency and effectiveness
iTAP evaluation: Medium to High
CI acknowledges the challenge of ensuring long-term financial sustainability to bring together
the public, private and community sectors to secure environmental services provided by
mangroves. Public funding for protection of mangroves is a strategic investment that
provides substantial environmental, social and economic returns. CI agrees that diversified
financing of mangrove protection is needed and has built this into the project design. The
activities of Component 2 seek to 1) integrate mangrove conservation and restoration as
standard practice in shrimp aquaculture operations, and 2) attract private-sector investment
for community management of mangroves.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
CI thanks the iTAP for the thorough review of the Funding Proposal package, the
recommendations and the overall positive assessment. The assessment document provides
an excellent summary of the project as it relates to the GCF’s six assessment criteria. We
welcome the recommendation to approve this Funding Proposal.
CI especially notes the different aspects identified for strengthening the project, including the
three main points highlighted in the “overall remarks” section. We are confident that the

--- Table 1 on Page 129 ---

Needs of the recipient
iTAP evaluation: High
CI notes iTAP’s positive assessment with thanks.
CI notes the recommendation to evaluate the effectiveness of strategies to address the needs
of the most vulnerable to climate change. Activity 3.1.1. includes a sub-activity to evaluate the
socio-economic impact of project activities.
Country ownership
iTAP evaluation: High
CI notes iTAP’s positive assessment with thanks.
CI acknowledges the recommendation to create explicit mechanisms for continuous
stakeholder input and feedback during implementation to improve adaptiveness and
inclusiveness. Annex 7 includes the Stakeholder Engagement Plan, which explains how
stakeholders will be engaged in each activity during project implementation. CI will examine
ways of further strengthening mechanisms for stakeholder input and feedback during project
implementation.
Efficiency and effectiveness
iTAP evaluation: Medium to High
CI acknowledges the challenge of ensuring long-term financial sustainability to bring together
the public, private and community sectors to secure environmental services provided by
mangroves. Public funding for protection of mangroves is a strategic investment that
provides substantial environmental, social and economic returns. CI agrees that diversified
financing of mangrove protection is needed and has built this into the project design. The
activities of Component 2 seek to 1) integrate mangrove conservation and restoration as
standard practice in shrimp aquaculture operations, and 2) attract private-sector investment
for community management of mangroves.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
CI thanks the iTAP for the thorough review of the Funding Proposal package, the
recommendations and the overall positive assessment. The assessment document provides
an excellent summary of the project as it relates to the GCF’s six assessment criteria. We
welcome the recommendation to approve this Funding Proposal.

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.10
Page 130
project design allows for all the points that have been raised to be addressed during project
implementation.

=== PAGE 131 ===
Gender Documentation for FP235
Mangroves for Climate: Public, Private and
Community Partnerships for Mitigation and
Adaptation in Ecuador
ANNEX 8: Gender Assessment Report and Gender Action
Plan
Prepared by Conservation International and Saraswati Rodriguez, Asesoramiento
Ambiental Estratégico (AAE) through a PPF grant from the Green Climate Fund
1

=== PAGE 132 ===
Contents
Figures and Tables .................................................................................................................... 4
Acronyms and abbreviations ..................................................................................................... 5
Executive summary ................................................................................................................... 6
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 8
1.1 Project background ...................................................................................................... 8
1.2 Purpose and methodology ................................................................................................ 10
1.2.1 Workshops ..................................................................................................................... 11
1.2.2 Semi structured interviews ............................................................................................. 13
1.2.3 Surveys........................................................................................................................... 14
2. Situation of men and women in coastal Ecuador ............................................................. 16
2.1 Legal status of women across Ecuador .............................................................................. 16
2.1.1 National legal framework ............................................................................................... 16
2.1.2 Agenda for Women ........................................................................................................ 16
2.1.3 Gender policy of the Ministry of Environment, Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador
(MAATE) .......................................................................................................................... 17
2.1.4 An NDC with a gender perspective ................................................................................. 18
2.2 Political participation at national, provincial, and local levels ............................................. 19
2.3 Socio-economic information ............................................................................................. 20
2.4 Education .......................................................................................................................... 22
2.5 Time use/division of labor ................................................................................................. 23
2.6 Health and gender-based violence .................................................................................... 24
2.7 Assets and infrastructure .................................................................................................. 25
3. Access, use, and management of mangroves. .................................................................. 26
3.1 Importance of mangroves to local populations .................................................................. 26
3.2 Participation and decision-making in mangrove management ........................................... 26
3.2.1 Northern estuaries (Cayapas-Mataje + Muisne) .............................................................. 28
3.3 Southern estuaries (Guayas + Jambeli) .............................................................................. 32
4. Vulnerability and adaptation to climate change ............................................................... 36
4.1 Impacts and response to past climate-related events. ................................................ 36
4.2 Climate projections in project sites and implications for women and men .................. 37
Conclusion and implications for project .................................................................................. 39
Gender Action Plan ................................................................................................................. 42
2

=== PAGE 133 ===
Bibliography ............................................................................................................................ 48
Appendix 1: Interview and data collection guide ..................................................................... 50
Appendix 2: Sample Job Description for Gender Specialist ...................................................... 52
Appendix 3: Documentation reviewed .................................................................................... 54
3

=== PAGE 134 ===
Figures and Tables
Figure 1. Map showing the principal mangrove areas in Ecuador and the four estuaries/areas
that make up the project area. .................................................................................................. 9
Table 1. Location and name of project sites ............................................................................ 10
Table 2. Participation in community stakeholder workshops ................................................... 11
Table 3. Participation in policy stakeholder workshops............................................................ 12
Table 4. Individual interviews (2 men, 5 women)..................................................................... 14
Table 5. Surveys conducted with community associations ....................................................... 14
Table 6. Parish board members in the project areas ................................................................ 19
Table 7. Mayors in the project areas ....................................................................................... 19
Table 8. Demographics in project site areas ............................................................................ 20
Table 9. Household size and demographics in project sites...................................................... 21
Table 10. Education in project sites ......................................................................................... 22
Table 11. Incidence of gender-based violence ......................................................................... 24
Table 12. Association membership in project sites .................................................................. 28
Table 13. Gender roles reported in Muisne-Cojimíes ............................................................... 29
Table 14. Gender roles reported in the Guayas estuary area ................................................... 33
Table 15. Gender roles reported in the Jambeli project area ................................................... 34
Table 16. Historical climate impacts on women and men ........................................................ 36
4

=== PAGE 135 ===
Acronyms and abbreviations
AFD: French Development Agency
FFLA: Fundación Futuro Latinoamericano (Latin American Future Foundation)
GCF: Green Climate Fund
GGCA: Global Gender and Climate Alliance
GIZ: German Corporation for International Cooperation
INEC: National Institute of Statistics and Censuses
MAATE: Ministry of Environment, Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador
NDC: Nationally determined contribution
NGO: Non-governmental organization
UNDP: United Nations Development Programme
UTPL: Universidad Técnica Particular de Loja
USFQ: Universidad San Francisco de Quito
UIDE: Universidad Internacional del Ecuador
UASB: Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar
IUCN: International Union for Conservation of Nature
WEDO: Women’s Environment and Development Organization
5

=== PAGE 136 ===
Executive summary
The mangroves along Ecuador’s coast provide important economic services to local communities
including food, income sources, and protection from flooding and storms. Across all project
sites, women and men depend on the natural resources they obtain from the mangroves.
A complex set of historical, social, cultural, and economic factors influence the project sites’
current gender norms and inequalities: Firstly, there is a clear lack of political representation by
women in decision-making fora. Secondly, women are overburdened with work, especially
reproductive labor, and this limits their ability to engage in community, organizational, and
project activities. And thirdly, gender-based violence is high and further highlights the
inequalities at the household level and an important additional barrier that keep women from
using their voice and agency. This situation is compounded by a number of structural problems
associated with education, health, the provision of utilities and limited employment
opportunities.
In these mangrove-dependent communities, women are more vulnerable and experience higher
rates of poverty than men. Men tend to control the main economic activity in the communities:
the harvesting and sale of seafood. Often it is men who hold formal positions of leadership
within communities and fishing associations. As Trevino & Murillo-Sandoval (2021) highlight in
a study of mangroves in Esmeraldas province, the gendered use of mangrove resources, and
societal gender norms, influence the strategies that men and women use to respond to
mangrove deforestation in the face of growing shrimp aquaculture, with women being
disproportionately affected by the loss of mangrove forests.
There are distinct gender differences with respect to mangrove use and management in the
northern projects sites verses those in the south. In the north, women are able to walk (often
collectively) to the mangroves together and are therefore more actively engaged in mangrove
use and management. Mangrove associations in the north have, on average, 60% women
members. Men have a dual role, they work in crab and black cockle extraction as well as in
fisheries outside the mangrove area and in the estuary. Engagement in decision-making within
the fishing associations in the southern project sites is more male dominated with women
engaging much less. In the south, women’s difficulty in participating in decision-making derives
from the fact they are not familiar with the mangrove or legally recognized as part of the
communities or productive organizations. This can be attributed to their access and use of the
mangrove areas which are far from the community and must be accessed by boat. Usually,
women’s mangrove activities in the south are more individual (each person arranges their own
access to the area). Mangrove associations in the south have, on average, 15% women members.
Women living in mangroves work long days, which include family caregiving responsibilities,
harvesting or fishing activities, cooking for the family and looking after the children. The average
working day for women is around 14 hours and little societal value is placed on their caregiving
or reproductive tasks. By contrast, men have much shorter days, fishing or harvesting for
between four and five hours. This means that once their day’s fishing or harvesting is over, they
are relieved from work.
Rates of gender-based violence are high (67% in project sites) and could be
perpetuated/increased by climate change impacts that result in economic disruption.
6

=== PAGE 137 ===
As a result of gender norms, men and women are impacted differently by climate related events.
Rising sea levels and flooding – the two major effects cited in justifying climate action in these
project sites – can also have consequences like an increase in water salinity and water-borne
diseases, which are likely to affect primarily women, who tend to be responsible for collecting
water for the household and caring for sick family members. Likewise, men (in their primary role
as fishers and farmers) experience climate impacts such as more unpredictable weather and
changing fish populations, which require farther (more dangerous) travel). Furthermore, existing
gender inequalities may be exacerbated by the dynamics of climate change in the project area.
Our analysis included extensive review of relevant secondary information related to gendered
uses of mangroves, the policy environment that supports gender equality in Ecuador, and
statistical information for the project sites. This research was complemented with primary
information from project sites gathered through surveys (involving 80 men/19 women),
community workshops (involving 223 men/40 women) and semi-structured key informant
interviews (involving 5 men/2 women).
The analysis points to several key areas of intervention for the project, as laid out in the project’s
gender action plan. These include mangrove use agreements that integrate gender
considerations, tailored and specific support to women in mangrove associations (including the
two women’s associations), setting targets (50/50) for women’s and men’s benefit from the
adoption of diversified and climate resilient livelihoods options linked to mangroves, and
ensuring that project staff and delivery partners are trained on gender equity principles and the
importance of mitigating gender inequalities in the project, including gender-based violence.
7

=== PAGE 138 ===
1. Introduction
1.1 Project background
Climate change will result in significant impacts on local environmental conditions along the
coast of Ecuador, including a rise in sea levels, El Niño events, and changes in the intensity and
variability of rainfall, flooding, and atmospheric temperatures. Based on models generated by
NASA, climate change could cause sea levels to rise by up to 27 cm by 2100 (NASA-GISS, n.d.).
Considering that the 1997-1998 El Niño event led to a 42 cm increase in sea levels, periods of
heavier rainfall are expected to worsen the rise in sea levels.
The risk of flooding is a major concern for the coast of Ecuador. The Dartmouth Flood
Observatory has recorded 22 major floods since 1987, displacing over 506,000 people
(Dartmouth Flood Observatory, n.d.). Based on current assessments, 39% of areas within 5 km
of the Ecuadorian coast are already at high risk of annual flooding (Secretaria Nacional de
Gestion de Riesgos, 2018).
Ninety-nine percent (99%) of mangroves are concentrated along the shores of the country’s 4
main estuaries: Cayapas-Mataje, Muisne, Guayas, and Jambelí. These areas are home to 2.9
million people and have very high poverty rates. These people rely heavily on fishing and
harvesting crabs and black clams.
There are 4,556 registered members of mangrove management associations devoted almost
exclusively to these activities (Ministry of Environment of Ecuador, 2020). These management
associations cover approximately 43% of Ecuador’s mangrove forests, meaning that the true
number of people who fish and gather seafood from the mangroves may be at least double the
number of registered members of associations (Zambrano, N., personal communication). With
4.04 family members dependent on each fisher (INEC, 2010), the total population directly
dependent on fishing in mangroves is likely to be around 43,000.
Despite their importance, almost 25% of Ecuador’s mangroves have been deforested since 1969
(CLIRSEN, 1999, 2007; Ministry of Environment of Ecuador, 2019). In 2018, there were 156,633
ha of mangrove remaining in mainland Ecuador. While the introduction of new regulations
requiring shrimp farms to restore mangrove areas in order to operate and export legally has
contributed to an increase in net reforestation, there continues to be significant gross
deforestation.
The ongoing mangrove deforestation in these areas is the result of a combination of (i) an
increase in illegal mangrove logging, (ii) poor enforcement of environmental regulations that
penalize causing damage to mangroves, (iii) pollution from liquid and solid waste, and (iv) poor
spatial planning by local governments for mangrove conservation (Carvajal & Santillán, 2019).
Given their importance, and in the face of future impacts from climate change, the government
of Ecuador has made it a priority to reduce the risks faced by coastal communities and promote
the ecosystem services provided by mangroves in its National Climate Change Strategy 2012 –
2025, its National Climate Change Plan 2015-2018, and other national frameworks.
In this context, this project seeks to build resilience and a coordinated adaptive capacity along
the entire coast and in the sectors most vulnerable to climate change, in particular coastal
communities and the fishing/shrimp sectors. The project has 3 components:
8

=== PAGE 139 ===
Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate-adapted management
increased, including through community-based management (AUSCEMs) and protected
areas implementing climate adaptation plans.
Component 2: The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing
GHG emissions and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that
increase climate resilience for other coastal populations.
Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove
deforestation and increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate
change adaptation strategies, coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.
Ecuador’s mangroves provide important economic benefits to local communities who harvest
white fish, black clams, crabs, fish, shrimp, oysters, mussels, blue crabs and sea snails for self-
consumption and sale. The forest is also used for beekeeping and logging/charcoal production
CIFEN/AAE (2019).
Figure 1. Map showing the principal mangrove areas in Ecuador and the four estuaries/areas that
make up the project area.
Mangrove dwellers are a heterogeneous group in terms of race. In the northern estuaries, the
mangrove-dependent population is chiefly Afro-Ecuadorian, while in the southern provinces,
mangrove populations are made up of mestizos (mixed-race population) and cholo fishermen
(cholos pescadores; Latorre, 2012).
Occupational identities as crab or seafood harvesters, combined with situations of social
vulnerability and poverty, play a more important role in self-identification than ethnicity. In
general, mangrove dwellers experience low wages, informal employment and exploitation by
intermediaries, malnutrition, low levels of education and inadequate infrastructure and public
services (Latorre, 2012).
9

=== PAGE 140 ===
Despite the mangrove dwellers’ age-old occupation of the area and shared management
practices, this ecosystem, like the entire intertidal zone, is considered a “National Asset for
Public Use” (bien nacional de uso público). This means that the mangrove swamp is owned by
the state and renders the intertidal zone inalienable, immovable, and imprescriptible.
Table 1. Location and name of project sites
Province Name of estuary
Northern project areas
Esmeraldas (1) Muisne
(2) Cayapas-Mataje
Southern project areas
Guayas (3) Guayas River
El Oro (4) Jambelí
From a gender perspective, the two northern estuaries are generally similar to each other, with
both men and women actively engaged in mangrove use and management, while the southern
two estuaries are more male dominated with women engaging much less than in the north.
With this in mind, we have organized this gender assessment and action plan to focus on these
two specific areas (north and south).
1.2 Purpose and methodology
The purpose of this gender assessment and action plan is to identify key information on the
roles, activities, needs, opportunities, interests and rights of men, women, boys and girls that
live in the project area in order to understand how the project can support their resilience to
climate change. In doing so, the gender assessment exposes the gaps and inequities that exist
between males and females, particularly in relation to the environment and climate change.
Finally, we also took an intersectional lens, recognizing that many other social characteristics
(e.g., wealth, education, marriage status, age, etc.) also contribute to women’s and men’s
climate vulnerability and resilience. Within this framework, the gender assessment took a
phased approach to data collection and analysis:
Collection of secondary information. This process involved reviewing existing documentation
from government, academics, and organizations that work in this area. This includes statistical
information, background data, information on the area, and documents and bibliographic
references to support the gender analysis. A list of the key documents can be found at the end
of this document. The documents include information of previous consultancies carried out in
mangrove areas, reports of the Fishing Authority, and press bulletins related to production and
marketing activities. Statistical information from official sources, including the national census
(2010) and living condition surveys (2014 & 2019), were used to determine the characteristics
of the social and economic conditions of the people living in the estuaries.
Collection of primary information. Primary information was collected through various
instruments determined based on the stakeholder group and as described in this image:
10

--- Table 1 on Page 140 ---
Province | Name of estuary
Northern project areas | 
Esmeraldas | (1) Muisne
(2) Cayapas-Mataje
Southern project areas | 
Guayas | (3) Guayas River
El Oro | (4) Jambelí

=== PAGE 141 ===
Tools Type of actors Information
Relationship between gender,
Fisheries organizations
Semi structured intervews environment and productive activities
Community leaders Leadership and participation dynamics
Surveys
Socio-economic dynamics with a
Women of the community
gender perspective
Workshops
Leaders of the associations Organizational structures
1.2.1 Workshops
In August and September 2019, we conducted 4 workshops1 in 3 of the estuaries (Muisne,
Guayas and Jambeli) with men and women from local associations that focus on crab and cockle
harvest. The workshops included Afroecuadorian communities and Cholos Pescadores in Guayas
and Jambelí. Following the observation above that woman are more engaged in mangrove use
in the north, it is unsurprising to see (in Table 2) that women were much more present in the
workshop in the north compared to those in the south.
The main objectives were:
• Obtain participants’ general information related to time of residence in the area,
economic activity, organization and activities of women and men in mangrove areas.
• Obtain information of potential reforestation sites, types of mangroves to plant and
their benefits.
• Identify the perceptions that men and women have of the impacts of current climate
conditions (wind, rain, presence of water holes, temperature, etc.) and marine
conditions, on their communities and mangrove area concessions.
• Identify what kind of mangrove products are currently used, who uses them, and how
they could be used in the future.
Table 2. Participation in community stakeholder workshops
Workshop/Loca
Stakeholders Men Women TOTAL
tion
Northern region
Members and leaders from the communities of
Bunche –
Bunche – Muisne, Chamanga, Pedro Carbo,
Muisne – 13 25 38
Salinas and Bellavista. Representatives of the
Esmeralda
German Corporation for International
Cooperation GmbH (GIZ), Ministry of
1 Workshop reports can be found in the Stakeholder Engagement section
11

--- Table 1 on Page 141 ---
 | Workshop/Loca |  | Stakeholders | Men | Women | TOTAL
 | tion |  |  |  |  | 
Northern region |  |  |  |  |  | 
Bunche –
Muisne –
Esmeralda |  |  | Members and leaders from the communities of
Bunche – Muisne, Chamanga, Pedro Carbo,
Salinas and Bellavista. Representatives of the
German Corporation for International
Cooperation GmbH (GIZ), Ministry of | 13 | 25 | 38

=== PAGE 142 ===
Environment (MAE) and the Tourism
Association.
Southern region
Members and leaders from the communities of
Guayas estuary Puerto Roma, Cerritos de los Morreños, Santa
134 1 135
(Puerto Roma) Rosa, Bellavista, Puerto Salinas, Puerto Libertad
and Guayaquil.
Leaders from the Asociación de Cangrejeros
Guayas estuary Balao, Nuevo Porvenir, Puerto El Morro Marines,
Puerto El Morro Apamupen, Puerto El Morro 59 6 65
(Balao) Porteño and Puerto El Morro Forjadores de
Futuro.
Members and leaders from the communities of
Jambeli
Costa Rica, Mar de Galilea, Isla Pongalilla, Amor
17 8 25
y Esperanza, Puerto Bolívar Union, 17 de Enero,
(Puerto Bolívar)
24 de Octubre.
Some gender-related information was also generated during the project’s stakeholder
engagement workshops, facilitated by the MAE and CI. The main objective of the workshops was
to develop an analysis of the conservation policies and use of the mangrove ecosystem, and
their contribution in the generation of ecosystem services and the wellbeing of the population.
While gender as a theme was included as one topic, it was not extensive. Two workshops were
held in the Guayas estuary (southern) in 2016:
Table 3. Participation in policy stakeholder workshops
Location Stakeholders Men Women TOTAL
Representatives from the Secretary of Aquaculture,
Association of Shellfish and Artisanal Fisherman Las
Huacas, Ministry of Environment (MAE), Ministry of
Tourism, National Institute of Statistics and Census,
German Corporation for International Cooperation
Playas del GmbH (GIZ), Secretariat of Water, Provincial Directorate
Villamil, of Guayas Environment, CONDESAN, National Institute
Provincia of Fishery, Catholic University of Guayaquil, Association 21 11 32
del of Users of the Manglar Cerrito de Los Morreños,
Guayas SENPLADES, Litoral Polythenic University, Municipality
of Guayaquil, Conservation International (CI-Ecuador),
Association of Crabbers and Artisanal Fisherman 21 de
Mayo – Puerto Roma, National Institute of Biodiversity,
Association of Crabbers 6 de Julio and National
Secretariat of Planning and Developing.
12

--- Table 1 on Page 142 ---
 | Environment (MAE) and the Tourism
Association. |  |  | 
Southern region |  |  |  | 
Guayas estuary
(Puerto Roma) | Members and leaders from the communities of
Puerto Roma, Cerritos de los Morreños, Santa
Rosa, Bellavista, Puerto Salinas, Puerto Libertad
and Guayaquil. | 134 | 1 | 135
Guayas estuary
(Balao) | Leaders from the Asociación de Cangrejeros
Balao, Nuevo Porvenir, Puerto El Morro Marines,
Puerto El Morro Apamupen, Puerto El Morro
Porteño and Puerto El Morro Forjadores de
Futuro. | 59 | 6 | 65
Jambeli
(Puerto Bolívar) | Members and leaders from the communities of
Costa Rica, Mar de Galilea, Isla Pongalilla, Amor
y Esperanza, Puerto Bolívar Union, 17 de Enero,
24 de Octubre. | 17 | 8 | 25

--- Table 2 on Page 142 ---
Location | Stakeholders | Men | Women | TOTAL
Playas del
Villamil,
Provincia
del
Guayas | Representatives from the Secretary of Aquaculture,
Association of Shellfish and Artisanal Fisherman Las
Huacas, Ministry of Environment (MAE), Ministry of
Tourism, National Institute of Statistics and Census,
German Corporation for International Cooperation
GmbH (GIZ), Secretariat of Water, Provincial Directorate
of Guayas Environment, CONDESAN, National Institute
of Fishery, Catholic University of Guayaquil, Association
of Users of the Manglar Cerrito de Los Morreños,
SENPLADES, Litoral Polythenic University, Municipality
of Guayaquil, Conservation International (CI-Ecuador),
Association of Crabbers and Artisanal Fisherman 21 de
Mayo – Puerto Roma, National Institute of Biodiversity,
Association of Crabbers 6 de Julio and National
Secretariat of Planning and Developing. | 21 | 11 | 32

=== PAGE 143 ===
Representatives from the Ministry of Environment
(MAE), National Institute of Biodiversity, CIIFEN,
Ciudad de
SENAGUA, Ministry of Tourism, National Institute of 8 9 17
Guayaquil
Fishery, ESPOL, Conservation International (CI-Ecuador),
TNC and CONDESAN.
1.2.2 Semi structured interviews
To supplement the workshops and desk review, targeted interviews were conducted with 7
representatives from Muisne, Guayas and Jambeli estuaries. The aim of the interviews was to
increase stakeholder input into the identification of social and environmental risks of the
planned project. Interview questions therefore included the following risk-related topics:
• Discrimination against women on the basis of their gender, especially with regard to
participation in the design and implementation and access to opportunities and
benefits.
• Limitations in women's ability to use, develop and protect natural resources, taking
into account the different roles and positions of men and women in accessing
environmental goods and services.
• Threats to women in the context of occupational health and safety.
• Other gender equality concerns related to the project.
• Indirect impacts on biodiversity or the ecosystem services on which the livelihoods of
affected communities depend.
• Adverse effects in terms of inequality or discrimination for affected populations.
• Possible restrictions in the availability, quality and access to basic resources or
services.
• Adverse impacts on “indigenous peoples” (i.e., here Afro-Ecuadorians and Cholos
Pescadores).
• Negative effects on the development priorities of “indigenous peoples” as defined by
themselves.
• Adverse impacts on the enjoyment of human rights by the affected population and
particularly by marginalized groups.
• Aggravation of conflict or generation of violence between affected communities and
individuals.
The interviews confirmed the risks that had been identified during the workshops and provided
further detail on the situation in different places and the unique perspectives of women and
men. The following table provides an overview of the interviewees2.
2 Interviewees were asked whether the information they provided could be recorded and did not
request to remain anonymous.
13

--- Table 1 on Page 143 ---
Ciudad de
Guayaquil | Representatives from the Ministry of Environment
(MAE), National Institute of Biodiversity, CIIFEN,
SENAGUA, Ministry of Tourism, National Institute of
Fishery, ESPOL, Conservation International (CI-Ecuador),
TNC and CONDESAN. | 8 | 9 | 17

=== PAGE 144 ===
Table 4. Individual interviews (2 men, 5 women)
Male president of a Fishing Cooperative with 150 members (30 women) in the south.
Members are crab collectors, fishers and women linked to activities such as gastronomy
and crab pulp.
Male, former president of an Association in the south that has 105 members who are
fishers and collect shells and crabs. At the moment, all members are men, but the plan is to
involve women at some point in crab pulping.
Afro-Ecuadorian female member of a Women’s Forum in the north.
Female president of a fishers association in the south (40 men + 20 women)
Afro-Ecuadorian female president of a Women’s Forum in the north with 35 members.
Female former President of an Association in the south. 67 men + 200 women.
Female president of an association of fishers (1 men + 19 women) in the north.
1.2.3 Surveys
Another important source of primary information was surveys conducted with 99 local leaders
and association members (80 males/19 females) during the same time as the workshops. The
surveys gathered information about: (i) mangrove benefits like landscape, recreation, air
purification, capture of commercial species and for self-consumption, bird habitat, obtaining
honey and wood for house construction. (ii) the perception of changes in the weather (iii) drivers
of impacts on mangrove ecosystem (iv) mangrove restoration, and (v) ecosystem services.
Table 5. Surveys conducted with community associations
Area Association Local leaders Members
Balao 27
Puerto El Morro 7
Naranjal 2
Miraflores 1
Puerto Baquerizo 1
Recinto Nuevo Porvenir 1
Northern
Puerto Roma 6 9
Machala 9
Puerto Bolivar 7 4
Isla Pongalillo 2
Isla Costa Rica 1
Sauces II 1
Naranjal 1 1
Puerto El Morro 1 1
Bunche 1 2
Southern Bunche 1 1
Pedro Carbo 1 1
Salina-Muisne 1 1
Chamanga 1 1
14

--- Table 1 on Page 144 ---
Male president of a Fishing Cooperative with 150 members (30 women) in the south.
Members are crab collectors, fishers and women linked to activities such as gastronomy
and crab pulp.
Male, former president of an Association in the south that has 105 members who are
fishers and collect shells and crabs. At the moment, all members are men, but the plan is to
involve women at some point in crab pulping.
Afro-Ecuadorian female member of a Women’s Forum in the north.
Female president of a fishers association in the south (40 men + 20 women)
Afro-Ecuadorian female president of a Women’s Forum in the north with 35 members.
Female former President of an Association in the south. 67 men + 200 women.
Female president of an association of fishers (1 men + 19 women) in the north.

--- Table 2 on Page 144 ---
Northern | Balao |  | 27
 | Puerto El Morro |  | 7
 | Naranjal |  | 2
 | Miraflores |  | 1
 | Puerto Baquerizo |  | 1
 | Recinto Nuevo Porvenir |  | 1
 | Puerto Roma | 6 | 9
 | Machala |  | 9
 | Puerto Bolivar | 7 | 4
 | Isla Pongalillo |  | 2
 | Isla Costa Rica |  | 1
 | Sauces II |  | 1
Southern | Naranjal | 1 | 1
 | Puerto El Morro | 1 | 1
 | Bunche | 1 | 2
 | Bunche | 1 | 1
 | Pedro Carbo | 1 | 1
 | Salina-Muisne | 1 | 1
 | Chamanga | 1 | 1

=== PAGE 145 ===
Pedro Carbo 1 1
Muise 1 3
Total 22 77
The gender assessment and subsequent gender action plan follow the Guidelines outlined in the
Green Climate Fund (GFC) Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects and the
Updated Gender Policy and Action Plan 2018–2020, as well as Conservation International-GCF’s
Gender Policy in their latest (November 2020) Environmental and Social Management
Framework. The purpose of the assessment is to ensure that the proposed project is gender
responsive, meaning it will substantially help to overcome historical gender biases. Measures
have been put in place by this project to ensure that both women and men benefit and that the
burden on women in particular, as a result of their gender roles, is not increased but reduced by
the project activities.
15

--- Table 1 on Page 145 ---
 | Muise | 1 | 3
Total |  | 22 | 77

=== PAGE 146 ===
2. Situation of men and women in coastal Ecuador
2.1 Legal status of women across Ecuador
This section describes the national legal framework in terms of gender and the international legal
framework for gender and the environment that the country has been following and with which
it has been bringing itself into line.
2.1.1 National legal framework
Ecuador has made significant progress in terms of national regulations to support women’s
rights. For over 10 years, in the Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador, the principle of non-
discrimination contained in Paragraph 4 of Article 66 has been further underpinned by
Paragraph 2 of Article 11, which prohibits discrimination based on certain suspect classifications
including sex.
Article 11 of the Constitution includes the concepts of direct and indirect discrimination. It
makes reference to direct discrimination with the phrase “that has the purpose of impairing or
nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of rights” and indirect discrimination with the
phrase “that has the effect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of
rights.”
Also included are a series of obligations incumbent upon the state to achieve effective gender
equality. These are a series of affirmative actions promoting true equality for rights holders in a
situation of inequality. They include developing and implementing policies to achieve equality
between men and women; including a gender perspective in plans and programs; promoting
equal representation of men and women in leadership and decision-making positions; bringing
about conditions that guarantee the rights and principles recognized in the Constitution, in
particular equality in diversity and non-discrimination, with an obligation to prioritize actions for
groups needing special attention due to ongoing inequalities, exclusion, discrimination or
violence; and adopting the necessary measures to guarantee equality for women in access to
employment, professional and career training and advancement, fair pay, and self-employment
initiatives.
Also enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic are the principles of parity, equity and rotation
of power as cornerstones of the electoral system. Therefore, consideration must be given to
alternating men and women in electoral lists. Similarly, the Constitution establishes the principle
of parity between men and women in appointing judicial officers.
2.1.2 Agenda for Women
As of 2018, the National Council for Gender Equality, a national authority with powers aimed at
mainstreaming gender equality in the country, has a key instrument to implement policy: the
National Agenda for the Equality of Women and LGBTI People 2018-2021, which includes lines
of action, policies and actions to be undertaken by institutions and civil society based on the
principle of fair treatment.
16

=== PAGE 147 ===
The guide is divided into several lines of action that include autonomy and a culture of peace,
and addresses issues relating to a life free of violence, actions in education and public policies in
health, sexual and reproductive rights, or in fields such as sport. Another line of action is
centered on sustainability of life and combines issues such as reproduction and sustainability,
while also establishing an environmental policy that sets forth the need to generate statistics
and promote conservation and reforestation programs and initiatives with the goal of improving
ecosystem services and water sources.
The agenda also includes a section on leadership and the transformation of sociocultural
patterns and discusses the monitoring and assessment of actions undertaken to promote
equality.
2.1.3 Gender policy of the Ministry of Environment, Water and Ecological Transition of
Ecuador (MAATE)
The Ministry of Environment, Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador (MAATE) is responsible
for complying with international instruments signed by Ecuador in matters relating to
environmental management and sustainable development. However, the country has made
some important advances in gender.
The MAATE must therefore actively define policies, mechanisms, and strategies conducive to
introducing interculturality and gender perspectives in programs, projects, and actions that
come under its area of authority.
In this context, the General Coordinating Office for Environmental Planning defined the
“Strategy for the Institutionalization of Interculturality and Gender Perspectives” as a
methodological approach and a mechanism for advocacy within the National Environmental
Policy (PAN). This initiative aims to comply with Constituent Assembly legislative decrees and
urgently address issues that have been put off or rendered invisible. The goal is to recognize
spaces to exercise citizen rights and consolidate democratic processes, strengthening the
institutional framework of the National Councils for Equality (Peoples and Nationalities, Women;
Afro-Ecuadorians, the Montubio people, among others), proposals linked to the democratizing
role of the state with a decentralized and territorial approach, and the application of the cross-
cutting themes of gender equity, interculturality and the environment.
The MAATE has proposed this strategy as a policy proposal to include social perspectives in
environmental management. It is also consistent with major strategic lines proposed by central
government and reflected in various public management instruments.
Furthermore, the constitution clearly shows the state’s obligation to ensure fair treatment of
men and women and of different peoples and ethnic groups, and respect universal human rights
inherent to every human being, including the right to a safe environment.
On January 30th, 2019, the environment minister, Tarsicio Granizo, and the deputy resident
representative of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Nuno Queiros, signed
the Project Appraisal Committee, an enabling document with which it will be possible to begin
a broad process to include a gender approach in developing Ecuador’s nationally-determined
contributions (NDCs). This project was undertaken within the framework of the NDC-SP (NDC
Support Programme).
17

=== PAGE 148 ===
Also in 2019, the MAATE and the National Council for Gender Equality signed an
interinstitutional cooperation framework agreement, through which the two institutions
committed to leading and ensuring the inclusion of gender equality policies to create and
strengthen effective, efficient interventions in climate change-related projects. This agreement
is the starting point for the joint development of the Gender and Climate Change Action Plan,
which will serve to define national priorities and goals that respond to the specific needs of, and
differential impacts faced by, women, men, and diverse peoples in the face of climate change,
taking into consideration age, ethnicity, disability and/or human mobility.
2.1.4 An NDC with a gender perspective
Ecuador is defining its NDC through a participatory process led by the MAE, with support from a
number of aid agencies: the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the French Development Agency (AFD),
the NDC-Partnership, the German Corporation for International Cooperation (GIZ), Euroclima
Plus, the Consortium for the Sustainable Development of the Andean Ecoregion (CONDESAN),
and Cooperación Española (FIIAPP).
The NDC Support Program is being implemented through, among other groups, the Technical
Roundtable on Gender and Climate Change, which is led by the MAE with support from the
UNDP. This group also includes representatives from Fundación Futuro Latinoamericano (FFLA),
which provides facilitation support, the National Council for Gender Equality, the German
Corporation for International Cooperation (GIZ), Grupo Faro, CARE, Universidad Técnica
Particular de Loja (UTPL), Universidad San Francisco de Quito (USFQ), the Rosa Luxemburg
Foundation, Heifer International, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and
Fundación Altrópico. The Technical Roundtable on Gender and Climate Change was founded in
response to a need to establish links between academia, non-governmental organizations and
international aid, and create a space for interaction between different agents that contribute to
the study, incorporation and strengthening of a gender approach in climate action in Ecuador.
In addition, with the support of Corporación Grupo Randi Randi (CGRR), a participatory
methodology was developed to include a gender approach.
a) National Climate Change Adaptation Plan (PLANACC) and gender mainstreaming.
The PLANACC establishes a need to identify and create programs and activities based on areas
of work or sectors that evidence has shown, in theory and practice, to be most vulnerable to
climate change and to cause the most economic, social and environmental harm to the country
as a result of the impacts of climate change. In this respect, one of the implementation criteria
mentioned by the plan is the relationship with the social, economic or environmental system.
Equally, the sectors prioritized for climate change adaptation in Ecuador can be grouped
according to their relationship with the social, economic and environmental systems (MAE,
2012, 87).
In this sense, and taking into account the scope of adaptation initiatives, there are more
opportunities to include women and sectors considered at risk or vulnerable.
18

=== PAGE 149 ===
2.2 Political participation at national, provincial, and local levels
Female voting in Ecuador increased from 76% to 84% between 2009 and 2018. However, since
the National Assembly was established in 2009, it has not included an equal number of men and
women: in 2009, only 40 (32.3%) of the 124 elected assembly members were women. (National
Electoral Council, 2019)
In the project areas, there is low female representation at the parish and mayoral level. It is
interesting to note the differences of gender parity in parish candidates verses election: it is
clear that women candidates are not as successful in being elected. It is also interesting to note
there is not much difference in northern vs. southern project sites. Women are highly
underrepresented at the mayoral level in both candidates and elected positions, with particular
starkness in the northern sites where there are no female mayors.
Table 6. Parish board members in the project areas
Candidates Elected
Province Estuary
Female Male Female Male
Northern sites
Esmeraldas Muisne 705 (44%) 900 81 (28%) 204
Cayapas
Southern sites
El Oro Jambelí 485 (44%) 610 69 (28%) 176
Guayas Guayas 446 (45%) 539 50 (34%) 95
Source: National Electoral Council, 2019
Table 7. Mayors in the project areas
Candidates Elected
Province Estuary
Female Male Female Male
Northern sites
Esmeraldas Muisne 7 (15%) 40 0 (0%) 7
Cayapas
Southern sites
El Oro Jambelí 11 (16%) 58 1 (7%) 13
Guayas Guayas 35 (17%) 166 5 (20%) 20
Source: National Electoral Council, 2019
Looking at the gender gap in politics can be a useful indication of women’s perceived standing
in society, as well as highlight some of the historical inequalities that continue to persist. In this
instance, it is clear that the project areas have larger gender gaps than the rest of the country,
especially when it comes to actually begin elected to a position of power and influence. The
reasons are likely multifaceted, including long-held societal/gender norms that privilege men in
elected positions, fewer women who have achieved the level of education needed to
19

--- Table 1 on Page 149 ---
Province | Estuary | Candidates |  | Elected | 
 |  | Female | Male | Female | Male
Northern sites |  |  |  |  | 
Esmeraldas | Muisne
Cayapas | 705 (44%) | 900 | 81 (28%) | 204
Southern sites |  |  |  |  | 
El Oro | Jambelí | 485 (44%) | 610 | 69 (28%) | 176
Guayas | Guayas | 446 (45%) | 539 | 50 (34%) | 95

--- Table 2 on Page 149 ---
Province | Estuary | Candidates |  | Elected | 
 |  | Female | Male | Female | Male
Northern sites |  |  |  |  | 
Esmeraldas | Muisne
Cayapas | 7 (15%) | 40 | 0 (0%) | 7
Southern sites |  |  |  |  | 
El Oro | Jambelí | 11 (16%) | 58 | 1 (7%) | 13
Guayas | Guayas | 35 (17%) | 166 | 5 (20%) | 20

=== PAGE 150 ===
successfully compete, and unequal burden of household chores that often keep women from
pursuing leadership outside of the home.
2.3 Socio-economic information
At a national level, the statistics and gender diagnosis presented in the Agenda for Women 2018-
2021 (National Council for Gender Equality, CNIG) have shown that relations between men and
women have been asymmetrical and have gone unchallenged throughout history. This has been
a root cause of inequalities. At a macro level, and especially in rural settings, women have found
themselves relegated to the private sphere, with little chance to undertake productive labor,
while men have greater opportunities to engage in the public sphere, in making decisions that
affect the community and their families, and in business dealings with external stakeholders.
Overburdening caused by the roles played by women in the home is another issue identified by
community members. “In general women are responsible for the home, children, husbands, and
family members, both in terms of providing general care and financially. Women have the most
important role in society because they play a part in all the different spheres of activity: the
home, productive labor, and the community,” (data collection workshop, comment by one
female participant). Likewise, men (in their roles as fishers) also face increasing socio-economic
challenges such as reduced fish populations, drug trafficking, and illegal fishing. This is forcing
fishers to travel even farther out to sea where open waters are dangerous. Men’s fishery-based
livelihoods are changing as Beitl & Gaibor (2018) explain, the lack of employment in recent years
has driven more men to enter the cockle fishery.
The national unemployment levels have shown a clear decline over the last five years and stood
at 4.4% in March 2017. The unemployment rate was higher for women than for men – in 2019
5.7% of women in the economically active population were unemployed, while for men this
figure was 3.8%. Overall, female labor force participation is limited, at 49% compared to 79% of
men. In the artisanal fishing sector, the conditions of poverty and extreme poverty are high in
all the cases analyzed.
Table 8. Demographics in project site areas
%
Ethnic Groups (% of total)
Pop- % % Poverty1
Municipality Estuary
ulation1 men women Afro
Mestizos Montubio Other White
descendents
El Guabo Jambelí 49,3 3,9 74%
59.536 50,7 91,2 1,7 0,7 2,3
Machala Jambelí 50,8 6,8 56%
306.309 49,2 86,8 1,7 0,9 3,8
Santa Rosa Jambelí 50,8 2,6 56%
80.299 49,2 94 0,8 0,7 1,9
Cayapas
Eloy Alfaro 50,8 67,9 18,1 94%
Mataje 46.305 49,2 11,3 2,2 0,6
Muisne
Muisne 49,4 38,8 2,7 1,8 98%
Cojimíes 36.426 50,6 53,4 3,2
Cayapas
San Lorenzo 52,3 83,9 5,1 84%
Mataje 48.391 47,7 9,9 0,6 0,4
Guayaquil Guayas 51,1 6,9 47%
2.746.403 48,9 85,2 2,3 1,5 4,1
20

--- Table 1 on Page 150 ---
Municipality | Estuary | Pop-
ulation1 | %
men | %
women | Ethnic Groups (% of total) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | % | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Poverty1 | 
 |  |  |  |  | Mestizos |  | Afro |  | Montubio | Other | White |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | descendents |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
El Guabo | Jambelí | 59.536 | 50,7 | 49,3 | 91,2 | 3,9 |  |  | 1,7 | 0,7 | 2,3 | 74% |  | 
Machala | Jambelí | 306.309 | 49,2 | 50,8 | 86,8 | 6,8 |  |  | 1,7 | 0,9 | 3,8 | 56% |  | 
Santa Rosa | Jambelí | 80.299 | 49,2 | 50,8 | 94 | 2,6 |  |  | 0,8 | 0,7 | 1,9 | 56% |  | 
Eloy Alfaro | Cayapas
Mataje | 46.305 | 49,2 | 50,8 | 11,3 | 67,9 |  |  | 2,2 | 18,1 | 0,6 | 94% |  | 
Muisne | Muisne
Cojimíes | 36.426 | 50,6 | 49,4 | 53,4 | 38,8 |  |  | 3,2 | 2,7 | 1,8 | 98% |  | 
San Lorenzo | Cayapas
Mataje | 48.391 | 47,7 | 52,3 | 9,9 | 83,9 |  |  | 0,6 | 5,1 | 0,4 | 84% |  | 
Guayaquil | Guayas | 2.746.403 | 48,9 | 51,1 | 85,2 | 6,9 |  |  | 2,3 | 1,5 | 4,1 | 47% |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 150 ---
Pop-
ulation1

--- Table 3 on Page 150 ---
%
men

--- Table 4 on Page 150 ---
%
women

=== PAGE 151 ===
Naranjal Guayas 49,9 4,5 74%
83.691 50,1 86 5,8 0,8 2,9
Total
3.407.360
Source: 1 INEC 2022; 2 INEC 2010
Communities in the northern Cayapas-Mataje and Muisne-Cojimies estuaries (and the northern
area more broadly) are generally small: 74% have between 4 and 28 households, only 13% have
more than 130 households, and the largest (Pampanal) has only 225 households. The average
number of household members is 4.46. Houses are usually small and 88.7% are built from wood,
55% of which are made from mangrove wood. Others are made from a combination of wood
and other materials, like brick and concrete. Almost all roofs are made of corrugated iron
(Ocampo-Thomason, 2006)
Communities in the southern Guayas and Jambeli estuaries, are bigger than those in the north.
The average number of members (and families) in each association is 128. The largest
association based on the number of members is Hualtaco at Jambeli estuary with 369
households. The average number of people per household is 4.05. Another characteristic is that
in the south there is a larger number of families that are female as head of the family (33% in
the north vs. 36% in the south) as Table 9 shows. This situation is important to highlight as only
19% of the associations has more than 30% women as members.
Widespread machismo is one hurdle to achieving equity in the productive, reproductive and
community spheres in these areas. “The fact that men are considered masters of the home
amounts to a lack of education because it’s machismo; we are equal with different ways of
thinking, but the woman’s main role is in the home. But when women are left on their own, they
take on both roles,” (data collection workshop, comment by one female participant) (MAE,
2018).
Table 9. Household size and demographics in project sites
Economically active population
Homes
and occupation
Index of average
Occupation
Estuaries Average Size female head in the EAP (% of total)
(% of EAP)
municipality
Northern
Cayapas-Mataje 4,3 39,0 38,03 91,78
Muisne-Cojimies 4,31 26,85 33,75 90,23
Southern
Guayas 3,9 34,6 43,11 91,81
Jambelí 3,7 37,5 43,26 94,56
Total 4,05 34,50 39,54 92,10
Source: INEC 2010
21

--- Table 1 on Page 151 ---
Naranjal | Guayas | 83.691 | 50,1 | 49,9 | 86 | 4,5 | 5,8 | 0,8 | 2,9 | 74%
 | Total | 3.407.360 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 151 ---
 | Homes |  | Economically active population
and occupation | 
Estuaries | Average Size | Index of average
female head in the
municipality | EAP (% of total) | Occupation
(% of EAP)
Northern |  |  |  | 
Cayapas-Mataje | 4,3 | 39,0 | 38,03 | 91,78
Muisne-Cojimies | 4,31 | 26,85 | 33,75 | 90,23
Southern |  |  |  | 
Guayas | 3,9 | 34,6 | 43,11 | 91,81
Jambelí | 3,7 | 37,5 | 43,26 | 94,56
Total | 4,05 | 34,50 | 39,54 | 92,10

=== PAGE 152 ===
Across all project sites, women and men depend on the natural resources they obtain from the
mangroves, namely crab, black clam, and resources from fishing in general. In exceptional
circumstances, such as during the closed season, men find they need to earn an income outside
the home. In all project areas, men and women depend on the outside market as they do not
have basic commodities. In most cases, family money is used to cover these expenses. Income
specifically obtained from small businesses and selling essentials can be used by women for
expenses considered luxuries. To support the family, basic foodstuffs, clothing, and other
consumables need purchasing. The specific gendered uses and management of mangroves is
detailed in a section below.
2.4 Education
Since 1990, the education gap in Ecuador between females and males has narrowed. On
average, males and women attend school for 7 years with difference of 2 years between the
estuaries at north and south. Illiteracy rates nationally are 6,7 males, 9,6 females with a
difference in gender that we didn’t find in the estuaries.
In the project sites:
Table 10. Education in project sites
Illiteracy Years of schooling
%
Estuaries % total % men Total Men Women
women
Northern
Cayapas-Mataje 13,29 13,55 13,02 6,92 6,78 7,07
Muisne-Cojimies 14,19 14,50 13,85 6,67 6,63 6,51
Sourthern
Guayas 3,90 3,80 3,99 8,36 8,36 8,36
Jambelí 4,38 4,31 4,45 8,24 8,17 8,23
Average 8,94 9,04 8,83 7,55 7,49 7,54
Source: INEC 2010
Inequality in education and literacy can be a product of gender inequality in society and can
directly influence women’s ability to participate, engage, and influence climate activities. In this
situation, however, it is encouraging to see that literacy and schooling is relatively equal
between males and females in the project sites.
Education is limited to the primary level. Secondary education can only be pursued in the larger
towns of the cantons, which are several kilometers away. This is a hindrance for women because
it limits their access to education – “leaving” their communities requires money for transport.
In addition, as victims of violence and sexual harassment, they feel vulnerable at having to travel
long distances on paths with little infrastructure before reaching a means of river or land
22

--- Table 1 on Page 152 ---
 | Illiteracy |  |  | Years of schooling |  | 
Estuaries | % total | % men | %
women | Total | Men | Women
Northern |  |  |  |  |  | 
Cayapas-Mataje | 13,29 | 13,55 | 13,02 | 6,92 | 6,78 | 7,07
Muisne-Cojimies | 14,19 | 14,50 | 13,85 | 6,67 | 6,63 | 6,51
Sourthern |  |  |  |  |  | 
Guayas | 3,90 | 3,80 | 3,99 | 8,36 | 8,36 | 8,36
Jambelí | 4,38 | 4,31 | 4,45 | 8,24 | 8,17 | 8,23
Average | 8,94 | 9,04 | 8,83 | 7,55 | 7,49 | 7,54

=== PAGE 153 ===
transport. Lastly, women’s responsibility toward caregiving makes this their priority within their
communities, leading them to give up the chance to pursue education.
The rural population does not have access and full coverage to attend primary, secondary and
higher education. Formal education presents limitations, especially at high school, whose
percentages of attendance are lower in comparison to elementary school, in most rural parishes
(Rengel 2020). In the case of islands in the Guayas estuary this situation is even worse, where
parents prefer not to send their kids to the school on another island because of security issues
with piracy (personal communication).
2.5 Time use/division of labor
In all project areas, caregiving dynamics are similar and, for the most part, are the responsibility
of women. Described below is an example of a daily routine encompassing the different
experiences in the project areas during field data collection.
Women living in mangrove swamps work long days, which begin with family caregiving
responsibilities and then harvesting or fishing activities. They return to cook for the family and
look after the children, and then cook dinner and finally rest. The average working day for
women is around 14 hours, and little societal value is placed on caregiving or reproductive tasks,
rarely seeing them as a social investment.
By contrast, men have much shorter days, fishing or harvesting for between four and five hours.
This means that once their day’s fishing or harvesting is over, they are relieved from work. This
situation changes when they work externally and find themselves compelled to work as day
laborers in shrimp farms or on a country estate or ranch (finca), in which case they leave home
at around 7 a.m. and return around 4 or 5 p.m. They take a packed lunch and return home at
different times depending on how far away their place of work is.
In this context, spare time is virtually unheard of for women. They rarely leave home, while men
get together on the playing areas in the afternoon or have time to rest after lunch. Problems
with alcohol were mentioned, but not ubiquitous. Some interviews made mention of the fact
that when decisions on how use financial resources are left entirely to men, a good share is
spent on alcohol.
These observations and surveys are validated by a gendered time use survey conducted earlier
(INEC 2010) in the northern provide of Esmeraldas. The study highlights a similar unequal
division of labor, with women performing – on average – 2 hours of labor more than men. The
difference in male and female time use is especially notable in unpaid labor, particularly
housework, which is primarily undertaken by women, for an average of four hours a day
compared to just one hour a day for men.
Together, this data reveals the excessive burden faced by women in work both inside and
outside the home. In sum, they spend their time tending to household members, obtaining
resources to support their families, and engaging in community activities. The situation becomes
yet more complex when women are the head of a household where resources need to be
obtained on a daily basis in order to subsist.
23

=== PAGE 154 ===
2.6 Health and gender-based violence
Life expectancy in Ecuador is approximately 76.4 years (73.7 for men and 79.1 for women). The
maternal mortality rate across Ecuador is 59/100,000 live births; infant mortality is
approximately 17 deaths/1,000 births. Healthcare is available in the main towns of each canton,
but accessing it requires having the financial means to leave the area. Pregnant women, for
instance, leave the communities one or two months before they are due and stay with relatives
so they can receive care in nearby hospitals in the cities of Machala, Guayaquil or Esmeraldas.
Table 11. Incidence of gender-based violence
Location Percentage
National 64.9
Urban 65.7
Rural 62.8
Esmeraldas (north) 68.2
Guayas (south) 63.1
El Oro (south) 70.2
Afroecuadorians 71.8
Mestizas 65.1
Indigenous 64.0
Montuvias 58.4
Global* 35
Perú 70
Source: INEC, 2020, ENCUESTA NACIONAL SOBRE RELACIONES FAMILIARES Y VIOLENCIA DE GÉNERO CONTRA LAS
MUJERES – ENVIGMU 2019 Retrieved in January 2020
*WHO.2013. Estimaciones globales y regionales de la violencia contra la mujer.
Rates of gender-based violence are very high and are linked to the socioeconomic dynamics of
exclusion and poverty. The table above presents the magnitude of the issue and manifestations
of violence most common. Further, it reveals that incidents are relatively similar in both urban
and rural areas. Rates of violence in the project sites are similar to those at the national rate,
which is nearly twice as high as the global average of 35%.
The importance of gender-based violence was underscored during our field data gathering: one
female leader reported that almost all women had endured this kind of violence at some point
in their life. Many women attending the workshop nodded in agreement, their body language
confirming that they had experienced or witnessed this type of violence.
The increase in gender-based violence in disaster situations and places experiencing economic
tension has been well documented. Both of these factors are closely linked to climate change
on the coast of Ecuador. When communities and families are unable or unprepared to deal with
the effects of climate change and climate-related disasters, this gives rise to heightened social
and financial tensions that may cause gender violence to escalate. Disasters increase existing
gender inequality and given that Ecuador already has a high rate of gender violence at over 60%,
the phenomenon is likely to worsen as the effects of climate change become more severe. At
24

--- Table 1 on Page 154 ---
Location | Percentage
National | 64.9
Urban | 65.7
Rural | 62.8
Esmeraldas (north) | 68.2
Guayas (south) | 63.1
El Oro (south) | 70.2
Afroecuadorians | 71.8
Mestizas | 65.1
Indigenous | 64.0
Montuvias | 58.4
Global* | 35
Perú | 70

=== PAGE 155 ===
the same time, as Ecuador remains stuck in the grip of the COVID-19 pandemic, the effects of
which will be felt for many years to come, it is also important to stress that gender-based
violence has increased drastically throughout the country as a result of the shutdowns and
economic tension. A 2017 report by the Red Cross on gender violence on the Ecuadorian coast
(the Manabí and Esmeraldas provinces) following the 2016 earthquake found a lack of gender
sensitivity in the disaster response mechanisms and called for better prevention and an
improved response to gender-based violence in disasters.
If gender-based violence is rooted in, and triggered by, economic stress, then relieving that
stress can help to mitigate and reduce the incidents of GBV. Proactively working with men and
women to adapt and buffer their livelihoods to climate change impacts, which can then
hopefully reduce economic stress, can be an important mitigation tactic.
2.7 Assets and infrastructure
Local dynamics in regard to economic and financial matters and other assets are similar across
the project areas. Women have scarce opportunities to access resources because they are
unable to access credit, with the exception of savings plans and small loans for household
consumption. Women have no capital to post as collateral to access credit (information from
interviews, August 2019). “There are many resources here, in tourism, in fishing, there are belief
systems, there are many other options possible. Sadly, there is no way to put them into effect
because we cannot access credit,” (data collection workshop, comment by one female
participant) (MAE, 2018).
Men, on the other hand, have higher earning potential and greater opportunities to access
formal loans. Additionally, benefits were recorded from the rural social security program for
small-scale agricultural workers, Seguro Social Campesino, in one area in the north (Muisne).
As far as infrastructure is concerned, the field visits showed there was electricity in all sites,
while Muisne and Jambeli had running, non-potable water, and in Puerto Roma in Guayas
Estuary water has to be managed on the islands, generally by collecting rainwater. Some women
sell fresh water they have collected or purified water that is brought in from the mainland.
In the areas close to cities, they do have access to cellular phone and Internet services, which
has helped connectivity, especially in Muisne and Guayas Estuaries. The service is weak and at
times non-existent, but it does at least enable communication with neighboring areas.
The roads to the main towns of the cantons are usually paved, with gravel roads serving to
connect communities. Transport services are limited both in number and frequency. This creates
a sense of vulnerability for women, as they have to walk long days, often without public lighting.
Speedboats are available to travel by river between Jambelí and Machala, and between
Guayaquil and Puerto Roma and other islands. In Muisne, transport is available from the back
road to the town center. River transport is safer because boarding takes place in the town center
and the place of arrival has better infrastructure.
25

=== PAGE 156 ===
3. Access, use, and management of mangroves.
3.1 Importance of mangroves to local populations
The mangroves provide a livelihood for fishing communities, mestizos, settlers, and Afro-
Ecuadorians, who all live in the project areas. The information on ecosystem services that was
generated in participatory workshops with the community showed that it was the provisioning
services that the population most valued, for the consumption and sale of products derived from
mangroves. The community reported that the effects of climate change are impacting the
provision of these ecosystem services. The regulating service was identified in coastal protection
in both the northern and southern project sites, and in the provision of clean air, with
reforestation efforts undertaken by both men and women, in the case of southern Guayas. The
cultural services, meanwhile, are geared toward the development of ecotourism and the use of
ancestral knowledge to cure diseases with the bark and roots of mangroves. These activities are
performed both by men (extraction) and women (preparation), while in the case of ecotourism,
it is women who feature most prominently, through the cuisine they offer tourists.
While outdated, an excellent account of gendered use of natural resources comes from the
northern Esmeraldas providence (Veach 1996). In this example, ocean fishing is done exclusively
by men with highly specialized knowledge and from motorized canoes, often being their main
source of income. Women generally do the bulk of the fish processing, with men usually
marketing the fish. Other livelihood activities performed primarily by men include carpentry,
agriculture, logging, charcoal production, and hunting. In contrast, resource use done primarily
by women includes collecting concha (mollusks) which, while the income potential is less than
fishing, is considered to be more reliable.
More recent research with mangrove communities in Esmeraldas highlighted the impacts that
expanding shrimp aquaculture is having on gendered use of mangrove resources, with collapsing
fishing livelihoods leading more men into mangrove exploitation and displacing women’s
traditional mangrove-dependent resources and livelihoods (Trevino & Murillo-Sandoval 2021).
This overuse of the mangrove resources is leading to depletion of mangrove cockle populations
and putting the community in a vulnerable positions as everyone is increasingly dependent on
this fishery to subsist (ibid).
3.2 Participation and decision-making in mangrove management
Women are largely inactive in discussions and decision-making in their communities, while men
are usually more vocal in meetings and better represented in the boards. It is at these meetings
that decisions about things like monthly payments of the members, defining the rules for crab
extraction (amounts extracted by each member, defining the extraction areas, or number of
hours in the areas). Some organizations, particularly those associated with their activities (e.g.,
mollusk collection), include female members, and this can be an important place to build their
capacities. Certain roles within mixed organizations are more feminized, such as secretary and
treasurer which tend to have less clout in decision-making. Within community processes for
mangrove management, women’s specific interests are rendered invisible, which can deepen
divides in terms of access, use, and control. Women’s limited participation can be attributed to
several reasons:
26

=== PAGE 157 ===
1. One recurring problem in women’s participation is their lack of leadership. In the words
of one community leader, “women know everything, the only thing they lack is
leadership, they already know the rest.” The fact that women do not feel they have that
capacity makes them uneasy. Certain restrictions faced by women have to do with the
issue of leadership, as many women still fear coming into confrontation in assemblies
and standing up for their rights as women.
2. Women are held back by their families/spouse and the household responsibilities they
largely shoulder. “you can’t go because you have to cook for me.”
3. Transportation and accessibility to meeting spaces is also limited. Interviews revealed
that only men hold knowledge about fishing and how to operate motorboats, and this
knowledge allows them to move around the area with ease and facilitates their
participation in various decision-making fora. Women do not own the canoes or
outboard motors, only their labor power.
It is important to mention that women engage to a greater extent when it comes to attending
meetings involving securing one or more basic services for coastal communities. In other words,
women are overrepresented in activities that support community services and works but are
lacking in community decision-making regarding natural resource management in the mangrove
ecosystem.
The mangrove management organizations in project sites were established with the aim of
promoting the use of mangroves and accessing communal benefits. The mangrove use
agreements are drawn up by the associations, which have a specific objective. While there are
no formal limitation in terms of access rights, as mentioned above, due to customary practices,
women have limited decision-making power even though they may be association members. In
one community, access to discussions and decision-making regarding the mangrove is
particularly challenging as women’s responsibilities are geared toward caregiving; there is no
interest or receptiveness toward identifying spaces to provide or promote activities associated
with women’s use or exploitation of mangrove resources.
One other organizational aspect that should be mentioned is that there are community boards
(organizations directly associated with the mangroves) with boards of directors in associations
generally made up of 5 people, who were selected by all members of the Association. Leadership
positions are generally held by men. The women who participate do so as secretaries or board
members with no additional specific decision-making tasks.
There are also organizations of fishermen, crabbers and black clam harvesters. They also have
boards of directors that handle and address sporadic needs to achieve and improve on their
objectives. Depending on the area, women play a minimal role on the board, but this depends
on the particular nature of each organization.
Below is a table that describes the number and gender make-up of the mangrove associations in
the four project estuaries. There is a remarkable difference in gender make-up between the
northern and southern estuaries. In the south, women’s difficulty in participating in decision-
making derives from the fact they are not familiar with the mangrove or legally recognized as
part of the communities or productive organizations. This can be attributed to their access and
use of the mangrove areas. In the north, women can walk to the mangroves in groups, but in the
south the mangrove areas are far from the community, so they have to take a boat. Usually,
women’s mangrove activities in the south are more individual (each person arranges their own
27

=== PAGE 158 ===
access to the area). This is why women are less involved in mangrove-related activities in the
south.
Table 12. Association membership in project sites
Women’s representation in mangrove associations
Project site
Total # of associations Average % of women in associations
Northern
Muisne
6 60%
Cayapas-Mataje 62%
14
1 association entirely female
Southern
Guayas River
23 11%
Jambelí 20%
24
1 association entirely female
Source: MAAE 2020
3.2.1 Northern estuaries (Cayapas-Mataje + Muisne)
Cayapas-Mataje estuary
The population in the northern Cayapas-Mataje estuary is chiefly Afro-Esmeraldian and in
sociocultural and local development terms is dependent on exploiting natural resources from
the mangroves, particularly black clams and blue crabs, and fishing in general.
In Cayapas-Mataje, men and women work harvesting black clams and other resources. In terms
of natural resource management, women are especially remarkable as they have great
knowledge of how to carry out this arduous task. Lastly, it is women who control the sale of
black clams and use the earnings to purchase certain products to feed their families.
Typically, each community in the northern Cayapas-Mataje estuary has specific areas for black
clam harvesting, which are usually respected by other communities. Traditionally, black clam
harvesters use small wooden canoes with oars, which limits the distances they travel to harvest.
In addition, women prefer to harvest in areas close to their communities. Fishermen tend to
alternate areas, leaving some areas undisturbed for a few weeks so that the black clams are able
to recover. Traditionally, harvesters return the “mother” (with young) so she may reproduce,
and they also return small clams (under 4.5 cm long) to allow them to grow.
Black clam harvesting has traditionally been performed by women. One reason for this is the
fact that black clams are gathered individually by hand, so no investment of capital is required.
The harvesting areas are close to communities, which allows women to take their children with
them and makes it easier for them to combine black clam harvesting with housekeeping chores.
Black clam harvesting is the most popular form of work undertaken by women in the area. In
the 99 households that reported black clam harvesting as their main livelihood, 82.4% of
harvesters are women (Ocampo-Thomason, 2006). In addition to the women who harvest, a
further 2.4% of women purchase black clams to sell them on to external intermediaries. One of
28

--- Table 1 on Page 158 ---
Women’s representation in mangrove associations | 
 | Average % of women in associations

--- Table 2 on Page 158 ---
Muisne | 6 | 60%
Cayapas-Mataje | 14 | 62%
1 association entirely female
Southern |  | 
Guayas River | 23 | 11%
Jambelí 20%
24
1 association entirely female
Source: MAAE 2020 |  | 

=== PAGE 159 ===
the most significant findings is that 20% of female-headed households depend almost
exclusively on black clam harvesting, and in 10% of mixed households, both spouses harvest
black clams as their main, and in some cases only, livelihood.
Black clam harvesting is the livelihood of 16% households. Other shellfish are also gathered at
the same time as black clams, but they have little market value and are used to provide protein
for household members (Ocampo-Thomason, 2006).
Interestingly, today 17.6% of black clam harvesters are men. The interviews revealed that men
have taken up black clam harvesting as they have no other source of income, having been driven
out of farming after selling their land to the shrimp industry (Ocampo-Thomason, 2006).
In Cayapas-Mataje, day-to-day livelihoods revolve around productive labor and livelihoods. They
derive their income primarily from black clam harvesting (known as “concheo”), crab harvesting,
and fishing. To a lesser extent, they perform agricultural work like sowing and picking coconuts
or other plants, or gathering smaller mangrove shellfish, but these activities are more for self-
consumption, subsistence, or barter for other foods.
The work carried out by Cayapas-Mataje associations is traditional in nature. For example, no
processing technologies are used after the resources are harvested. Some expenditure is
incurred by men for the purposes of aquaculture, but women face gender discrimination due to
the scant value placed on their work, which is evident in the restrictions they face in accessing
credit and other financial services. Women encounter structural challenges in accessing credit
and the financial system itself. For example, only 9% of the loans for female heads of household
did not require any type of guarantee, compared to 29% of male heads of household. Women
have, on average, 10% less access than men to an account at a financial institution. In addition,
the average labor income of a man with a job is 1.27 times higher than the income earned by a
woman with a job in Ecuador (BCE 2018), 31% of female heads of household access credit from
informal sources, while this happens to 25% of men. This situation occurs at different levels and
in urban and rural areas.
Muisne
Muisne Cojimíes is notable for the high level of participation by women as members and leaders
of these associations.
Table 13. Gender roles reported in Muisne-Cojimíes
Activity Women Men
Feeding, childcare, help
Caregiving tasks with homework, among Help at times
others.
Black clam harvesting Cooking, fishing, and
Fishing and selling
(concheo) selling
29

--- Table 1 on Page 159 ---
 | Activity |  |  | Women |  |  | Men | 
Caregiving tasks |  |  | Feeding, childcare, help
with homework, among
others. |  |  | Help at times |  | 
Black clam harvesting
(concheo) |  |  | Cooking, fishing, and
selling |  |  | Fishing and selling |  | 

=== PAGE 160 ===
Crabs, including blue crabs Fishing, selling, and
Fishing, sorting, and selling
and mangrove ghost crabs cooking
Cooking, fishing, and
Catching, selling and sorting Fishing, sorting, and selling
selling
Culinary activities, Operating small boats guiding
Tourism running tourism tours, providing tourist
businesses, trail guides presentations, culinary activities
Group cleaning work, Group cleaning work,
Seedbeds for species
management workshops management workshops
On the mangroves Reforestation activities
Use of mangroves
Strip the bark off to make infusions
(medicine)
Coastal protection Refuse collection
Source: Survey on Perception of Environmental Standards in Mangroves, CIFEN / AAE, August
2019
Most land in the mangrove area is communally owned. However, women are only minimally
included in decision-making because they do not feature explicitly in the regulatory framework.
Furthermore, cultural practices maintain the sexual division of labor and continue to exclude
women from mangrove conservation activities.
Often, it is men who hold formal positions of leadership within communities and fishermen’s
associations. Women, on the other hand, are responsible for homemaking, caring for family
members, and cooking; very few are able to generate their own income through sales in small
businesses like retail stores.
In Muisne, women engage in housework and caregiving activities but are also involved in
collecting black clams. Crab and black clam harvesting is the main economic activity, performed
on a daily basis in the morning. Men work harvesting crabs in the mangrove and also engage in
small-scale fishing. Women as young as 13 get involved in harvesting the black clams. In this area
it is also common to find women who are the heads of their households and who, for various
reasons, take charge of productive labor.
Those being the two main economic activities associated with the mangrove swamp, men and
women have developed adequate know-how to improve harvesting in tough conditions: mud,
brackish water, mosquitoes and poor mobility.
It was reported that a hundred clams fetch $2.50 USD and a string of 20 crabs $3.00 USD. The
women do not get involved in selling what they harvest – that is the responsibility of the men.
However, situations arise in which intermediaries come into the communities to purchase the
seafood gathered.
30

--- Table 1 on Page 160 ---
Crabs, including blue crabs
and mangrove ghost crabs | Fishing, selling, and
cooking | Fishing, sorting, and selling
Catching, selling and sorting | Cooking, fishing, and
selling | Fishing, sorting, and selling
Tourism | Culinary activities,
running tourism
businesses, trail guides | Operating small boats guiding
tours, providing tourist
presentations, culinary activities
Seedbeds for species | Group cleaning work,
management workshops | Group cleaning work,
management workshops
On the mangroves | Reforestation activities | 
Use of mangroves
(medicine) | Strip the bark off to make infusions | 
Coastal protection | Refuse collection | 

=== PAGE 161 ===
In these communities, men have a greater chance of engaging in productive labor in the
surrounding areas. Both black clams and crabs are sold on the local market to intermediaries who
transport the products to large cities in the north of the country.
There is a month-long closed season between February and March, with a permanent ban on
harvesting black clams below a certain size. The aim of these bans is to ensure the reproduction,
growth and conservation of the species. The local population is aware of the dates and regulations
of the closed season as the Ministry of Environment (the controlling agency) works to disseminate
the dates and specifics of the closed seasons.
“The women are well aware that they must only collect black clams greater than 4.5 cm, as
provided by law, and the rest must be returned to the mangrove. Similarly, they know the dates
of the closed seasons for crabs by heart (even though they may not know why it is forbidden to
harvest them). As for fishing, they know they can engage in artisanal fishing without using
chemicals, and they use traditional methods of fishing, with a casting net or “wide-meshed” fishing
net. Other than that, they know little or nothing about environmental conservation, resource
management, recycling, proper waste disposal, and being kind to animal and forest species,”
(interview with female community leader).
During the closed seasons, men and women from the local populations struggle to access
economic resources as there are limited job opportunities, especially for women, who have less
training or formal education and have caregiving responsibilities. It was reported in the
interviews that very few women are able to leave the home to engage in paid work, as women
bear full responsibility for reproductive activities. Furthermore, the existing work opportunities
can be summarized as follows:
o Shrimp farms, where shrimp are bred and harvested. This work is carried out in the water,
by day and in full-day shifts; this is also due to the use of pollution-causing chemicals. The
nature of the work means that it is mostly considered a man’s job.
o Farm work, which includes sowing, reaping, cleaning, and harvesting crops. Working hours
are from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m., which a short lunch break. These tasks are considered a man’s
job and very few women access this type of work on private land.
o State institutions generally look to employ people with at least a high school diploma. Given
the requirements and difficulties women experience in accessing formal education, a very
low percentage of women are able to access this kind of work.
Meanwhile, men work as day laborers on the crops of nearby farms and in stocking and tending
shrimp. Men are able to travel to nearby towns to offer their labor as construction workers or
any other type of service. However, this is more difficult for women as it is not culturally
accepted.
This analysis clearly shows gender inequalities in the use of, access to and control of mangrove
resources in the project’s three regions. With the goal of guaranteeing gender equity and
sustainability in mangrove conservation, substantial efforts will be deployed to ensure that both
men and women participate and reap the full benefits of this project. This analysis includes a
detailed gender plan and will contain specific recommendations, activities, staffing details, and
the budget.
31

=== PAGE 162 ===
3.3 Southern estuaries (Guayas + Jambeli)
Guayas
The mangrove forest in Guayas is notable for being very near the city of Guayaquil. The
mangroves can be reached by land and water, and this has shaped the socio-productive
landscape among the population. The Guayas River estuary contains 80% of the country’s shrimp
farms.
In the Guayas River archipelago, the local population possesses ancestral community property
under land legislation that ensures ownership of community land and the recognition, allocation
and titling of the lands and territories of indigenous communes, communities, peoples and
nationalities, the Afro-Ecuadorian people and Montubio people, under the Constitution and
international agreements and other instruments regarding collective rights (Organic Law on
Rural Lands and Ancestral Territories, 2016). However, the land is located in protected areas
over which the Ministry of Environment has influence, and therefore they are required to draw
up an Agreement on the Sustainable Use and Stewardship of the Mangrove Ecosystem
(AUSCEM).
Due to socio-cultural dynamics, women and men have different experiences in terms of access
to and use and control of natural resources, as summarized in the following table.
Women Men
They do not know the mangrove forest and it Men know the mangrove forest, use it
does not appeal to them as a place to visit or and decide which areas will be harvested
get to know. They operate in populated for mangrove ghost crabs.
areas.
They sign the mangrove use agreements.
Women do not take part in decision-making
processes and take primary responsibility for
care giving activities.
The area is subject to a ban on crab and black clam harvesting for one month between February
and March to enable the species to reproduce and grow. During this period, the population is
able to support itself financially through other activities, particularly tourism. A significant
number of men work in the community as service providers for the construction, agro-exports
and shrimp farms. In comparison, this is more common in the south because in the north these
economic options do not exist.
On the other hand, due to the geographical position of the Puerto Roma and Balao area (an
estuary with remnants of mangroves), the population devotes itself fully to harvesting crabs and
black clams. This work is the responsibility of men, who go out to the surrounding areas on a
daily basis to harvest. This work takes up about 4 hours of their day. They also fish for their own
consumption.
Women, on the other hand, are responsible for caregiving duties. Some attempt to earn an
income from removing and selling crab pulp. They also work selling clothes or cosmetics or invest
in small stores that serve the basic needs of the local population. Single women generally live
32

--- Table 1 on Page 162 ---
Women | Men
They do not know the mangrove forest and it
does not appeal to them as a place to visit or
get to know. They operate in populated
areas.
Women do not take part in decision-making
processes and take primary responsibility for
care giving activities. | Men know the mangrove forest, use it
and decide which areas will be harvested
for mangrove ghost crabs.
They sign the mangrove use agreements.

=== PAGE 163 ===
with their parents or family and rejoin the family nucleus. The following table further clarifies
the different roles of women and men in the Guayas estuary.
Table 14. Gender roles reported in the Guayas estuary area
Activity Women Men
Feeding, childcare, help with
Caregiving tasks Help at times.
homework, among others.
Black clam harvesting
Sale of clams. Harvesting.
(concheo)
Crabs Removal and sale of crab pulp. Harvesting and sale.
Oysters Shucking. Harvesting and sale.
Tour guides, boatmen, provide
Tourism demonstrations, take tourists
fishing.
Cleaning and inspection,
Beekeeping No involvement.
performed by the over-60s.
Strip the bark off the mangrove
Use of mangrove bark and make infusions to control
sugar levels.
Prepare products to sell to
tourists, door-to-door sales, the
White fishing Fishing and sale.
scales are used to make
handicrafts.
Exploratory activities Guides. Work as guides.
Seedbeds Collect seeds for reforestation. Reforestation, refuse collection.
Trading Clothing, cosmetics, stores.
Source: Survey on Perception of Environmental Standards in Mangroves, CIFEN / AAE, August 2019.
In terms of vulnerabilities or impacts, a lack of water for human consumption and difficulties
securing healthy food that meets the population’s nutritional requirements are plain to see.
Lastly, it is worth pointing out that the population is highly dependent on larger towns to obtain
food, reducing opportunities to fulfill dietary needs. The inhabitants see themselves as cut off
from the economic system as they live in an island environment that can lead to difficulties
accessing services, workspaces, and life options (interview with a female leader from Guayas).
One other important subsistence activity is gathering honey for sale. For women, this remains
difficult and they do not get involved in the sales process.
The problems cited in terms of vulnerability to climate change include flooding and a loss of
livelihoods caused by environmental pollution.
33

--- Table 1 on Page 163 ---
 | Activity |  |  | Women |  |  | Men | 
Caregiving tasks |  |  | Feeding, childcare, help with
homework, among others. |  |  | Help at times. |  | 
Black clam harvesting
(concheo) |  |  | Sale of clams. |  |  | Harvesting. |  | 
Crabs |  |  | Removal and sale of crab pulp. |  |  | Harvesting and sale. |  | 
Oysters |  |  | Shucking. |  |  | Harvesting and sale. |  | 
Tourism |  |  |  |  |  | Tour guides, boatmen, provide
demonstrations, take tourists
fishing. |  | 
Beekeeping |  |  | No involvement. |  |  | Cleaning and inspection,
performed by the over-60s. |  | 
Use of mangrove bark |  |  | Strip the bark off the mangrove
and make infusions to control
sugar levels. |  |  |  |  | 
White fishing |  |  | Prepare products to sell to
tourists, door-to-door sales, the
scales are used to make
handicrafts. |  |  | Fishing and sale. |  | 
Exploratory activities |  |  | Guides. |  |  | Work as guides. |  | 
Seedbeds |  |  | Collect seeds for reforestation. |  |  | Reforestation, refuse collection. |  | 
Trading |  |  | Clothing, cosmetics, stores. |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 164 ===
Jambeli
The mangrove forests of the province of El Oro are located in the Jambelí estuary, a special
management zone on the outskirts of Puerto Bolívar, an area accessed by boat and inhabited by
a number of communities. Socioeconomically it is challenging for those living in the area, as
services are limited and they are unable to produce food, and so they are plainly dependent on
the mainland. This situation directly affects gender dynamics.
The characteristics of the management zone complicate land ownership as there is no land
titling. Populations or communities living in the areas are not formal owners but have houses
and buildings that have been maintained for over 50 years, since the first settlers arrived. In
addition to the local population, men and women from the city of Machala come to the
mangrove to fish for a living.
In this particular context, women have limited opportunities to engage in fishing; many work
shucking crabs. Those living in the areas surrounding Jambelí may fish and sell what they catch.
In the Puerto Bolívar area, black clam and crab harvesting takes place in the Guayas River estuary,
where there are remnants of mangrove forests. Over the last 20 years, the local population has
come under intense pressure from shrimp farming companies that have sought to cut down
mangrove forests for their own benefit.
In this area, the productive labor carried out by men and women can be characterized as
follows.
Table 15. Gender roles reported in the Jambeli project area
Activity Women Men
Mostly the responsibility Help out, without taking full
Caregiving
of women. responsibility.
Boat rides, transportation
within and outside the
Tourism Food preparation.
islands, guiding and leisure
activities around the islands.
Mangrove ghost Use traps to catch crabs.
Pulp removal, some sell to
crab and lobster Dive in rocky coastal areas to
small restaurants locally.
harvesting catch lobster.
Collect clams from the
Black clam
mangrove swamp and sell Harvesting.
harvesting
them.
Some women fish with
Fishing in the estuary. Net or
their husbands. This is not
rod fishing by day; they only
Fishing their explicit
work a few hours in the
responsibility, but rather
morning.
they “help out”.
Oyster Collection and sale.
Collect waste, sort it and sell
Group cleaning
whatever can be recycled.
Source: Survey on Perception of Environmental Standards in Mangroves,
CIFEN / AAE, August 2019.
34

--- Table 1 on Page 164 ---
 | Activity |  |  | Women |  |  | Men | 
Caregiving |  |  | Mostly the responsibility
of women. |  |  | Help out, without taking full
responsibility. |  | 
Tourism |  |  | Food preparation. |  |  | Boat rides, transportation
within and outside the
islands, guiding and leisure
activities around the islands. |  | 
Mangrove ghost
crab and lobster
harvesting |  |  | Pulp removal, some sell to
small restaurants locally. |  |  | Use traps to catch crabs.
Dive in rocky coastal areas to
catch lobster. |  | 
Black clam
harvesting |  |  | Collect clams from the
mangrove swamp and sell
them. |  |  | Harvesting. |  | 
Fishing |  |  | Some women fish with
their husbands. This is not
their explicit
responsibility, but rather
they “help out”. |  |  | Fishing in the estuary. Net or
rod fishing by day; they only
work a few hours in the
morning. |  | 
Oyster |  |  | Collection and sale. |  |  |  |  | 
Group cleaning |  |  |  |  |  | Collect waste, sort it and sell
whatever can be recycled. |  | 
Source: Survey on Perception of Environmental Standards in Mangroves,
CIFEN / AAE, August 2019. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 165 ===
Women engage in artisanal fishing more frequently here than in other areas and, in fact, some
are members of artisanal fishing organizations. As mentioned in the table, the type of fishing
equipment used in the area allows women to access and take part in fishing activities. In this
sense, women experience some difficulties in accessing, using, and controlling natural resources.
Women do not own the canoes or outboard motors, only their labor. This means that in
community mangrove management processes, their own specific interests become invisible,
which may exacerbate divides in terms of access, use, and control.
Lastly, the Jambelí River estuary has one association made up exclusively of women and some
other associations have female leaders.
35

=== PAGE 166 ===
4. Vulnerability and adaptation to climate change
It is clear that, as a result of gender norms, men and women are impacted differently by climate
related events. Global evidence has shown that in places with high gender inequality, women
and children are much more likely to die because of natural disasters. Rising sea levels and
flooding – the two major effects cited in justifying climate action in these project sites – can also
have consequences like an increase in water salinity and water-borne diseases. Both are more
likely to directly affect women, who tend to be responsible for collecting water for the
household and who have the responsibility of caring for sick family members. Likewise, men,
who are primarily responsible for sea fishing and agriculture are negatively impacted by
increasingly unpredictable weather.
4.1 Impacts and response to past climate-related events.
The project’s areas of influence are places of high climate risk and vulnerability. As islands, they
run the risk of flooding and pests that would affect the human population, together with
pollution from waste brought over by currents from the mainland.
In order to understand how previous climate-related events have impacted women and men in
the project sites, we asked workshop respondents to describe their past experiences. The data
collection process included identifying perceptions of climate change vulnerability. This exercise
was devised based on the last 20 years and the characteristics identified.
Table 16. Historical climate impacts on women and men
Project Differentiated impacts
site Year Event Women Men
Northern The fish left and they were Less black clam harvesting, they
(Muisne) unable to work. They emigrated moved to other areas to collect black
El Niño elsewhere and worked the land clams (an hour and a half away). They
1970
phenomenon (cacao, rubber, banana); emigrated to work in Atacames (in
economic impact, loss of life and restaurants and cafeterias) and
disease. “ditched their children.”
Many emigrated to other Economic impacts; they had no work
countries (Spain, USA, and Chile) or income; migration, many men left
and were left jobless. They were the country; loss of life. They were no
2000 La Niña no longer able to sell larvae to longer able to sell larvae to shrimp
- phenomenon shrimp farmers. farmers.
2001
Good quality and quantity of When fish were abundant, prices on
clams, but prices on the local the local market fell.
market fell.
Southern Loss of livelihoods.
(Guayas) Epidemics and diseases. Areas of mangrove flooded.
El Niño
1980 Children were underweight and Lack of job opportunities.
phenomenon
malnourished. Shrimp farms had no production so
were not hiring.
Impact on families’ financial Fish left due to the red tide.
La Niña
2005 situation; they were unable to There were no crabs because the
phenomenon
sell seeds to the shrimp farms, ground “went hard”.
36

--- Table 1 on Page 166 ---
Project
site | Year | Event | Differentiated impacts | 
 |  |  | Women | Men
Northern
(Muisne) | 1970 | El Niño
phenomenon | The fish left and they were
unable to work. They emigrated
elsewhere and worked the land
(cacao, rubber, banana);
economic impact, loss of life and
disease. | Less black clam harvesting, they
moved to other areas to collect black
clams (an hour and a half away). They
emigrated to work in Atacames (in
restaurants and cafeterias) and
“ditched their children.”
 | 2000
-
2001 | La Niña
phenomenon | Many emigrated to other
countries (Spain, USA, and Chile)
and were left jobless. They were
no longer able to sell larvae to
shrimp farmers. | Economic impacts; they had no work
or income; migration, many men left
the country; loss of life. They were no
longer able to sell larvae to shrimp
farmers.
 |  |  | Good quality and quantity of
clams, but prices on the local
market fell. | When fish were abundant, prices on
the local market fell.
Southern
(Guayas) | 1980 | El Niño
phenomenon | Epidemics and diseases.
Children were underweight and
malnourished. | Loss of livelihoods.
Areas of mangrove flooded.
Lack of job opportunities.
Shrimp farms had no production so
were not hiring.
 | 2005 | La Niña
phenomenon | Impact on families’ financial
situation; they were unable to
sell seeds to the shrimp farms, | Fish left due to the red tide.
There were no crabs because the
ground “went hard”.

=== PAGE 167 ===
the economic impact led to Difficulty fishing due to the death of
difficulties providing for families. species, higher water temperature.
Very heavy rainfall preventing fishing.
Rivers filled with silt and boats were
Often they had to help push the
2009 Ocean current unable to move, so they had to push
boats.
the boats or wait for high tide.
Southern They were left with no sources They sought work outside the
(Jambeli) El Niño of work due to the loss of crabs; mangrove, such as on banana
1998
phenomenon overburdened with household plantations and in the construction
cleaning. industry.
Impact on families’ financial Loss of crabs and black clams in the
2004 Swell
situation. area, loss of source of work.
2017
Women who fished for these Direct impact on people working with
and Red tide
species were left without work. shellfish.
2019
Source: Field data collection through interviews and participatory workshops, August 2019.
4.2 Climate projections in project sites and implications for women and men
Climate change will result in significant impacts on local environmental conditions along the
coast of Ecuador, including a rise in sea levels, El Niño events, and changes in the intensity and
variability of rainfall, flooding, and atmospheric temperatures.
Based on models generated by NASA, climate change could cause sea levels to rise by up to 27
cm by 2100 (NASA-GISS, n.d.). Considering that the 1997-1998 El Niño event led to a 42 cm
increase in sea levels, periods of heavier rainfall are expected to worsen the rise in sea levels.
The risk of flooding is a major concern for the coast of Ecuador. The Dartmouth Flood
Observatory has recorded 22 major floods since 1987, displacing over 506,000 people
(Dartmouth Flood Observatory, n.d.). Flooding was particularly severe during the El Niño events
of 1972/73, 1982/83, 1997/98, and in 2008 and 2012, affecting between 184,000 and 222,000
ha (Ocles Padilla, 2018). Flooding of coastal areas will increase as a result of the sea level rise
(SLR), particularly due to extreme sea level (ESL) events in which periodic storm surges and wave
setup (an increase in the mean water level due to the presence of breaking waves) are worsened
by projected increases in the relative sea level (Kirezci et al., 2020). Higher sea levels will lead
directly to an increase in coastal flooding in Ecuador (Reguero et al., 2015).
Given their regular contribution to sea level rise, the El Niño events are of particular concern.
The mean projected increase in sea levels due to climate change is only comparable to sea level
changes experienced during El Niño events. The increase in sea levels, together with
exceptionally high rainfall associated with El Niño on the coast of Ecuador, limits the discharge
of river systems into the ocean, causing flooding inland. This will lead to impacts on drainage
along the entire coastal region, which are not fully captured in existing models of coastal and
river flooding. Based on current assessments, 39% of areas within 5 km of the Ecuadorian coast
are already at high risk of annual flooding (Secretaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos, 2018).
Existing gender inequalities may be exacerbated by the dynamics of climate change in the
project area. That said, the impacts and challenges are expected to be greater in the following
areas:
37

--- Table 1 on Page 167 ---
 |  |  | the economic impact led to
difficulties providing for families. | Difficulty fishing due to the death of
species, higher water temperature.
Very heavy rainfall preventing fishing.
 | 2009 | Ocean current | Often they had to help push the
boats. | Rivers filled with silt and boats were
unable to move, so they had to push
the boats or wait for high tide.
Southern
(Jambeli) | 1998 | El Niño
phenomenon | They were left with no sources
of work due to the loss of crabs;
overburdened with household
cleaning. | They sought work outside the
mangrove, such as on banana
plantations and in the construction
industry.
 | 2004 | Swell | Impact on families’ financial
situation. | Loss of crabs and black clams in the
area, loss of source of work.
 | 2017
and
2019 | Red tide | Women who fished for these
species were left without work. | Direct impact on people working with
shellfish.

=== PAGE 168 ===
• Having access to water fit for human consumption. At present they only have rainwater
or tap water, pointing to substantial difficulty in adequately securing this resource,
especially if droughts become longer or unpredictable. The water problem affects the
general population because they lack adequate water, both in terms of quantity and
quality, however it is women who are responsible for collecting water and therefore
directly impacts on their time burden.
• Depending on the market for food of adequate quantity and quality. This may be a
challenge and could widen gaps in access for men and women because all the basics
need to be purchased with money, and the money is usually controlled by men.
• Women and men in four estuaries live in uncertain socioeconomic contexts and
situations of extreme poverty, and lack access to general resources: land, tools, and
formal education for gainful employment. This situation hinders their access to options
to improve their living conditions and the dynamics of violence. While this situation is
true of both, as explained in previous sections, women do tend to be at higher risk and
with fewer assets.
• Men during non-take season are usually forced to search for work in other municipalities
and provinces they live, leaving their families behind. Main sources of work are banana
plantation, construction and commerce.
• The most vulnerable groups are elder men, divorced, widowed or single women, who do
not have the financial support of members of a community organization or of a family
with male income earners. They find themselves compelled to adopt extremely insecure
livelihoods. The problem of single, widowed and divorced women is complex and in this
respect the interviews did not provide sufficient information. The elderly related to
artisanal activities usually can’t generate incomes during their last years and don’t have
social networks to relay on.
• The gap in access to employment may be worsened by a lack of access to formal
education and natural resources. For example, the women in the communities visited
have no formal education, making it difficult for them to access key information to make
appropriate, timely decisions and manage risks, and they are excluded from formal
education settings. This occurs as a result of the lack of education available and because
their relationship with the market is different.
• Artisanal fisheries in general and mangrove fisheries in particular, perpetuate
conceptions of masculinity that, prevent fishermen from taking initiatives to break the
cycle of poverty and environmental degradation. The pressure that derives from the
social obligation to comply with the role of suppliers, pushes fishermen to irresponsible
fishing behavior, justifying the non-observance of environmental regulations. Attitudes
of negligence and conformism emanate from the need to prove to be a man and not fall
into attitudes that show weakness or any trait considered feminine, repressing feelings
to reaffirm their masculine position, defining themselves as someone without fear or
pain, with a heroic attitude, giving little importance to the consequences.
Furthermore, it should be borne in mind that women will continue to spend a substantial amount
of time on caregiving, lessening their chances of being able to truly participate in decision-making
and in managing the use and exploitation of mangrove resources.
38

=== PAGE 169 ===
Conclusion and implications for project
This gender assessment highlights the complex set of historical, social, cultural, and economic
factors that influence the project site’s current gender norms and inequalities. Firstly, men and
women are vulnerable and susceptible to the impacts of climate change in differentiated ways;
they also have different coping mechanisms. Secondly, there is a clear lack of political
participation by women in community-based mangrove/fishery decision-making fora. Thirdly,
the data presented suggest that women are overburdened with work, especially reproductive
labor, and this limits their ability to engage in community, organizational, and project activities.
And finally, gender-based violence is quite high and further highlights the inequalities at the
household level and an important additional barrier that keep women from using their voice
and agency. This situation is compounded by a number of structural problems associated with
education, health, the provision of utilities and limited employment opportunities. All these
factors come together to shed light on a violation of rights, with gender inequities affecting
women of all ages.
In these mangrove-dependent communities, while both men and women are vulnerable to
climate change impacts, women often have higher vulnerability due to higher rates of poverty,
fewer livelihood alternatives, and less access to decision-making/information spaces compared
to men. Men tend to control the main economic activity in the communities: the harvesting and
sale of seafood. Often it is men who hold formal positions of leadership within communities and
fishing associations. Women, on the other hand, take care of housekeeping, caregiving for family
members and cooking; very few are able to generate their own income.
Taking a holistic and proactive approach, the project’s gender action plan will ensure that the
projects’ goals and activities take into account the complex realities that women and men face
and help to improve the resilience of the mangrove-dependent communities.
39

=== PAGE 170 ===
Gender evaluation for the project
Root causes Sociocultural norms Limited work Lack of formal education Structural and Culturally, caregiving is
regarding land access opportunities for for both sexes. sociocultural dynamics seen as a woman’s job.
do not recognize women and men in are maintained
women as mangrove areas, through control over
organization becoming more income.
members or difficult with climate
landowners. change.
Implications /causes Difficulties Women & men find it Difficulty making informed, Gender-based Women devote long
participating in more difficult to knowledgeable decisions violence. hours to caregiving
decision-making. generate income; turn on conservation and work- duties, limiting their
to changes in related issues. ability to access other
livelihoods (e.g., environments and
migration, men enter activities.
traditionally female
fisheries – black clam,
cockle)
Immediate effects Women do not Families do not have Women are left out of Women do not Women are confined to
participate in sufficient food to meet discussions on the participate in the home and are highly
decisions on the their nutritional environment and community life. dependent on a partner
mangrove. requirements. biodiversity conservation. or male family members.
Additional pressure on
resources.
40

=== PAGE 171 ===
Effects Women of all ages Total dependence on Women of all ages fail to Policies and decision- Women do not gain
fail to access the market for access conservation making does not access to socio-
conservation benefits subsistence. Reduced benefits (including necessarily take into productive activities.
(including increased efficiency of women’s increased CC resilience) account women’s
CC resilience) harvest. needs.
41

=== PAGE 172 ===
Gender Action Plan
Given the gender assessment above, there are several areas where this project can integrate gender-responsive actions to help close gender gaps in mangrove
management in order to support more efficient, effective, and equitable mangrove conservation. These opportunities are largely concentrated in the support
to mangrove associations where direct collaboration with the women and men who depend on, and manage, the mangroves will occur. Activities within the
gender action plan have been included in the project’s budget, as noted. The project will have one CI safeguards specialist and one CI gender specialist in the
project management unit, two CI field social specialists in the Guayas and Jambeli estuaries, and one PUCESE staff in the northern estuaries (4 CI staff costs
total USD 1,575,580, 1 PUCESE staff cost USD 85,546). Together, these individuals will drive the implementation and accountability of the GAP, in collaboration
with the entire project team and partners. Travel for these positions has also been included in the project budget (4 CI Staff Travel USD 95,202). CI’s global
Gender Advisor will also support the project’s implementation and monitoring of the GAP (USD 66,531 in staff cost, USD 6,704 in travel).
42

=== PAGE 173 ===
Project Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate-adapted management increased, including through community-based management (AUSCEMs)
and protected areas implementing climate adaptation plans.
Gender outcome: Women and men are able to equitably benefit from community-based management and local economic development initiatives, thus contributing
to increased resilience to climate impacts (as monitored by the project monitoring system livelihoods assessment & mangrove cover).
Entity
Output Activity Indicators Baseline Goal Timeline Budget
responsible
1.1 Revise existing mangrove
use and stewardship
agreements (and support new Number of 100% of the 59
agreements) that supports revised/new existing Included in
women’s and men’s equal agreements with No prior agreements Third year Mangrove AUSCEM training
engagement in management language that allows information. and 100% of of project technician + workshops
and grants women and men for equal decision- 59 new implemen gender/social (Activity 1.1.1).
equal rights to concessions and making, rights to agreements agreements tation. specialists. Total USD
use of NTFPs in protected areas. concessions, and include gender 297,801
1.Community-based This may include indicating a use of NTFPs. considerations.
mangrove conservation minimum number of seats on
and management the association body for women.
contributes to closing Included in
gender gaps and AUSCEM
reducing exposure to training
Percentage of
flood risk of 3,465 1.2 Work closely with the workshops
women association
vulnerable people (est. project’s mangrove association (Activity 1.1.1;
members who have 50%
50%M/50%F). partners to support and Gender and Total USD
received tailored (1078 women
encourage women’s equitable End of safeguard 297,801) and
leadership training 0 association
and meaningful participation, project specialist, social local exchange
(e.g., technical skills, members -
recognizing and responding to specialists. visits for
public speaking, total)
potential elevation of GBV. women leaders
etc.) and productive
in AUSCEMs
activities.
(Activity 1.2.1;
Total USD
51,477 )
43

--- Table 1 on Page 173 ---
 | Project Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate-adapted management increased, including through community-based management (AUSCEMs) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and protected areas implementing climate adaptation plans. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Gender outcome: Women and men are able to equitably benefit from community-based management and local economic development initiatives, thus contributing
to increased resilience to climate impacts (as monitored by the project monitoring system livelihoods assessment & mangrove cover). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output |  | Activity | Indicators | Baseline | Goal | Timeline | Entity
responsible | Budget |  | 
1.Community-based
mangrove conservation
and management
contributes to closing
gender gaps and
reducing exposure to
flood risk of 3,465
vulnerable people (est.
50%M/50%F). |  | 1.1 Revise existing mangrove
use and stewardship
agreements (and support new
agreements) that supports
women’s and men’s equal
engagement in management
and grants women and men
equal rights to concessions and
use of NTFPs in protected areas.
This may include indicating a
minimum number of seats on
the association body for women. | Number of
revised/new
agreements with
language that allows
for equal decision-
making, rights to
concessions, and
use of NTFPs. | No prior
information.
59
agreements | 100% of the 59
existing
agreements
and 100% of
new
agreements
include gender
considerations. | Third year
of project
implemen
tation. | Mangrove
technician +
gender/social
specialists. | Included in
AUSCEM training
workshops
(Activity 1.1.1).
Total USD
297,801 |  | 
 |  | 1.2 Work closely with the
project’s mangrove association
partners to support and
encourage women’s equitable
and meaningful participation,
recognizing and responding to
potential elevation of GBV. | Percentage of
women association
members who have
received tailored
leadership training
(e.g., technical skills,
public speaking,
etc.) and productive
activities. | 0 | 50%
(1078 women
association
members -
total) | End of
project | Gender and
safeguard
specialist, social
specialists. |  | Included in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | AUSCEM | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | training | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | workshops | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (Activity 1.1.1; | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Total USD | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 297,801) and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | local exchange | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | visits for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | women leaders | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | in AUSCEMs | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (Activity 1.2.1; | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Total USD | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 51,477 ) | 

--- Table 2 on Page 173 ---
Included in
AUSCEM trainin
workshops
(Activity 1.1.1).
Total USD
297,801

=== PAGE 174 ===
Number of
mangrove 0
60 associations
associations and associations
Included in
individuals that
By end of AUSCEM
have received
project training
training on gender, Gender and
workshops
joint decision 0 men/0 800 association safeguard
women members (Activity 1.1.1;
making, reducing specialist, social
Total USD
GBV, etc. specialists.
297,801) and
1078 (24% 50%of all specialists’
Number of women of all association By end of duties
in associations association members are project
members) women
1.3 Document and share lessons
Number of
learned, examples of women
communication Costed as part
leaders, success stories, etc. to
pieces that share Gender & SG of the
inform and influence other 0 At least 2/year Annual
information on specialist specialists’
mangrove conservation
gender approach in duties.
activities to be gender-
this project
responsive
Number of Socio
2.1 Contribute to the
Manglar investment
2. Socio-manglar development of Socio-Manglar Third year Gender and Costed as part
plans that include
investment plans investment plans to ensure 4 (one for each of project safeguard of the
gender-responsive 0
include gender gender considerations are estuary) implemen specialist. specialists’
activities and the
considerations incorporated in community tation. Social specialist. duties.
equitable input of
mangrove conservation/
women and men.
management initiatives.
Number of males
3.Males and females in
and females in
mangrove areas benefit 3.1 Provide tailored technical
mangrove areas Gender and Costed as part
from adoption of support for current economic 41,500 (50%
benefiting from the Second safeguard of the
diversified, climate activities, or new activities that 0 female/50%
adoption of year specialist. specialists’
resilient options and are priorities for women and male)
diversified, climate Social specialist. duties.
business practices linked men.
resilient livelihood
to mangroves
options and
44

--- Table 1 on Page 174 ---
 |  | Number of
mangrove
associations and
individuals that
have received
training on gender,
joint decision
making, reducing
GBV, etc. | 0
associations | 60 associations | By end of
project | Gender and
safeguard
specialist, social
specialists. | Included in
AUSCEM
training
workshops
(Activity 1.1.1;
Total USD
297,801) and
specialists’
duties
 |  |  | 0 men/0
women | 800 association
members |  |  | 
 |  | Number of women
in associations | 1078 (24%
of all
association
members) | 50%of all
association
members are
women | By end of
project |  | 
 | 1.3 Document and share lessons
learned, examples of women
leaders, success stories, etc. to
inform and influence other
mangrove conservation
activities to be gender-
responsive | Number of
communication
pieces that share
information on
gender approach in
this project | 0 | At least 2/year | Annual | Gender & SG
specialist | Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties.
2. Socio-manglar
investment plans
include gender
considerations | 2.1 Contribute to the
development of Socio-Manglar
investment plans to ensure
gender considerations are
incorporated in community
mangrove conservation/
management initiatives. | Number of Socio
Manglar investment
plans that include
gender-responsive
activities and the
equitable input of
women and men. | 0 | 4 (one for each
estuary) | Third year
of project
implemen
tation. | Gender and
safeguard
specialist.
Social specialist. | Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties.
3.Males and females in
mangrove areas benefit
from adoption of
diversified, climate
resilient options and
business practices linked
to mangroves | 3.1 Provide tailored technical
support for current economic
activities, or new activities that
are priorities for women and
men. | Number of males
and females in
mangrove areas
benefiting from the
adoption of
diversified, climate
resilient livelihood
options and | 0 | 41,500 (50%
female/50%
male) | Second
year | Gender and
safeguard
specialist.
Social specialist. | Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties.

--- Table 2 on Page 174 ---
Included in
AUSCEM
training
workshops
(Activity 1.1.1;
Total USD
297,801) and
specialists’
duties

--- Table 3 on Page 174 ---
Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties.

--- Table 4 on Page 174 ---
Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties.

--- Table 5 on Page 174 ---
Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties.

=== PAGE 175 ===
business practices
linked to mangroves
% of accepted
proposals that have
3.2 Include gender consideration
gender 100% of
into the competitive fund for
considerations, as relevant
associations.
relevant. projects
0
# of proposals
3.3 Provide tailored support to
developed by the
the 2 women-only associations 2 proposals
women
to develop strong proposals.
associations.
Number of regular
Costed as part
training/refresher/d
of the
iscussion sessions
4.1 Provide ongoing gender specialists’
given to CI and
training/dialogue to CI and 8 duties; 8
4. Project team has the MAAE personnel on
MAAE personnel workshops on
technical capacity to gender and 2x/year in Gender and
awareness
advance gender- mitigating/reducing 0 years 2, 3, safeguard
raising and
responsive project GBV in the project. 4,5 s pecialist.
capacity
activities.
4.2 Ensure project’s Grievance building on
Number/% of N/A – no target,
Redress Mechanism is gender gender
grievances that are simple
sensitive, prepared to respond included (total
related to gender reporting
to GBV-related incidents. USD 17,014)
Project Component 2: The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions and providing financial support to conserve and
restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for other coastal populations.
Gender outcome: Shrimp aquaculture sector is more inclusive of communities, including women, minorities, and vulnerable men.
Output Activity Indicator Baseline Goal Timeline Responsible Budget
45

--- Table 1 on Page 175 ---
 |  |  | business practices
linked to mangroves |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 3.2 Include gender consideration
into the competitive fund for
associations. | % of accepted
proposals that have
gender
considerations, as
relevant. | 0 | 100% of
relevant
projects |  |  |  | 
 |  | 3.3 Provide tailored support to
the 2 women-only associations
to develop strong proposals. | # of proposals
developed by the
women
associations. |  | 2 proposals |  |  |  | 
4. Project team has the
technical capacity to
advance gender-
responsive project
activities. |  | 4.1 Provide ongoing gender
training/dialogue to CI and
MAAE personnel | Number of regular
training/refresher/d
iscussion sessions
given to CI and
MAAE personnel on
gender and
mitigating/reducing
GBV in the project. | 0 | 8 | 2x/year in
years 2, 3,
4,5 | Gender and
safeguard
s pecialist. | Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties; 8
workshops on
awareness
raising and
capacity
building on
gender
included (total
USD 17,014) | 
 |  | 4.2 Ensure project’s Grievance
Redress Mechanism is gender
sensitive, prepared to respond
to GBV-related incidents. | Number/% of
grievances that are
related to gender |  | N/A – no target,
simple
reporting |  |  |  | 
 | Project Component 2: The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions and providing financial support to conserve and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for other coastal populations. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Gender outcome: Shrimp aquaculture sector is more inclusive of communities, including women, minorities, and vulnerable men. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output |  | Activity | Indicator | Baseline | Goal | Timeline | Responsible | Budget | 

--- Table 2 on Page 175 ---
Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties; 8
workshops on
awareness
raising and
capacity
building on
gender
included (total
USD 17,014)

=== PAGE 176 ===
Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties.
5.1 Sensitize the members of
5. Aquaculture Gender and Workshop costs
the Chamber of Aquaculture on Percentage of
farms owners safeguard on inclusivity,
the Aquaculture Stewardship aquaculture farm 30% of Year 2, 3,
are more aware 0 specialist & human rights
Council’s social impact owners that attend membership 4
of the need for Private Sector and equity USD
standards on inclusion, human the training.
inclusion. 6,269 plus
rights, and equity.
trainings on
climate smart
shrimp (total
USD 273,963)
Project Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation and increased mangrove restoration by strengthening
governance, climate change adaptation strategies, coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.
Gender outcome: Local governments have included gender considerations & targets in their PDOT (Coastal Development + Zoning Plans)
Costed as part
6. Support local of the
governments to Gender and specialists’
improve and/or 6.1 Provide guidance and safeguard duties.
# of subnational
implement support to local governments on 0 9 Year 2,3 specialist & Workshop costs
PDOTs with gender
PDOTs that are how to apply a gender approach Adaptation covered under
approach
gender to PDOT implementation. specialist Activity 3.2.1
sensitive. (total USD
39,884)
7. Project’s
socioeconomic
Costed as part
surveys are
of the
gender
Gender & safeguard specialists’
disaggregated Gender and
7.1 Survey instrument is gender specialist is involved duties. Socio
and analyzed to N Y Each year safeguard
informed in survey design economic
identify gender- specialist
(Y/N) surveys
related changes
budgeted
in mangrove-
separately
dependent
communities,
46

--- Table 1 on Page 176 ---
5. Aquaculture
farms owners
are more aware
of the need for
inclusion. |  | 5.1 Sensitize the members of
the Chamber of Aquaculture on
the Aquaculture Stewardship
Council’s social impact
standards on inclusion, human
rights, and equity. | Percentage of
aquaculture farm
owners that attend
the training. | 0 | 30% of
membership | Year 2, 3,
4 | Gender and
safeguard
specialist &
Private Sector | Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties.
Workshop costs
on inclusivity,
human rights
and equity USD
6,269 plus
trainings on
climate smart
shrimp (total
USD 273,963) | 
 | Project Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation and increased mangrove restoration by strengthening |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | governance, climate change adaptation strategies, coastal management policies, and legal enforcement. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Gender outcome: Local governments have included gender considerations & targets in their PDOT (Coastal Development + Zoning Plans) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
6. Support local
governments to
improve and/or
implement
PDOTs that are
gender
sensitive. |  | 6.1 Provide guidance and
support to local governments on
how to apply a gender approach
to PDOT implementation. | # of subnational
PDOTs with gender
approach | 0 | 9 | Year 2,3 | Gender and
safeguard
specialist &
Adaptation
specialist | Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties.
Workshop costs
covered under
Activity 3.2.1
(total USD
39,884) | 
7. Project’s
socioeconomic
surveys are
gender
disaggregated
and analyzed to
identify gender-
related changes
in mangrove-
dependent
communities, |  | 7.1 Survey instrument is gender
informed | Gender & safeguard
specialist is involved
in survey design
(Y/N) | N | Y | Each year | Gender and
safeguard
specialist | Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties. Socio
economic
surveys
budgeted
separately | 

--- Table 2 on Page 176 ---
Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties.
Workshop costs
covered under
Activity 3.2.1
(total USD
39,884)

--- Table 3 on Page 176 ---
Costed as part
of the
specialists’
duties. Socio
economic
surveys
budgeted
separately

=== PAGE 177 ===
which is then
shared with
relevant
governments to
inform policy.
47

--- Table 1 on Page 177 ---
which is then
shared with
relevant
governments to
inform policy. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 178 ===
Bibliography
Carvajal, R., & Santillán, X. (2019). Plan de Acción Nacional para la Conservación de los Manglares del
Ecuador Continental. Ministerio del Ambiente de Ecuador. Conservación Internacional Ecuador,
Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Educación, la Ciencia y la Cultura (UNESCO) y la Comisión
Permanente del Pacífico Sur (CPPS). Proyecto Conservación de Manglar en el Pacífico Este Tropical
CEDEAL. (2014). Agenda de las mujeres de la Provincia de Esmeraldas [Women’s Agenda in the Province
of Esmeralda].
CIFEN/AAE (2019). Estudio de Línea e Base Sobre Emisiones de Carbono Cuantificadas, Vulnerabilidad e
Impactos Proyectados del Cambio Climático
CLIRSEN. (1999). Estudio Multitemporal de manglares, camaroneras y áreas salinas de la costa
ecuatoriana mediante el empleo de la información de sensores remotos. Centro de Levantamientos
Integrados de Recursos Naturales por Sensores Remotos.
CLIRSEN. (2007). Actualización del Estudio Multitemporal de Manglares, Camaroneras y Áreas Salinas en
la Costa Continental Ecuatoriana al año 2006. Convenio de Cooperación Técnica entre el CLIRSEN y el
PROGRAMA DE MANEJO DE RECURSOS COSTEROS (PMRC). Centro de Levantamientos Integrados de
Recursos Naturales por Sensores Remotos.
Consejo Nacional Electoral (CNE). 2019. Participación política de la mujer [Political participation of
women]. Quito. CNE
Consejo Nacional Electoral (CNE). 2014. Indicadores de participación política de la mujer ecuatoriana
[Indicators of political participation of Ecuadorian women]. 2014 sectional elections. Quito. CNE
Dartmouth Flood Observatory. (n.d.). Retrieved July 15, 2020, from
http://floodobservatory.colorado.edu/
Encuesta sobre percepción de los Patrones Del Ambiente En Los Manglares [Survey on Perception of
Environmental Standards in Mangroves], CIFEN /AAE, August 2019
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos - INEC. (2010). Censo de Población y Vivienda CPV 2010. INEC.
Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas y Censos [National Institute of Statistics and Censuses]. Ecuador.
www.ecuadorencifrascapituloeducación.gob.ec
INEC. 2011. Encuesta de Relaciones Familiares y Violencia de Género contra las mujeres [Survey on
Family Relationships and Gender-Based Violence Against Women]. Quito, Ecuador.
INEC. 2012.
Kirezci, E., Young, I. R., Ranasinghe, R., Muis, S., Nicholls, R. J., Lincke, D., & Hinkel, J. (2020). Projections
of global-scale extreme sea levels and resulting episodic coastal flooding over the 21st Century. Scientific
Reports, 10(1), 11629. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-67736-6
48

=== PAGE 179 ===
Latorre, Sara. 2012. “Territorialities of Power in the Ecuadorian Coast: The Politics of an Environmentally
Dispossessed Group”, desiguALdades.net Working Paper Series, No. 23, Berlin: desiguALdades.net
Research Network on Interdependent Inequalities in Latin America.
León, Magdalena, & Carmen Diana Deere (2002). Género, propiedad y empoderamiento: Tierra, estado
y mercado en América Latina [Gender, ownership and empowerment: Land, state and market in Latin
America]. Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México & FLACSO Ecuador.
MAE. 2012. Estrategia nacional de Cambio Climático [National Climate Change Strategy].
Ministerio del Ambiente [Ministry of Environment]. 2018. Diagnóstico para el proceso de
transversalización del enfoque de género y de participación en la Reserva Ecológica Manglares Cayapas-
Mataje , Provincia de Esmeraldas [Diagnosis for the gender mainstreaming and participation process in
the Cayapas-Mataje Ecological Mangrove Reserve]. Ministry of Environment of Ecuador (MAE),
Conservation International Ecuador, Humanist Institute for Cooperation with Developing Countries
(HIVOS), Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), and the Global Environment
Facility (GEF). Guayaquil, Ecuador.
MAAE. 2019. Mapa de cobertura vegetal del Ecuador. Ministerio del Ambiente de Ecuador.
MAAE. 2020. Base de datos de AUSCEMS. Guayaquil. Ministerio del Ambiente y Agua del Ecuador.
NASA-GISS, n.d.)
Ocampo-Thomason, P. 2006. Mangroves, People and Cockles: Impacts of the Shrimp-Farming Industry
on Mangrove Communities in Esmeraldas Province, Ecuador P. School of Geography, Politics and
Sociology, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. CAB International 2006.
Environment and Livelihoods in Tropical 140 Coastal Zones (eds C.T. Hoanh, T.P. Tuong, J.W. Gowing and
B. Hardy)
Ocles Padilla, A. (2018, June 20). IV Plataforma Regional para la Reducción del Riesgo de Desastres en las
Américas, Cartagena, Colombia.
https://www.paho.org/disasters/index.php?option=com_docman&view=download&alias=2616-
proyectos-de-infraestructura-para-control-de-inundaciones-ecuador&category_slug=meetings-
4&Itemid=1179&lang=es
Reguero, B. G., Losada, I. J., Díaz-Simal, P., Méndez, F. J., & Beck, M. W. (2015). Effects of Climate
Change on Exposure to Coastal Flooding in Latin America and the Caribbean. PloS One, 10(7), e0133409.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0133409
Secretaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos. (2018). Atlas de espacios geográficos expuestos a amenazas
naturales y antrópicas. Zonas susceptibles a inundaciones. Escala 1:25.000 [Map]. Secretaría Nacional de
Gestión de Riesgos.
49

=== PAGE 180 ===
Appendix 1: Interview and data collection guide
1. Objetive:
• Identify the dynamics of participation, decision making.
• Show the impacts differentiated by gender
2. Agenda
Time Activity Methodology
30 min Presentation The activity will be presented, additionally, the ice will be broken.
of the activity Participants will be asked to make a circle. A ball will be handed
Awareness out at random and will request that when they receive the ball,
through the they can say their names and which organization they come from.
dynamic In addition, they are asked to mention something that they were
"I never e ..." not allowed to do as children because they were women and
men”. The facilitator will make the first presentation as an
example.
40 min Community How has the landscape in which they live changed and what are
map the effects of climate change?
Show differences in women and men both in the illustration and in
the evidence of impacts.
30 min Identification Work will be done on identifying the main negative impacts of
of benefits climate change for women and men, as well as identifying the
and risks with main benefits and risks.
a gender They will be recorded on paper.
perspective To close the activity, the session will be closed based on the
following guiding questions:
- What are the coincidences and differences between the
responses of the groups regarding heat, rain and wind?
- What are the coincidences and differences between the
responses on impacts on crops and animal husbandry?
- Compare the responses of the different groups and
analyze who has greater responsibility for maintaining
crops and raising animals that are affected by changes in
the climate, men or women?
- How does this affect the daily work of women related to
taking care of the home and their diet?
- Do these impacts represent a threat to the food security of
the family and the community? Why?
40 min Prioritization Once the problems and possible benefits and risks have been
of gender identified, the impact areas (community, productive, reproductive
issues for and community) will be identified.
women and We will use the tree of life and post it for prioritization.
men. The prioritization will be based on:
50

--- Table 1 on Page 180 ---
Time | Activity | Methodology
30 min | Presentation
of the activity
Awareness
through the
dynamic
"I never e ..." | The activity will be presented, additionally, the ice will be broken.
Participants will be asked to make a circle. A ball will be handed
out at random and will request that when they receive the ball,
they can say their names and which organization they come from.
In addition, they are asked to mention something that they were
not allowed to do as children because they were women and
men”. The facilitator will make the first presentation as an
example.
40 min | Community
map | How has the landscape in which they live changed and what are
the effects of climate change?
Show differences in women and men both in the illustration and in
the evidence of impacts.
30 min | Identification
of benefits
and risks with
a gender
perspective | Work will be done on identifying the main negative impacts of
climate change for women and men, as well as identifying the
main benefits and risks.
They will be recorded on paper.
To close the activity, the session will be closed based on the
following guiding questions:
- What are the coincidences and differences between the
responses of the groups regarding heat, rain and wind?
- What are the coincidences and differences between the
responses on impacts on crops and animal husbandry?
- Compare the responses of the different groups and
analyze who has greater responsibility for maintaining
crops and raising animals that are affected by changes in
the climate, men or women?
- How does this affect the daily work of women related to
taking care of the home and their diet?
- Do these impacts represent a threat to the food security of
the family and the community? Why?
40 min | Prioritization
of gender
issues for
women and
men. | Once the problems and possible benefits and risks have been
identified, the impact areas (community, productive, reproductive
and community) will be identified.
We will use the tree of life and post it for prioritization.
The prioritization will be based on:

=== PAGE 181 ===
- Pink: priority 1, the most important to address and
improve the impacts of climate change on the lives of
women.
- Orange, priority 2, moderately important to address and
improve the impacts of climate change on the lives of
women.
- Green: priority 3, nothing important to address and
improve the impacts of climate change on women's lives.
Conclusions and closing
Matrix: Identification of impacts of climate change
Differentiated impacts on nature Differentiated impacts for women
and men
Landscape / natural
Animals Women Men
resources
Adaptation / Activities Who How do How are Obstacles to Strategies for
incentive participates? women and the the the
measure (% men,% men benefits participation participatory
Improve women) participate? shared? of women inclusion of
irrigation women
(systems, Activity 1
technification). Activity 2
Activity 3
Vegetable Activity 1
nursery
Activity 2
Activity 3
Activity 4
51

--- Table 1 on Page 181 ---
 |  | - Pink: priority 1, the most important to address and
improve the impacts of climate change on the lives of
women.
- Orange, priority 2, moderately important to address and
improve the impacts of climate change on the lives of
women.
- Green: priority 3, nothing important to address and
improve the impacts of climate change on women's lives.
 | Conclusions and closing | 

--- Table 2 on Page 181 ---
Matrix: Identification of impacts of climate change |  |  | 
Differentiated impacts on nature |  | Differentiated impacts for women
and men | 
Landscape / natural
resources | Animals | Women | Men
 |  |  | 
 |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 181 ---
Adaptation /
incentive
measure | Activities | Who
participates?
(% men,%
women) | How do
women and
men
participate? | How are
the
benefits
shared? | Obstacles to
the
participation
of women | Strategies for
the
participatory
inclusion of
women
Improve
irrigation
(systems,
technification). |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Activity 1 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Activity 2 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Activity 3 |  |  |  |  | 
Vegetable
nursery | Activity 1 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Activity 2 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Activity 3 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Activity 4 |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 182 ===
Appendix 2: Sample Job Description for Gender Specialist
Summary:
Conservation International is looking for a Gender Specialist to be based in Guayaquil City. This position is responsible
for oversight, coordination, and technical support for the implementation of the project’s Gender Action Plan (GAP).
Key Responsibilities:
Coordinate/oversee the implementation and execution of the GAP within the framework of the
•
GCF Gender Mainstreaming Policy.
• Develop and deliver appropriate capacity building for colleagues and delivery partners that is well-
designed, clear, tailored to the context, and practical.
• Monitor gender-related outcomes through established project-specific indicators and through
qualitative information gathering.
• Accompany project teams to the field to ground truth progress on gender outcomes: meet with
women/women’s groups, collect qualitative information, help project teams to problem solve,
propose adaptive changes, participate in reports and other activities.
• Identify opportunities/entry points to support and encourage a diversity of women’s leadership
through project activities.
• Develop relationships with gender and women-focused NGOs/CSOs/government entities in order
to learn and share lessons.
• Communicate internally and externally to share materials, project results, and lessons learned
among project/program stakeholders and external audiences.
• Be the point person for any gender, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) or
Gender-based Violence (GBV) related grievance that may come through the project’s grievance
mechanism.
• Collaborate with CI’s global gender program to ensure consistency in gender approach across the
institution.
Required Qualifications.
• Experience in leading the implementation of gender/social analyses and gender action plans in
conservation/climate/NRM-related projects involving Indigenous and rural populations.
• Work experience in implementing projects with a gender approach.
• Experience/understanding of taking a survivor-centered approach to respond to GBV issues.
• Strong facilitation and training skills.
• Bachelor's degree with a focus in social science, international development, or related discipline, ideally
with postgraduate studies (specializations, diplomas, master's degree, etc.).
52

=== PAGE 183 ===
• Spanish and English language proficiency. (TOEFL, IELTS, TOEIC certificate etc.)
• Excellent skills in written and verbal communication.
• Executive and analytical capacity to implement projects, manage multiple tasks and adapt to a dynamic
environment.
• Ability to work well in an interdisciplinary, multicultural, diverse, and dynamic team environment.
• Strategic, creative, flexible, and able to work under general supervision and take initiative to solve
problems.
• Competencies with Microsoft Office 365.
53

=== PAGE 184 ===
Appendix 3: Documentation reviewed
Abad, E. 2016. Criterios Metodológicos Para La Valoración Económica De Manglares Del Ecuador.
Alava, J. Lindop, A. & J. Jacquet. 2015. Marine Fisheries Catch Reconstructions For Continental Ecuador: 1950-
2010.
Alongi, D. 2008. Bosques de manglares: resiliencia, protección contra tsunamis y respuestas al cambio climático
global.
Arizala, Y. 2019. Análisis del comportamiento socioambiental en la zona de amortiguamiento del refugio de vida
silvestre Manglares Estuario Río Esmeraldas.
BCE. 2018. Determinantes del acceso al crédito desde una perspectiva de género para el Ecuador. Banco Central
del Ecuador.
Beitl, C. & Gaibor, N. (2018) Rights-based Approaches in Ecuador’s Fishery for Mangrove Cockles. FAO.
http://www.fao.org/fishery/static/tenure-user-rights/root/volume1/C3%20Rights-
based%20Approaches%20in%20Ecuador%E2%80%99s%20Fishery%20for%20Mangrove%20Cockles%20.pdf
Beitl, C., et al. 2019. New valuation for defying degradation: Visualizing mangrove forest dynamics and local
stewardship with remote sensing in coastal Ecuador.
Bodero, A. 2007. El Bosque De Manglar De Ecuador.
Bravo, Y. 2018. Valoración Económica De Manglares Del Sur De La Reserva (Remacam) Próximos A Camaroneras
Mediante El Método De Reposición De Daño
Burgess, P., Siyu Qin, and Xiangyi Li. 2015. Mangroves in Ecuador: An application and comparison of ecosystem
service models.
Calderón, C., Aburto, O. & Ezcurra. 2009. El valor de los manglares.
Carvajal, R.& Santillán, X. 2019. Plan de Acción Nacional para la Conservación de los Manglares del Ecuador
Continental. Ministerio del Ambiente de Ecuador, Conservación Internacional Ecuador, Organización de las
Naciones Unidas para la Educación, la Ciencia y la Cultura (UNESCO) y la Comisión Permanente del Pacífico Sur
(CPPS). Proyecto Conservación de Manglar en el Pacífico Este Tropical
Castillo, E. & Ortiz, J. 2018. Acumulación De Biomasa Y Materia Orgánica En El Manglar Del Refugio De Vida
Silvestre Manglares Estuario Río Esmeraldas.
Cusme, K. 2017. Evaluación de las especies del manglar establecidas en el Parque Histórico Guayaquil
Guerrero, A. 2017. Evaluación de efectividad de manejo de la concesión de manglar Isla Bellavista en la provincia
de El Oro .
Donato, D., J. Boone Kauffman, Daniel Murdiyarso, Sofyan Kurnianto, Melanie Stidham and Markku Kanninen.
2011. Mangroves among the most carbon-rich forests in the tropics.
Fedelea, G. Camila I. Donattia,, Celia A. Harveya, Lee Hannaha, David G. Holea. 2019. Transformative adaptation
to climate change for sustainable socialecological systems.
54

--- Table 1 on Page 184 ---
http://www.fao.org/fishery/static/tenure-user-rights/root/volume1/C3%20Rights-
based%20Approaches%20in%20Ecuador%E2%80%99s%20Fishery%20for%20Mangrove%20Cockles%20.pdf

=== PAGE 185 ===
Hamilton, S & Stankwitz, C. 2012. Examining the relationship between international aid and mangrove
deforestation in coastal Ecuador from 1970 to 2006.
Hamilton, S and Clare Stankwitz. 2012. Examining the relationship between international aid and mangrove
deforestation in coastal Ecuador from 1970 to 2006.
Hamilton, S. 2013. Assessing The Role of Commercial Aquaculture In Displacing Mangrove Forest.
Hamilton S, 2020. Introduction to Coastal Ecuador. In: Mangroves and Aquaculture. Coastal Research Library, vol
33. Springer, Cham.
Hamilton S. 2020. Assessing 50 Years of Mangrove Forest Loss Along the Pacific Coast of Ecuador: A Remote
Sensing Synthesis. In: Mangroves and Aquaculture. Coastal Research Library, vol 33. Springer, Cham.
Hamilton S. 2020. Botany of Mangroves. In: Mangroves and Aquaculture. Coastal Research Library, vol 33.
Springer, Cham.
Hamilton S.E. 2020. Shrimp Farming. In: Mangroves and Aquaculture. Coastal Research Library, vol 33. Springer,
Cham.
Hamilton S.E. 2020. Discussion: Local Actions with Global Consequences. In: Mangroves and Aquaculture. Coastal
Research Library, vol 33. Springer, Cham.
Herrera. P. Calles, A., Pozo, M., Villa, G., Ortega, D., Coronel, J. & Almeida, M. 2017. Políticas Públicas De
Conservación De Los Manglares y Bienestar De Pescadores Y Recolectores En El Golfo De Guayaquil. Guayaquil.
Guayquil: Espol-Ci-Condesan-Mae.
Hutchison, J., Mark Spalding and Philine zu Ermgassen. 2014. The Role Of Mangroves In Fisheries Enhancement.
Lee, S., Stu Hamilton, Edward B. Barbier, Jurgenne Primavera and Roy. R. Lewis II. 2019. Better restoration policies
are needed to conserve mangrove ecosystems.
López, O. & Acosta, G. 2018. Evaluación de la actividad antibacteriana y antiinflamatoria in vitro del extracto
vegetal seco de mangle rojo (Rhizophora mangle L.)
Keene, S., Meltzoff y Edward LiPuma. 1986. The Social and Political Economy of Coastal Zone Management:
Shrimp Mariculture in Ecuador
Olguín, J., Hernández, M., y Sánchez-Galván, G. 2007. Contaminación de manglares por hidrocarburos y
estrategias de biorremediación, fitorremediación y restauración.
Meaden, G.J., Aguilar-Manjarrez, J., Corner, R.A., O’Hagan, A.M. & Cardia, F. 2016. Marine spatial planning for
enhanced fisheries and aquaculture sustainability Its application in the Near East.
Molina, N. & Moreno, K. 2018. Estructura Y Zonación De La Vegetación Arbórea Del Manglar De La Comunidad
Masa 1.
Moreira, E., Muñiz Vidart Luis. 2013. Evaluación del estado actual de las concesiones de áreas de manglar
entregadas a comunidades ancestrales en la provincia del Guayas: Maestría en Ciencias Manejo Sustentable de
Recursos Bioacuáticos y Medio Ambiente.
Moreira. 2014. La Reforestación del Manglar como factor de desarrollo de las comunidades ancestrales que
colindan con el sector camaronero en el Archipiélago de Jambelí.
55

=== PAGE 186 ===
Nacipucha X. 2014. “Implementación De Un Protocolo De Reforestación del Género Rhizophora, En Tres Sectores
De La Provincia del Guayas.”
Nuñez, A. 2016. Delineación de un modelo metodológico básico enmarcado en Evaluar la Efectividad de Manejo
de los Acuerdos de Uso Sustentable y Custodia de Manglar.
Ochoa-Gomez, J., Elisa Serviere-Zaragoza, Daniel B. Lluch-Cota, Victor H. Rivera-Monroy, Walter Oechel, Enrique
Troyo-Diguez, and Salvador E. Lluch-Cota. 2019. Structural Complexity and Biomass of Arid Zone Mangroves in the
Southwestern Gulf of California: Key Factors That Influence Fish Assemblages.
Ochoa-Gomez, J., Salvador E. Lluch-Cota, Victor H. Rivera-Monroy, Daniel B. Lluch-Cota, Enrique Troyo-Dieguez,
Walter Oechel,, Elisa Serviere-Zaragoza. 2019. Mangrove wetland productivity and carbon stocks in an arid zone
of the Gulf of California (La Paz Bay, Mexico.
Pifarré, D., & Briansó . 2017. Análisis de los servicios ecosistémicos producidos por los manglares a partir de la
percepción de la comunidad de Curral Velho.
Rivera-Monroy, V., Cattelino, J., Wozniak, J., Schwartz, K., Noe, G., Castañeda-Moya, E., and G. Koch. 2018. The
Life Of P: A Biogeochemical and Sociopolitical Challenge in the Everglades.
Rovai, A., P. Riul, R. R. Twilley, E. Castañeda-Moya, V. H. Rivera-Monroy, A. A. Williams, M. Simard, M. Cifuentes-
Jara, R. R. Lewis, S. Crooks, P. A. Horta, Y. Schaeffer-Novelli, G. Cintrón, M. Pozo-Cajas and P. R. Pagliosa. 2015.
Scaling mangrove aboveground biomass from site-level to continental-scale.
Rodríguez, G. 2015. Determinación De La Estructura, Diversidad Y Abundancia De La Vegetación Del Manglar De
Palmar Provincia De Santa Elena Durante Octubre 2014 / Marzo 2015.
Rodríguez, G., Gabriela Alexandra Aguirre León, Frank Grey Chiriboga Calderón.2016. La Gestión Ambiental
Empresarial, su Función Frente A Cambios Climáticos Globales. Camaroneras, Caso: Manglares De Ecuador.
Sierra, S. 2016. Determinación de las proteínas solubles y clorofila en Rhizophora Harrisonll mediante
Espectrofotometría de luz visible como indicadores de polución en un sector del puerto de Guayaquil.
Solá, M. 2016. Impacto económico de la pérdida de los servicios ambientales del manglar en Guayas.
Smith Im, Robblee, M., Wanless, H., and T. Doyle. 2014. Mangroves, Hurricanes, and Lightning Strikes Assessment
of Hurricane Andrew suggests an interaction across two differing scales of disturbance.
Trevino, M. & Murillo-Sandoval, P. (2021) Uneven consequences: Gendered impacts of shrimp aquaculture
development on mangrove dependent communities. Ocean & Coastal Management.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2021.105688
Twilley, R., Pozo, M., Garcia, V., Rivera-Monroy, V., Zambrano, R., Bodero, A. 1997. Litter dynamics in riverine
mangrove forests in the Guayas River estuary, Ecuador.
Yáñez-Arancibia, Y., John W. Day, Robert R. Twilley y Richard H. Day. 2014. Manglares: ecosistema centinela
frente al cambio climático, Golfo de México.
___________
56
