=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sanghyun Kim
CreationDate: D:20240211165723+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 23.8.20470
ModDate: D:20240212101137+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 23.8.20470
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
4 – 7 March 2024
Kigali, Rwanda
Provisional agenda item 10 12 February 2024
Consideration of funding proposals –
Addendum VI
Funding proposal package for FP226
Summary
This addendum contains the following seven parts:
a) A funding proposal titled "Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for
sustainable High Andean communities and ecosystems in Peru";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 3
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 120
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 121
Secretariat’s assessment 127
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 142
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
156
assessment
Gender documentation 158

=== PAGE 3 ===
Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for sustainable
Project/Programme title:
High Andean communities and ecosystems in Peru
Country(ies): Peru
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
Accredited Entity:
(GIZ)
Date of first submission: 2023-09-18
Date of current submission 2024-02-05
Version number V.04

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
 | Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template | 
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4. |  | 

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1
A
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.1. Project or
Project A.2. Public or private sector Public
programme
A.3. Request
for Proposals Not applicable
(RFP)
GCF Co-financers’
contribution contribution1
Mitigation total Enter number % Enter number %
☐ Energy generation and access Enter number % Enter number %
☐ Low-emission transport Enter number % Enter number %
A.4. Result ☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances Enter number % Enter number %
area(s) ☐ Forestry and land use Enter number % Enter number %
Adaptation total 100 % 100 %
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities 30 % 30 %
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security 30 % 30 %
☐ Infrastructure and built environment Enter number % Enter number %
☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services 40 % 40 %
A.5. Expected
mitigation
outcome A.6. Expected adaptation 60,715 Direct2 2,011,856
outcome beneficiaries (of Indirect3
(Core indicator 1: N/A which 30,088 are beneficiaries (of
GHG emissions (Core indicator 2: direct and indirect women) which 1,005,928
reduced, avoided beneficiaries reached) are women)
or removed / 0.2% of the 6.8% of the
sequestered) national national
population4 population
A.7. Total
78.32 million
financing (GCF
Euros
+ co-finance5)
A.9. Project size Medium (Up to USD 250 million)
A.8. Total GCF
40.79 million
funding
Euros
requested
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent with
A.10. Financial
A.8.
instrument(s)
requested for ☒ Grant 40.79 million
☐ Equity Enter number
the GCF ☐ Loan Enter number
funding ☐ Results-based payment Enter number
☐ Guarantee Enter number
A.11.
Implementatio 6 years A.12. Total lifespan 15 years
n period
A.13. Expected
date of AE
11/6/2023 A.14. ESS category Category B
internal
approval

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or
programme |  |  | Project | A.2. Public or private sector | Public | 
 | A.3. Request |  | Not applicable |  |  | 
 | for Proposals |  |  |  |  | 
 | (RFP) |  |  |  |  | 
A.4. Result
area(s) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | GCF
contribution | Co-financers’
contribution1
 |  |  | Mitigation total |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | ☐ Energy generation and access |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | ☐ Low-emission transport |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | ☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | ☐ Forestry and land use |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | Adaptation total |  | 100 % | 100 %
 |  |  | ☒ Most vulnerable people and communities |  | 30 % | 30 %
 |  |  | ☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security |  | 30 % | 30 %
 |  |  | ☐ Infrastructure and built environment |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | ☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services |  | 40 % | 40 %
A.5. Expected
mitigation
outcome
(Core indicator 1:
GHG emissions
reduced, avoided
or removed /
sequestered) |  |  | N/A | A.6. Expected adaptation
outcome
(Core indicator 2: direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 60,715 Direct2
beneficiaries (of
which 30,088 are
women) | 2,011,856
Indirect3
beneficiaries (of
which 1,005,928
are women)
 |  |  |  |  | 0.2% of the
national
population4 | 6.8% of the
national
population
 | A.7. Total |  | 78.32 million
Euros | A.9. Project size |  | 
 | financing (GCF |  |  |  |  | 
 | + co-finance5) |  |  |  |  | 
 | A.8. Total GCF |  | 40.79 million
Euros |  |  | 
 | funding |  |  |  |  | 
 | requested |  |  |  |  | 
A.10. Financial
instrument(s)
requested for
the GCF
funding |  |  | Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent with
A.8.
☒ Grant 40.79 million
☐ Equity Enter number
☐ Loan Enter number
☐ Results-based payment Enter number
☐ Guarantee Enter number |  |  | 
 | A.11. |  | 6 years | A.12. Total lifespan | 15 years | 
 | Implementatio |  |  |  |  | 
 | n period |  |  |  |  | 
 | A.13. Expected |  | 11/6/2023 | A.14. ESS category | Category B | 
 | date of AE |  |  |  |  | 
 | internal |  |  |  |  | 
 | approval |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 5 ---
A.1. Project or
programme

--- Table 3 on Page 5 ---
A.4. Result
area(s)

--- Table 4 on Page 5 ---
A.5. Expected
mitigation
outcome

(Core indicator 1:
GHG emissions
reduced, avoided
or removed /
sequestered)

--- Table 5 on Page 5 ---
A.6. Expected adaptation
outcome

(Core indicator 2: direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached)

--- Table 6 on Page 5 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s)
requested for
the GCF
funding

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2
A
A.15. Has this
A.16. Has Readiness or PPF
FP been
Yes ☒ No ☐ support been used to prepare Yes ☒ No ☐
submitted as a
this FP?
CN before?
A.17. Is this FP
included in the A.18. Is this FP included in the
Yes ☐ No ☒ Yes ☒ No ☐
entity work country programme?
programme?
A.19.
Complementari
Yes ☐ No ☒
ty and
coherence
The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, besides being the
Accredited Entity (AE) of the project, will also act as an Executing Entity (EE). GIZ is registered in
Germany, and its sole shareholder is the Federal Republic of Germany, represented within Germany
A.20.
by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) and the Federal Ministry of
Executing
Finance (BMF). In addition, there will be four Peruvian Executing Entities: i) the Ministry of Agricultural
Entity
Development and Irrigation (MIDAGRI), ii) the National Service of Natural Protected Areas by the State
information
(SERNANP) , iii) Profonanpe, and iv) Asociación Instituto Andino de Montaña (hereafter Instituto de
Montaña (IdM)). MIDAGRI and SERNANP are Government entities, Profonanpe is a private non-profit
institution of public and social interest, and IdM is a non-government organization (NGO).
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
1. Climate change and unsustainable management of productive practices are degrading the Puna
ecosystems, (peatlands, wetlands, and grasslands) and the services they provide (provision and
regulation of water; provision of fodder, food, and fiber; nutrient and carbon regulation) in the Southern High
Andes of Peru (SHAP)6. Increased temperatures have contributed to glacier melting while fewer rains and
longer drought periods have affected water availability in an area where 80% of the population is heavily
reliant on rainfed agriculture. This climate factors are threating the livelihoods of approx. half a million people
in SHAP and the water security of approx. 4.5 million downstream. Increased temperatures have already
decreased 51 percent of Peru’s glaciers. In addition, huge stocks of carbon stored in the Puna ecosystems
could be released into the atmosphere as they are increasingly degrading.
2. The Andean Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities (IPLCs) in the SHAP are characterized
throughout history by their own adapting capacity to cope with environmental changes. Over the
years, they have passed down from one generation to others their agricultural, water and ecosystem
management knowledge and practices. For example, selection and domestication of tolerant crops and
varieties such as potatoes and Andean grains, water management technologies, systems of terraces to use
small parcels of land at different altitudes and within different microclimates to ensure crop diversification.
They also brought important food crops such as potatoes, quinoa and other highly nutritious high-altitude
crops to the world7. Even though this traditional knowledge has been a key asset to Andean people when
facing climate stress, nowadays Andean population find the increasing severity and unpredictability of
extreme events, as well as the unpredictability of hydric regimes quite challenging8. This situation coupled
with their vulnerabilities such as low levels of development, dependence on subsistence agriculture and
husbandry practices, limited economic opportunities are forcing them to migrate and lose their traditional
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF
contribution (i.e., GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the
funding proposal.
2 Direct beneficiaries include all individuals who will receive i) targeted support from the GCF-funded intervention and ii) a measurable
adaptation benefit from a GCF-funded intervention, including: a) Individuals that implement Local initiatives that will be financed and supported
by the Puna Facility, multiplied by the average number of members of the groups/legal entities supported and the average members per
household in the region, b) Individuals that will be supported by MIDAGRIs co-finance programs, multiplied by the average members number
per household in the region. c) Individuals that will receive technical assistance from the GCF- funded intervention (e.g., trainings, support to
develop site-specific climate diagnostics and preparation of participatory intervention plans) and d) Public officials that will receive capacity
building for adjusting regulations and norms. For more information, please see Annex 23.
3 Indirect beneficiaries of the project will be those that do not receive targeted support from the GCF-funded intervention but are likely to
receive a measurable adaptation benefit from the GCF-funded intervention but will benefit from water generated by the improvement of
ecosystems that contribute to water regulation in the basin in the main cities of Cusco, Arequipa and Cañete. For more information, please
see Annex 23.
4 Number based on the latest census of 2017 with a total national population of 29,381,884.
5 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.
6 Four regions are considered in the SHAP: Puno, Cusco, Arequipa and Apurimac.
7 Argumedo, A; Stenner, T; Swiderska, K; (2021). Quechua values and worldviews in the chalakuy maize park, Peru, IIED, London.
8 Ponce, Carmen (2020). Intra-seasonal climate variability and crop diversification strategies in the Peruvian Andes. A word of caution on
the sustainability of adaptation to climate change.

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
 | A.15. Has this |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ | A.16. Has Readiness or PPF
support been used to prepare
this FP? | Yes ☒ No ☐
 | FP been |  |  |  | 
 | submitted as a |  |  |  | 
 | CN before? |  |  |  | 
 | A.17. Is this FP |  | Yes ☐ No ☒ | A.18. Is this FP included in the
country programme? | Yes ☒ No ☐
 | included in the |  |  |  | 
 | entity work |  |  |  | 
 | programme? |  |  |  | 
 | A.19. |  | Yes ☐ No ☒ |  | 
 | Complementari |  |  |  | 
 | ty and |  |  |  | 
 | coherence |  |  |  | 
A.20.
Executing
Entity
information |  |  | The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, besides being the
Accredited Entity (AE) of the project, will also act as an Executing Entity (EE). GIZ is registered in
Germany, and its sole shareholder is the Federal Republic of Germany, represented within Germany
by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) and the Federal Ministry of
Finance (BMF). In addition, there will be four Peruvian Executing Entities: i) the Ministry of Agricultural
Development and Irrigation (MIDAGRI), ii) the National Service of Natural Protected Areas by the State
(SERNANP) , iii) Profonanpe, and iv) Asociación Instituto Andino de Montaña (hereafter Instituto de
Montaña (IdM)). MIDAGRI and SERNANP are Government entities, Profonanpe is a private non-profit
institution of public and social interest, and IdM is a non-government organization (NGO). |  | 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) |  |  |  |  | 
1. Climate change and unsustainable management of productive practices are degrading the Puna
ecosystems, (peatlands, wetlands, and grasslands) and the services they provide (provision and
regulation of water; provision of fodder, food, and fiber; nutrient and carbon regulation) in the Southern High
Andes of Peru (SHAP)6. Increased temperatures have contributed to glacier melting while fewer rains and
longer drought periods have affected water availability in an area where 80% of the population is heavily
reliant on rainfed agriculture. This climate factors are threating the livelihoods of approx. half a million people
in SHAP and the water security of approx. 4.5 million downstream. Increased temperatures have already
decreased 51 percent of Peru’s glaciers. In addition, huge stocks of carbon stored in the Puna ecosystems
could be released into the atmosphere as they are increasingly degrading.
2. The Andean Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities (IPLCs) in the SHAP are characterized
throughout history by their own adapting capacity to cope with environmental changes. Over the
years, they have passed down from one generation to others their agricultural, water and ecosystem
management knowledge and practices. For example, selection and domestication of tolerant crops and
varieties such as potatoes and Andean grains, water management technologies, systems of terraces to use
small parcels of land at different altitudes and within different microclimates to ensure crop diversification.
They also brought important food crops such as potatoes, quinoa and other highly nutritious high-altitude
crops to the world7. Even though this traditional knowledge has been a key asset to Andean people when
facing climate stress, nowadays Andean population find the increasing severity and unpredictability of
extreme events, as well as the unpredictability of hydric regimes quite challenging8. This situation coupled
with their vulnerabilities such as low levels of development, dependence on subsistence agriculture and
husbandry practices, limited economic opportunities are forcing them to migrate and lose their traditional |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 6 ---
A.16. Has Readiness or PPF
support been used to prepare
this FP?

--- Table 3 on Page 6 ---
A.18. Is this FP included in the
country programme?

--- Table 4 on Page 6 ---
A.20.
Executing
Entity
information

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3
A
knowledge. Especially young people are abandoning ancient practices, resulting in insufficient means and
capacities to develop alternatives or adopt climate-resilient livelihoods. The Peruvian Ministry of Agricultural
Development and Irrigation (MIDAGRI) has set in place a series of programs to support these vulnerable
populations, but access is low, and the available budgets are insufficient to address identified needs.
3. Regarding the noted vulnerabilities, the proposed project aims to enhance ownership and resources
of Andean Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities to build their own resilience to climate
change by defining, implementing and monitoring their Ecosystem based Adaptation (EbA) priorities
to improve the Puna ecosystems management and ensure the continuous provision of their services
such as water provision that will be captured during raining season for their livelihoods during dry
season. Therefore, the project participatory approach consists in providing technical assistance and setting
up of a financing mechanism for the implementation of Ecosystem based Adaptation (EbA) measures and
promoting Climate Resilient Value Chains (CRVC) led by IPLCs at local scale via the alignment and
leveraging of public and private financing. Funding by the GCF will complement, facilitate and increase the
access to MIDAGRI programs through technical assistance and set the financing structure to sustain
investments in the long term via payment for ecosystem services, private sector contributions, and
microfinancing. At the local level, experiences with EbA implementation and the facilitation of community
participatory processes from the Nor Yauyos Cochas landscape reserve will be scaled up to the SHAP where
communities will receive direct financial and technical support to design, implement and monitor EbA
measures to enhance Climate Resilient Value Chains (CRVC) and thus promote a change in behaviour and
boost the local economy for the continued protection of the Puna ecosystems. In doing so, at the national
level the project will support MIDAGRI in strengthening and mainstreaming the EbA approach with a gender
perspective into all its programs (Agrorural, Sierra Azul, INIA, Agroideas and SERFOR), and improve the
coordination with other local stakeholders on the landscape. Support will also be given to SERNANP in line
with its mandate for actions within Natural Protected Areas (NPAs). To assess progress on agricultural and
water sectoral adaptation measures local monitoring systems will be set up and feed into existing information
management systems and promote coordination between sectorial M&E systems. The project will support
MIDAGRI to enhance their internal monitoring systems in order to allow easier and streamlined reporting on
their NDCs into the System for Monitoring Adaptation and Mitigation Measures (SIMOM) managed by
Ministry of Environment (MINAM). This will be done in coordination with technical advice from the General
Directorate of Climate Change and Desertification (DGCCD) of MINAM and in coordination with the General
Directorate of Agriculture Environmental Affairs (DGAAA), focal point within MIDAGRI for its NDCs. The
project also recognises the inclusion of different gender perspectives in its activities as a crucial element to
understand inequalities between women and men in the SHAP for managing and deciding over agriculture,
water and ecosystems (e.g., low participation in decision-making processes. Women have limited access to
finance as well as trainings and capacity building opportunities. Men and women have unequal use/control
of natural resources. The project proposes actions to address the barriers that have been hindering women's
participation in building adaptation to climate change, as well as actions that will contribute to the
strengthening of women roles, allowing them to actively participate in the implementation of the project, and
thereby promoting a wider appropriation of the EbA measures and CRVC. Following the approach the project
design has been structured based on three components (1) Resilient ecosystems and communities, (2)
Public and private investments for scaling up EbA measures aligned and leveraged and (3) Multilevel
territorial governance for the incorporation of EbA measures which are aligned with three outcomes, as
depicted in the following Error! Reference source not found..
Figure 1. Overview of project outcomes, outputs and activities

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4
A
4. By implementing investments on the ground (through component 1), the aim is (i) to maintain or improve
the provision of puna ecosystem services for climate resilience of Andean Indigenous Peoples and Local
Communities (IPLCs) in the SHAP and (ii) to strengthening sustainable and productive value chains that are
dependent on and impacting on those ecosystems. This component will provide financial and technical
support, through a call for proposal mechanism, for EbA and Climate Resilient Value Chains implementation
on the ground. To ensure IPLCs investment ownership and enhance replication potential, the component
will have a special focus on the promotion of traditional knowledge and practices that play an important role
in Ecosystem based Adaptation. Since EbA uses the best available science on climate change and
ecosystems, alongside local and traditional knowledge, a list of EbA measures relevant in the target area
were pre-identified and validated with IPLCs during stakeholder consultations phase. EbA approach draws
on community-based adaptation (CBA) and builds on traditional knowledge systems, therefore IPLCs will
decide which combination of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains will be planned,
implemented, and monitored. All this will be supported by peer-to-peer learning among communities and
facilitated by the EEs; and, in some cases by local partners (Civil Society Organizations (CSOs)). IPLCs in
the SHAP will thus recognize and acknowledge the benefits provided by their traditional knowledge, practices
and other EbA-related measures, namely improved resilience in ecosystems, maintained carbon stocks and
sustainable livelihoods. A series of technological packages, trainings, information materials and
communities’ exchanges to nurture dialogue will be implemented to co-produce knowledge and foster local
innovation that will result in investment on the ground. Therefore component 1 will enhance access to
information obtained at local level, which is expected to trigger a change in behaviour towards conservation
of ecosystems and their services and the potential of developing climate resilient agribusinesses. Activities
in this component will address the barrier of limited economic opportunities by supporting the development
of climate resilient value chains and enhanced entrepreneurship in the SHAP region.
5. Through component 2 the project will establish a Facility implemented by Profonanpe to delivery financing
through a call for proposal for IPCLs led Local Initiatives oriented to increase climate resilience. This
component will also align and leverage public and private financing for EbA measures and Climate Resilient
Value Chains at different and coordinated levels. At macro level it will focus on the alignment, leveraging,
mobilization and upscaling of private and public funds to finance EbA activities on the ground (component
1). At the meso level, it will strengthen the capacities of local institutions and organizations to access financial
resources and technical assistance. At the micro level, it will work on enhancing access to alternative
financial services for small farmers, such as microfinancing, and access to public programs for improved
entrepreneurship (i. e. Agroideas and Sierra y Selva Exportadora from MIDAGRI) and climate resilient
investments (i. e. Sierra Azul and Agrorural from MIDAGRI). As a result, the focus of this project is on
mobilizing finance at different scales and with different schemes, with impact beyond the specific landscape.
The key feature of this project is its leverage potential, to facilitate the mobilization of MIDAGRI, MERESE,
private and financial institutions resources.

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5
A
6. Furthermore, through the last component 3 the project will promote integrated gender responsive9
landscape planning, governance platforms and policy improvement and coordination, fostering dialogue and
improving coordination among stakeholders that intervene in the landscape (local, regional and national
governments, rural communities, producer organizations, watershed committees, and MIDAGRI extension
services, among others).The most adequate processes through effective participatory approaches or
platforms for knowledge exchange, dialogue, coordination and consensus-building will be fostered according
to local needs. The paradigm shift towards climate resilience and sustainability will be driven by a
transformation in the way MIDAGRI interacts with rural communities, provides context-appropriate extension
services and coordinates among its programs, regional offices and other sectors to implement consistent
and effective policies in the territory.
7. Overall, the project will promote the sustainable management of 23,914 ha of Puna ecosystems, benefiting
directly 60,715 people and indirectly another 2,011,856 people. The mitigation co-benefit is estimated at
407,657 t CO eq. The promoted EbA measures (i.e., qochas, peatlands and grasslands restoration and
2
conservation) will not recompensate the water from rainfall or glacial melting in the same magnitude but they
will capture water during the rainy season or during glacier melting and store it to recharge aquifers,
expanding water availability during the dry season for agriculture, livestock and drinking water.
8. The Accredited Entity of this project is the German Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ),
with MIDAGRI as the leading political partner. Profonanpe, the NGO Instituto de Montaña and GIZ Peru will
act as Executing Entities receiving GCF funds. While MIDAGRI and the Peruvian National Service of Natural
Protected Areas by the State (SERNANP) will act as Executing Entities that will contribute with financing to
achieve project’s objective. Furthermore, Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities (IPLCs) with their
different forms of organisation (i.e., communities, producers’ associations and cooperatives in the process
of formalization) will be supported by local Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) for the planning, presenting
and implementing of climate resilient Local initiatives financed through the Puna Facility.
9 Please note that the GIZ working definition for gender responsive follows the OECD Gender Equality Continuum (2022): A gender-
responsive approach not only considers gender differences, inequalities, ratios and aspects, e.g., by targeting and including a certain number
of women in project activities but goes a step further in responding to gender specific needs and/or requirements, or by collecting gender-
disaggregated data for monitoring purposes. Gender responsiveness aims to ensure that all people can engage in and/or benefit from certain
measures regardless of their gender (e.g., trainings or strategies are developed that consider gendered needs, preferences, and constraints).

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6
B
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
B.1.1 Socio-economic Context:
9. Peru is considered an upper-middle-income economy, but inequality is high, and poverty is concentrated among
rural, indigenous populations, whose food security depends upon climate conditions. More than 80 percent of
farmers practice subsistence, rainfed agriculture, and changes in precipitation are increasing competition over water
resources for consumption, agriculture, and industry. Glaciers, a main water source, are melting at accelerating
rates due to increasing temperatures. Peru is susceptible to natural disasters including floods, droughts and
landslides, whose frequency, severity, and impacts are compounded by the El Niño Southern Oscillation and will
be amplified by increased climate change and variability. Combined with ongoing problems such as agricultural
expansion, deforestation, illegal mining and air and water pollution, these climate risks threaten advancements in
Peru’s development10.
10. Peru’s population reached more than 33 million people in 2021, of which 50.5% are women. The country’s annual
population growth decreased to 1.2%, in comparison to 1.9% in 2019 (World Bank, 2023). Most of the population,
78.5%, lives in urban centers, while 21.5% live in rural areas (FAO, 2023). Peru is divided in three main regions
Coast with 58% of the Peruvian population, the Andes with 28% of the population, and the Amazon with 14% of the
population11. Peru is a multiethnic country formed by the amalgamation of different cultures and ethnicities.
Mestizos compose about 60% of the total population12. The Indigenous Peoples in Peru represent about 25.7%.
Of those, 95.8% are Andean and 3.3% from the Amazon. The two major indigenous or ethnic groups are
the Quechuas, followed by the Aimaras. A large proportion of the indigenous population who live in the Andean
highlands still speak Quechua. The Afro-Peruvian population (around 3.5%) is concentrated mostly in coastal cities
south of Lima. The project will be focused on the Andes region where most of the population belongs to the Quechua
Indigenous Peoples Group.
11. The agricultural sector employs 29.9% of the total population in Peru (CEPAL, 2023), and 30% of the national
territory is dedicated to activities within the sector. In the rural areas, the number reaches, on average, 78% of the
population (FAO, 2023). According to the National Agricultural Census (2012) 50.4% of agricultural producers are
women. Besides the economic benefits, the agricultural sector also contributes to the country’s food security, as
70% of the food consumed in the country is produced internally (Fernández, 2021). However, the government
expenditure and investment in the sector is still very low, mainly due to a lack of interest from policy makers (World
Bank, 2017). In addition, only 12.2% of the total number of producers have higher education (INEI, 2012).
12. The target region of the project interventions is in the Southern High Andes of Peru (SHAP): Puno, Cusco, Arequipa,
Apurimac, Lima. The SHAP is part of the 7,000 km long tropical Andes Mountain range, which is the top biodiversity
hotspot for conservation priorities worldwide (Myers et al., 2000). This area is located above 3,500 m.a.s.l and the
ecosystems consist primarily of grasslands (77%), wetlands (locally known as bofedales13 in Spanish), and some
relicts of high Andean forests also persist14. Grasslands hold significant importance as they play a vital role in
safeguarding the soil from erosion and promoting effective water infiltration, thereby regulation the flow of runoff
water. Wetlands and grasslands capture rainwater and retain it for some period. Local communities rely on Puna
ecosystems to feed and provide water to their domestic herds, their crops and finally, for domestic use.
13. The main economic activities in the SHAP are mixed husbandry and agriculture for local subsistence on both
communal and family land. Major livestock species above the 3,500 m are native South American camelid species
(alpaca, lama and vicuña), typically reared in mixed systems with sheep, while the vicuña is a wild species.15 In the
transition zone between 2,800 and 3,500 m, cattle is also present in these mixed herds. See section 3.7 in the
Feasibility Study for more details.
14. Agriculture in the highlands of Peru is primarily characterized by small-scale farming systems focused on
subsistence production, and low-complexity value chains tied to local markets. These farming systems combine
the cultivation of staple crops such as potatoes, wheat, and quinoa with livestock rearing (particularly camelids,
such as alpacas and vicuña, sheep, and cattle). Puna ecosystems contribute with a substantial amount of meat,
fiber, and dairy products to local, regional, and international markets. Peru is the main producer and exporter of
Andean grains, especially quinoa. Peru is also the largest producer of native potato in Latin America and exported
10 USAID (2017). Fact Sheet Climate Change Risk Profile: Peru
11 INEI 2017
12 "Perú: Perfil Sociodemográfico" (PDF). Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática.
13 In Peru, the term “bofedales” is used to describe areas of wetland vegetation that may have underlying peat layers. These areas are a key
resource for traditional land management at high altitudes. Because they retain water in the upper basins of the cordillera, they are important
sources of water and forage for domesticated livestock as well as biodiversity hotspots. Maldonado (2014). An introduction to the bofedales of
the Peruvian High Andes.
14 WWF. General description of Central Andean Puna. https://www.worldwildlife.org/ecoregions/nt1002
15 In Peru, the management and conservation of vicuña are under the responsibility of the National Forestry and Wildlife Service (SERFOR),
under MIDAGRI; if the species is found within a protected natural area, conservation and sustainable use is the responsibility of the National
Service of Natural Areas Protected by the State (SERNANP), an entity attached to the Ministry of the Environment (MINAM).

--- Table 1 on Page 10 ---
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
B.1.1 Socio-economic Context:
9. Peru is considered an upper-middle-income economy, but inequality is high, and poverty is concentrated among
rural, indigenous populations, whose food security depends upon climate conditions. More than 80 percent of
farmers practice subsistence, rainfed agriculture, and changes in precipitation are increasing competition over water
resources for consumption, agriculture, and industry. Glaciers, a main water source, are melting at accelerating
rates due to increasing temperatures. Peru is susceptible to natural disasters including floods, droughts and
landslides, whose frequency, severity, and impacts are compounded by the El Niño Southern Oscillation and will
be amplified by increased climate change and variability. Combined with ongoing problems such as agricultural
expansion, deforestation, illegal mining and air and water pollution, these climate risks threaten advancements in
Peru’s development10.
10. Peru’s population reached more than 33 million people in 2021, of which 50.5% are women. The country’s annual
population growth decreased to 1.2%, in comparison to 1.9% in 2019 (World Bank, 2023). Most of the population,
78.5%, lives in urban centers, while 21.5% live in rural areas (FAO, 2023). Peru is divided in three main regions
Coast with 58% of the Peruvian population, the Andes with 28% of the population, and the Amazon with 14% of the
population11. Peru is a multiethnic country formed by the amalgamation of different cultures and ethnicities.
Mestizos compose about 60% of the total population12. The Indigenous Peoples in Peru represent about 25.7%.
Of those, 95.8% are Andean and 3.3% from the Amazon. The two major indigenous or ethnic groups are
the Quechuas, followed by the Aimaras. A large proportion of the indigenous population who live in the Andean
highlands still speak Quechua. The Afro-Peruvian population (around 3.5%) is concentrated mostly in coastal cities
south of Lima. The project will be focused on the Andes region where most of the population belongs to the Quechua
Indigenous Peoples Group.
11. The agricultural sector employs 29.9% of the total population in Peru (CEPAL, 2023), and 30% of the national
territory is dedicated to activities within the sector. In the rural areas, the number reaches, on average, 78% of the
population (FAO, 2023). According to the National Agricultural Census (2012) 50.4% of agricultural producers are
women. Besides the economic benefits, the agricultural sector also contributes to the country’s food security, as
70% of the food consumed in the country is produced internally (Fernández, 2021). However, the government
expenditure and investment in the sector is still very low, mainly due to a lack of interest from policy makers (World
Bank, 2017). In addition, only 12.2% of the total number of producers have higher education (INEI, 2012).
12. The target region of the project interventions is in the Southern High Andes of Peru (SHAP): Puno, Cusco, Arequipa,
Apurimac, Lima. The SHAP is part of the 7,000 km long tropical Andes Mountain range, which is the top biodiversity
hotspot for conservation priorities worldwide (Myers et al., 2000). This area is located above 3,500 m.a.s.l and the
ecosystems consist primarily of grasslands (77%), wetlands (locally known as bofedales13 in Spanish), and some
relicts of high Andean forests also persist14. Grasslands hold significant importance as they play a vital role in
safeguarding the soil from erosion and promoting effective water infiltration, thereby regulation the flow of runoff
water. Wetlands and grasslands capture rainwater and retain it for some period. Local communities rely on Puna
ecosystems to feed and provide water to their domestic herds, their crops and finally, for domestic use.
13. The main economic activities in the SHAP are mixed husbandry and agriculture for local subsistence on both
communal and family land. Major livestock species above the 3,500 m are native South American camelid species
(alpaca, lama and vicuña), typically reared in mixed systems with sheep, while the vicuña is a wild species.15 In the
transition zone between 2,800 and 3,500 m, cattle is also present in these mixed herds. See section 3.7 in the
Feasibility Study for more details.
14. Agriculture in the highlands of Peru is primarily characterized by small-scale farming systems focused on
subsistence production, and low-complexity value chains tied to local markets. These farming systems combine
the cultivation of staple crops such as potatoes, wheat, and quinoa with livestock rearing (particularly camelids,
such as alpacas and vicuña, sheep, and cattle). Puna ecosystems contribute with a substantial amount of meat,
fiber, and dairy products to local, regional, and international markets. Peru is the main producer and exporter of
Andean grains, especially quinoa. Peru is also the largest producer of native potato in Latin America and exported

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7
B
6,530 tonnes in 2022 (Agencia Agraria de Noticias, 2023). Peru ranks 14th in the world in potato production and the
potato is the second most important product (after rice) in Peruvian agriculture, with more than 3,000 potato
varieties.
15. From the total agricultural units in Peru, 82 percent correspond to farms with equal or less than five (5) hectares,
64 percent are characterized as subsistence farming and 57.5 percent are located in the highlands, especially in
the departments of Cajamarca, Puno and Cusco (INEI, 2012). Thus, the majority of farms in the SHAP are less
than five hectares, and farmers often have dispersed plots located in various micro-environments. These micro-
environments differ in terms of altitude, soil quality, water availability, and climate.
16. Food production in the highlands is often inadequate to meet the consumption needs of households, leading many
farmers to seek additional income through off-farm activities. Smallholder farmers in the highlands region make use
of the diverse ecological niches available to them. In high-altitude areas, livestock is grazed, and specialized
traditional tubers like native potatoes, mashua, olluco, oca, and maca are grown using traditional agroecological
practices, mainly for subsistence and barter. At intermediate altitudes, farmers cultivate grains such as wheat,
barley, rye, and maize, along with pulses, fruits, berries, and vegetables. In the inter-Andean valleys, various types
of fruits like avocado, orange, lemon, and banana are grown.
17. Land tenure in the High Andes generally appears to be dominated by private regime, in average 48% of the
agricultural units in the prioritized districts of the Resilient Puna project (varying from 24% to 86% depending on the
department), followed by communal land regime, for 44% of agricultural units in average (variation from 1% to 70 %
depending on the department). Tenant and Possessors regimes are less common in the target area of the project
(INEI 2012). Traditional herder communities living in the High Andes tend to combine private and collective regimes
as an alternative form for strengthening land tenure, treating grasslands as common resources which are accessed,
used and controlled collectively, usually under open access or communal land tenure regimes.16 Regarding land
use in the project area is 77% is for natural pastures and 8% for agricultural use. Studies17 show that women have
limited access to land, which is conditioned upon their membership in a community and their relationship within a
family, including marital status and whether they have children.
18. Population in SHAP is mainly Andean Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities (IPLCs). In the target area
of the Resilient Puna project only one Indigenous Peoples Group exist: the Quechuas. According to the last National
Census (2017) almost 69% of the population within the project target area have Quechua as their mother tongue
while 31% of the population have Spanish18. Spanish native speakers in this area are mainly rural farmers living
also in communities The Quechua people are the long-standing largest Indigenous Group in Peru and in the Andean
territory, whose mother tongue is Quechua. A large part of this Indigenous Group is organised in peasant or local
communities. Nonetheless, they have other forms of organisation and live in other places such as villages, hamlets,
among others. In many areas of the country, including in the Andean region, Quechua communities nowadays tend
to also form associations, cooperatives, community enterprises and organisations by the need to manage local
development, administer common resources or provide services to each other19. Therefore, the project will work
with the various forms of organizations that IPLCs have established in the target area. In accordance with the
obligations established in Convention 169 of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and the Peruvian Law,
peasant or Andean communities peoples can also be identified as Indigenous or Original Peoples, according to the
criteria: a) Direct descent from the original populations of the national territory, b) Lifestyles and spiritual and
historical links with the territory they traditionally use or occupy, c) Their own social institutions and customs, d)
Cultural patterns and way of life different from those of other sectors of the national population. The names used to
designate Indigenous or Original Peoples do not alter their nature or their collective rights.
19. Andean IPLCs in their various forms of organization continue using practices that they learned from their
ancestors. For instance, they still use ancient techniques to storage rainwater into micro water reservoirs named
qochas in Quechua, to infiltrate water and recharge aquafers or build irrigation system of canals to divert water from
rivers descending from highland areas to irrigate foothill slopes. This ancestral knowledge is accumulated, and
transgenerational knowledge related to the natural resources found on the lands and territories they occupy and is
central to climate change adaptation. During their agricultural and livestock activities, they also combine collective
celebrations and perform a series of rites of payment to the pachamama (mother earth) and to the guardian hills of
the livestock. They perform animal fertility rites involving singing, dancing and feasting. Also, they have a series of
festivals linked to productive activities, such as sowing and harvesting, but above all the cleaning of irrigation
ditches20. Native fibers (from alpaca, llama, and vicuña wool) and ancestral weaving traditions continue to occupy
16 Damonte, G., M. Glave, S. Rodríguez and A. Ramos. 2016. ‘The evolution of collective land tenure regimes in pastoralist societies:
lessons from Andean countries. IDS Working Paper No. 480. Brighton: Institute of Development Studies.
17 2016-Best-Practices-Case-Peru.pdf (landesa.org)
18 Please note that in 2012, 83% were Quechua speakers and 17% Spanish speaker within the project area of the project (CENAGRO,
2012)
19 In Peru mestizo is defined as the biological, as well as cultural, mixture between white Europeans and Indigenous peoples.
20 Quechuas | BDPI (cultura.gob.pe)

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8
B
a central space not only in the Andean culture but also in the social and economic aspects since many communities
depend on camelids wool for their livelihoods. In the pre-colonial times Andean worldview was represented by the
Ayllu concept which is understood as the form of social organization in Andean communities where individuals
share same reciprocity norms and rituals with respect to humans, animals, rocks, spirits, mountains, lakes, rivers,
pastures, crops. The main objective of ayllu was to give guide in the positive relationship between communities and
their social and natural environment. Forms of organisation based on the Ayllu concept can still be found in some
communities of Cusco, Apurimac and Puno. These cultural and spiritual values of Andean people are still very
strong in some parts of the Andes and will play an important role in EbA by promoting conservation and equity
values, and social cohesion at landscape level21. IPCLs play vital roles in the management of their ecosystems
(FAO, 2016), although in most cases, this knowledge is being lost due to the low valuation of native cultures, cultural
erosion, high rates of rural-urban migration, among others. Additionally, gender traditional norms in the Andes often
prevent women from achieving the same level of visibility as men, or benefit from the same opportunities and
recognition, despite their deep knowledge of agriculture, water and ecosystems.
B.1.2 Climate Change context (historic climate trends and future scenarios)
20. Climate change and unsustainable management of productive practices are degrading the Puna ecosystems,
(peatlands, wetlands, and grasslands) and the services they provide, including the provision and regulation of water,
provision of fodder, food, and fiber, nutrient and carbon regulation. Fewer rains and longer drought periods have
contributed to glacier melting, threating the livelihoods of approx. 4.5 million people in SHAP and the water security
of millions more downstream. Increased temperatures have already decreased 51 percent of Peru’s glaciers. In
addition, huge stocks of carbon stored in the Puna ecosystems could be released into the atmosphere as they are
degrading increasingly.
21. The communities in the SHAP are characterized by their vulnerabilities such as low levels of development,
dependence on subsistence agriculture and husbandry practices, limited economic opportunities, and overall high
vulnerability to climate change. They are losing their traditional knowledge and are abandoning ancient practices,
resulting in insufficient means and capacities to develop alternatives or adopt climate-resilient livelihoods. MIDAGRI
has set in place a series of programs to support these vulnerable populations, but access is low, and the available
budgets are insufficient to address identified needs.
22. The goal of the project is to align public and private investments and increase access to state programs improving
climate resilience of high Andean ecosystems and communities livelihoods to shift a state of ecosystem
conservation, high productivity, income diversity and climate resilience because they will reduce the degree of
losses from climate impacts, improve their relationship with ecosystems, increase their participation in the value
chain and product transformation, improve their associative processes, market access and monitor progress on
decreasing their vulnerability.
Historic climate trends
23. Temperatures during the analysed period (1981-2016) as shown in Figure 2 overall show an increase. Maximum
temperatures show the greatest increases during the spring, while the smallest increases show in the autumn
season. Increases range from 0.3°C to 0.44°C per decade and the districts with the greatest trends are
approximately at 4,600m above sea level. Precipitation historical trends show high seasonal and interannual
variability. Trends are therefore of low magnitude and do not usually show statistical significance. Overall, the
intervention shows an increase in precipitation at the annual level as well as the summer and autumn seasons. In
spring, trends in precipitation have been negative in recent decades. Since the end of the 1970s, Andean tropical
glaciers have been shrinking at an increasing rate. The main factor that explains this retreat is the warming of the
atmosphere, given that precipitation does not show significant changes. Recent analysis of glacier melting in the
last decades in the SHAP show considerable glacier losses (Seehaus et al., 2019). During the period between
2000-2013, the retreat rate in the southern SE subregion was −1.3 percent by year, and in the SW subregion, it
was −2.3 percent by year, approximately.
21 Swiderska, K, King-Okumu, C and Monirul Islam, M (2018) Ecosystem-based adaptation:a handbook for EbA in mountain, dryland and
coastal ecosystems. IIED, London.

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9
B
Figure 2. Temperature trends for the period 1981-2016
24. Regarding extreme weather events, in accordance with total precipitation trends, the number of events with more
than 10 mm rainfall show very few significant trends over the regions with very small intensity. SPI3 trends over the
last decades lean towards more droughts in the SHAP region (a negative SPI indicate more severe droughts).
Significant trends are visible in the Altiplano, SW and SE region. In recent decades, the Cusco, Puno and Arequipa
regions (SHAP), were the most affected by major meteorological droughts, especially in 1983, 1987, 1990, 1992,
2005 and 2016. See Chapters 3.3 and 3.4 in Annex 2 (Feasibility Study) for more details on these observed climate
trends.
Precipitation historical trends
25. As shown in Figure 3 show high seasonal and interannual variability. Trends are therefore of low magnitude and
do not usually show statistical significance (a). Overall, the intervention shows an increase in precipitation at the
annual level as well as the summer and autumn seasons. In spring, trends in precipitation have been negative in
recent decades. For winter, no precipitation trends are shown.
Figure 3. Precipitation trends for the period 1965-2016

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10
B
(Imfeld, Sedlmeier, & Gubler, 2021).
26. As shown in Figure 4 annual trends (a) in precipitation range from -14.1% to 55.4% per decade. Annual trends are
positive throughout SHAP, except in a few districts located in SE and A, which show slightly negative trends. In
summer (b), trends show a clear spatially distributed positive trend ranging from 3.7 to 50.9% per decade. In autumn
(c), trends range from -28.6 to 65.4% per decade, with eastern SE and A showing negative trends. In contrast, west
of SE and SW return spatially positive trends. In the winter (d) months, trends are not significant, but discrepancies
in trends again between east of SE and A (decrease) and west of SE and SW (increase), are noticeable. In spring
(e), there is a clear trend of decreasing rainfall, ranging from -45.7 to 45.7% per decade. All districts show a
decrease, except for a few located northwest of the SE. These decreases in spring months are related to the
tendency to delay the onset of rainfall that typically begins in this season. This is in line with other studies in the
Peruvian Andes that have noticed similar patterns of rainfall seasonality (Giráldez, Silva, Zubieta, & Sulca, 2020).
Figure 4. Spatial distribution of precipitation trends (%) from 1981 to 2016 in the SHAP chosen districts

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11
B
Climate change future scenarios
27. Projections for temperature and precipitation in the SHAP region as shown in Figure 5 (subregions are shown
divided by blue lines), shows that the changes in temperature are always positive, in any season or scenario.
According to the RCP4.5 scenario, by 2050, changes in maximum temperature range between 2.1 and 3.8°C, with
stronger signals in winter (d). Minimum temperature shows changes that go from 1.3 to 4°C. Spatially, these
changes are bigger in one specific zone placed over high altitudes between the SE and the Altiplano region and
the border of SW and SE in autumn.
Figure 5. Projected changes in maximum temperature towards 2050 under RCP 4.5 scenario for the annual mean (a),
summer (b), autumn (c), winter (d) and spring (e)
28. Under the RCP8.5 scenario as shown in Figure 6, by 2050, changes in maximum temperature range from 2.5 to
4°C, with stronger signals in winter. Minimum temperature shows changes between from 2 to 4°C. Similar to
RCP4.5, areas that show higher increases in all seasons are the border of SE and A and the border of SW and
SE.
Figure 6. Projected changes in maximum temperature (°C) towards 2050 under RCP 8.5 scenario for the annual mean (a),
summer (b), autumn (c), winter (d) and spring (e)

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12
B
29. For precipitation, under the RCP4.5 as shown in Figure 7 (subregions are also shown divided by blue lines), annual
changes range from -5 to +20 percent by 2050. In winter (d), changes are negative in most parts of the SHAP. On
the other hand, the largest positive changes occur in summer, especially over the north of the SE region. In general,
areas that show higher increases in all seasons are located at the west of SE. On the contrary, areas with decreases
or smaller increases are located in the A subregion.
Figure 7. Projected changes in precipitation towards 2050 under the RCP4.5 emission scenario for the total annual (a),
summer (b), autumn (c), winter (d) and spring (e)
30. Under the RCP8.5 emission scenario as shown in Figure 8, annual changes range from -30 to +30 percent by 2030.
The biggest negative changes happen in winter (d). However, spring is the season when the largest positive
changes in precipitation are expected. The SE and the Altiplano regions show mixed positive changes, whereas
the SW region shows consistent negative changes. Regarding extreme climate events like droughts Under RCP

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13
B
8.5, there is an increase of droughts in the Altiplano region by 2050, and wetter climates at lower altitudes. The
total number of drought months by some estimates is projected to almost double by 2100 under the RCP 8.5
scenario (Potter, et al., 2022). This will have impacts on the water balance, and on agricultural activity. See Chapter
3.5 in Annex 2a (Feasibility Study) for more details on these projected climate changes.
Figure 8. Projected changes in precipitation (%) towards 2050 under the RCP8.5 scenario for the annual mean (a),
summer (b), autumn (c), winter (d) and spring (e)
B.1.3 Climate risks and vulnerability of the SHAP ecosystems
31. Glacier retreat. Increased temperatures lead to the shrinking of glaciers. Peru is home to 71 % of the world's tropical
glaciers, however, due to higher temperatures and the increased absorption of solar radiation, the country has
already lost 51 % of its glaciers in the last 70 years.22 Accelerated glacier melting is possibly the strongest evidence
of climate change impacts in the Andes. Water resources in the Puna ecosystems, are greatly dependent on
Andean glaciers. According to the National Research Institute on Glaciers and Mountain Ecosystems (INAIGEM),
Peru glaciers have been reduced by 43 percent over the last 40 years, with at least seven watersheds already
crossing peak flow. Once the glaciers feeding these watersheds disappear, dry season average discharge may
decrease by up to 30 percent, causing water stress in these areas (Baraer et al., 2012). In the tropical Andes,
glaciers have represented a crucial water source for ancient and modern livelihoods and are of particular cultural
and spiritual values for local communities23. In recent years, those areas closer to melted glaciers has impacted
local livelihoods due to the scarcity of water resources. This is also threatening sacred festivals and reshaping
centuries-old indigenous rituals such as the Sanctuary of the Lord of Qoyllur Rit’I which each year about 100,000
individuals make a pilgrimage to the sacred Colque Punku glacier24.
32. Frost days. Associated with the general warming in the region, frost days trends return a general decrease over
the last three decades, especially at higher altitude in A and SE (Figure 31: Trends for several extreme weather
indices for the period 1981-2020 a) Frost days (FD), b) extreme rainfall (R10) and c) summer drought SPI3 Trends
in frost days mostly correspond to trends of minimum temperature with low magnitudes and few significant signals.
Since frost days are strongly related to incoming longwave radiation, the occurrence of frost days follows the cycle
of minimum temperature cycle (García, Raes, Jacobsen, & Michel, 2007). Regionally, differences in the occurrence
of frost days are observed. For instance, the percentage of frost days is considerably reduced close to the border
22 ANA (2020). Retroceso glaciar en el Perú 1948-2019. Impactos en el recurso hídrico.
http://repositorio.ana.gob.pe/bitstream/handle/20.500.12543/4551/ANA0003031.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
23 Drenkhan, Fabian; Carey, Mark; Huggel, Christian; Seidel, Jochen; Oré, María Teresa (2015). The changing water cycle: climatic and
socioeconomic drivers of water-related changes in the Andes of Peru. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water, 2 (6):715-733
24 https://www.nationalgeographic.com/culture/article/andean-glaciers-melting-reshaping-centuries-old-indigenous-rituals

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14
B
of Lake Titicaca compared to the areas more distant to the lake. This is an indication of the warming effect of the
lake on minimum temperature.
33. Heavy rainfall events. In accordance with total precipitation trends, the number of events with more than 10 mm
rainfall show very few significant trends over the regions with very small intensity. In a recent study, authors were
not able to attribute trends in R10 to trends in precipitation in the region (Imfeld, Sedlmeier, & Gubler, 2021).
Variability in decadal trends explain well the variability of precipitation in the region and the challenges in detecting
significant trends (Imfeld, Sedlmeier, & Gubler, 2021).
34. Drought risk. SPI3 trends over the last decades lean towards more droughts in the SHAP region (a negative SPI
indicate more severe droughts). Significant trends are visible in the A, SW and SE region. In recent decades, the
Cusco, Puno and Arequipa regions (SHAP), were the most affected by major meteorological droughts, especially
in 1983, 1987, 1990, 1992, 2005 and 2016. The El Niño phenomenon has long-distance impacts on the behaviour
of the climate of the Altiplano and its surroundings, causing a decrease in rainfall during El Niño episodes. ENSO
only partially explains a proportion of this decrease in the Andes, mainly in the central and southern western
highlands (Lavado W. E., 2014). Therefore, it is important to consider that recent studies of projections of ENSO
events indicate that, with a warmer climate comes an increase in ENSO events, and therefore an increased risk of
droughts (Cai, Ng, Wang, Santoso, & Yang, 2022).
35. Moreover, in a 2015 SENAMHI study, it was found that the greatest numbers of dry events between 1970 and 2014
are located in the SHAP region. In the Altiplano region (A subregion), these events have a shorter length. The SW
subregion, roughly corresponding to Arequipa’s high areas, experiences drought with the maximum intensity.
Between Cusco and Apurimac (SE subregion), dry events show greater intensity and number of events at the same
time (SENAMHI, 2015).
36. Impacts on Species and Ecosystems. The impact of higher temperatures and less precipitation will have an
impact on species distribution. For example, Feeley et al. (2010) studied the behaviour of Andean trees in the
tropical Andes located between 950m 3400m above sea-level. The authors concluded that due to the increase in
temperature, trees were migrating to higher elevations, at a mean rate of 2.5-3.5m per year (and even up to 20.6m
for some species). The observed mean rate of change is less than predicted in comparison to the temperature
increases in the region, suggesting that there is a limited capacity to respond to these and poses extinction risks
for some genera (Feeley, et al., 2010).
37. Similarly, glacier retreat has meant that there is more suitable territory for some species to inhabit. For example,
the glacial retreat in the Vilcanota mountain range (SE subregions) has opened an ecological corridor in recent
decades where species’ distributions have been affected. Many of the woody and herbaceous species in the Andes
(e.g. Ericaceae, Bromeliaceae) depend on interactions with animals for seed dispersal and pollination, and the
effects of climate change on these organisms could cause spatial, temporal or physiological asynchronies between
mutualistic species. The changes on species distribution implies that there will be changes in the coverage of
landscapes as well. For example, Ludeña et al. (2014) found that, in the Puna region, there would be an increase
in shrub surface under an A2 emission scenario (equivalent of an RCP 8.5 scenario with regards to temperature
rise). The same phenomenon is projected for the páramos. Conversely, glaciers, the suprandino area (the area
between glaciers and the puna), the puna and yungas forests show large reductions in extension. In general, a
migration to higher elevations was observed in the vegetation bands that characterize the Andes, but the puna was
replaced by shrubs rather than yungas forests. The projected expansion desert and dry (xeric) areas will reduce
water availability (Ludeña, Sánchez-Aragón, de Miguel, Martínez, & Pereira, 2014). Results from different climate
change scenarios suggest a progressive reduction in the carrying capacity of ecosystems and a decrease in the
available area of grazing land.
38. Impacts on agriculture and livestock production. Prolonged droughts, changes in temperature and precipitation
are likely to have various impact on the livelihoods of subsistence farmers in the Andes, including decreased crop
yields and shorter growing seasons, changes in water availability, grasslands and diminished carrying capacity of
ecosystems for livestock, including camelids. An evaluation developed by SENAMHI found that increases in
maximum temperature (2°C to 3°C), minimum temperature (4°C to 6°C), and higher rainfall (10% to 20%) by 2050
would lead to negative impacts in agricultural activity in the SHAP region. According to SENAMHI (2015), crop
yields in the SE, SW and A subregions decrease in different magnitudes depending on the model and scenario.
For potato25, in the SE subregion for CanESM2 in the RCP4.5 scenario, the changes in yield crop are between -
436.4 and -1750.3 kg/ha with statistical significance toward 2050. Similarly, for CNRM-CM5 in the RCP8.5 scenario,
the yield crop is between -762.4 and -21.7 kg/ha with statistical significance toward 2050. Results obtained from
MPI-ESM-MR for both scenarios, for CanESM2 for the RCP8.5 and CNRM-CM5 for the RCP4.5 are mostly negative
25 In SEMANHI (2015), they also quantified the σ parameter, which is the proportion between the change in yield (Δyield = yield –
(2036-2065)
yield ) and the standard deviation (σ = Δyield (kg/ha)/standard deviation(kg/ha)) considering the average of 2036-2065 years as
(1971-2010)
the future climate and the 1971-2010 average as the present climate. Results for potato crops showed that averaging all three models, σ
goes from -0.17 to -0.82 for the RCP4.5 and from -0.28 to -0.69 for the RCP8.5. All models in both scenarios show a consistent decrease in
potato yields. For wheat yield, the σ parameter goes from -0.84 to 0.56 in the RCP4.5 and from -0.71 to 0.35 in the RCP8.5. Positive σ is
shown in the A region, while negative σ, in the SW region.

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15
B
but with no statistical significance. Wheat yields in the SW and A subregions, are also likely to significantly decrease
from 125.5 to 39.5 kg/ha with statistical confidence in the RCP4.5 scenario using the CanESM2 model. Likewise,
the crop yield for the RCP8.5 scenario using the CNRM-CM5 model, goes from -56.6 to 18.2 kg/ha with statistical
confidence. Pests and diseases26 will affect potato and onion crops due to shifts in species distribution (SENAMHI,
2015). Most highland communities in the Andes rely on crop and livestock farming for their livelihoods. Many are
smallholders who own livestock and use traditional farming practices, relying on rainfed crops and limited irrigation
(Aragón, Oteiza, & Rud, 2018). Surveys carried out in Apurimac in 2009, the loss of potato production due to
drought was 69% and 65% for corn. Most of the products from this region are used for self-consumption (Llosa,
2009).
39. In the case of livestock, the reduction in the carrying capacity of ecosystems in the high Andes translates into
economic losses for communities in the SHAP region. The value of the loss of livestock due to climate hazards was
estimated in the context of the Ministry of Agricultural Development and Irrigation’s Climate Risks and Adaptation
Strategy. The losses in the Puno region alone constitute over 60% of the national total in terms of monetary loss
(MIDAGRI, 2012). The scarcity of water and limited grazing areas are further reducing livestock productivity.
Extreme temperatures and frost events disrupt the reproductive cycles of both plants and animals, further
exacerbating the vulnerability of subsistence farmers who heavily rely on these resources. A detailed climate
change impact analysis on relevant value chains can be found in section 5.7.3 of Feasibility Study (Annex 2a).
40. Impact on population. In principle, climate change affects all people – but to varying degrees. In addition to
regional differences, this is largely due to social structures. Being affected by the consequences of climate change
also depends to a relevant extent on gender-conforming behaviour and gender-inequitable distribution of resources.
This means that migration caused by climate change also has something to do with gender equality27. This is also
applicable to specific highland communities use migration to anticipate or react to hazards. In terms of temperature-
related hazards, Sperling et al. (2008) mention the emigration of communities from the highlands of Puno, especially
of young people, mostly men, due to frosts and droughts. Crespeigne et al. (2009)’s findings show that after an
episode of rainfall deficiencies investigated in a community in Puno in 2007, 31% of those surveyed migrated or
looked for work as vendors, waiters and shoe-shiners to smooth out income losses in places like Lima and other
cities, or by working in mines and in agribusiness. Generally, men and boys migrate and look for work whereas
women and girls and the elderly do stay behind. According to a survey carried out in the Apurimac region, in the
last five years, 50% of the relatives of the inhabitants of that region have emigrated due to the drought, being the
province of Grau (76%) with the highest immigration according to the proportion of cases (Llosa, 2009).
B.1.4 Water balance under climate change
41. In order to assess the current status of the hydrological system of the puna and to describe how the system will be
affected by climate change and what the status of the system would be after implementing the, by the project
promoted, EbA measures, a hydrological study was conducted (see Annex 2g). As the availability of water is critical
for the maintenance of ecosystems and also for the sustainability of the agricultural and livestock breeding activities.
In this regard, the hydrological study considered hydrological and climate variables that are available as gathered
from open data and scientific literature to assess actual and future hydrological status and dynamics as a function
of changing climate and the effect of the EbA measures in the Puna Resilient project’s districts.
42. The hydrological study predicts an overall negative climate change impact28 in all the districts selected with different
levels of intensity from an index29 of 0.25 to 1 (the higher is the value, the higher is the combined effect of the
climate change and current water usages as respect to the water availability). Detailed results from the carried
hydrological model are described in Annex 2g.
43. In addition, to evaluate the impact of the EbA measures on each district, a Combined Index (CI) considering water
stress30 and EbA suitability was developed. The result showed that Ecosystem based adaptation measures have
the potential to generate positive impacts on the water availability at the district level. For example, the EbA
Wetlands (Bofedal) restoration and conservation, could potentially increase the soil-plant system humidity, increase
the spring flow due to infiltration produced by the wetland system recovered and decrease the base flows. The
values of the EbA Impact Index for each district and each EbA vary from 031 to 1. The higher the value, the higher
26 The affirmation about the effect of pests and diseases that might affect crops due to shifts in species distribution is not quantified but only
mentioned in the results obtained from SENAMHI (2015).
27 Klimawandel, Migration und Geschlechterverhältnisse | Migration und Klimawandel | bpb.de
28 Data on current and projected hydrological variables with the projected climate change were based on the data presented in the Annex 2f
and information available at landscape scale from reliable sources.
29 This hydrological study supports the calculation of hydrological and climate resource and risk indexes that contributes to the understanding
and estimation of water availability versus water usages. To analyses climate change impacts 10 climate change indexes were calculated
based in five water resources and two climate change variables.
30 For the water stress hydrological interdependencies of EbA measure for climate change adaptation were considered as assumptions based
on studies that have demonstrate the links between the proposed interventions and improved climate resilience among vulnerable
communities in the region (The benefits for adaptation of the proposed EbAs measures are described in section 9.2 of Annex 2a).
31 Some EbAs are not suitable for all analyzed districts.

--- Table 1 on Page 19 ---
40. Impact on population. In principle, climate change affects all people – but to varying degrees. In addition to
regional differences, this is largely due to social structures. Being affected by the consequences of climate change
also depends to a relevant extent on gender-conforming behaviour and gender-inequitable distribution of resources.
This means that migration caused by climate change also has something to do with gender equality27. This is also
applicable to specific highland communities use migration to anticipate or react to hazards. In terms of temperature-
related hazards, Sperling et al. (2008) mention the emigration of communities from the highlands of Puno, especially
of young people, mostly men, due to frosts and droughts. Crespeigne et al. (2009)’s findings show that after an
episode of rainfall deficiencies investigated in a community in Puno in 2007, 31% of those surveyed migrated or
looked for work as vendors, waiters and shoe-shiners to smooth out income losses in places like Lima and other
cities, or by working in mines and in agribusiness. Generally, men and boys migrate and look for work whereas
women and girls and the elderly do stay behind. According to a survey carried out in the Apurimac region, in the
last five years, 50% of the relatives of the inhabitants of that region have emigrated due to the drought, being the
province of Grau (76%) with the highest immigration according to the proportion of cases (Llosa, 2009).

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16
B
is the potential of the relative impact of the EbA in respect to the water availability of the district. In general, the
results demonstrate the benefits and positive impacts that the proposed interventions will have in the target areas,
identifying which districts benefit best from each EbA measure, providing information on the prioritization of EbA
measures for the implementation of sub-activity 1.1.1.2. Ultimately these EbA interventions will substantially reduce
the expected negative impacts of climate change in the project area.
B.1.5 Priorities for climate change adaptation in ecosystems and agriculture
44. The most relevant impacts of climate variability and change in the Puna ecosystems and agricultural value chains
include: i) losses in livestock, both in terms of the number of animals and productivity; ii) losses in crop yields,
increased incidence of pests and diseases and loss in resilience to external shocks; iii) reduced water availability;
iv) increased soil erosion and reduced topsoil moisture; v) decreased food and nutritional security.
45. At present, the prioritized value chains suffer significant impacts due to climate change, which translate into the
following vulnerabilities:
Andean crops
46. Potato: The effects of climate change on potato production are complex, as plant growth and yield are related to
temperature. Potato cultivation, in order to maintain its nutritional properties, requires cold temperatures. Many
farmers in the High Andes have moved the agricultural frontier upwards to maintain favourable temperatures for
their crops (Giamberso, 2014). Shaw and Kristjanson (2013) found that potato farmers in the region have raised
their crops by approximately 150 m in the last 30 years. Arce et al. (2019) found that in Huancavelica, native
potatoes rose almost 500 m above those reported 38 years ago. In the agro-ecological zones of the Puna, in
addition to the increase in temperature, there are currently other climatic events that put agricultural production at
risk, such as frosts, droughts and hailstorms that generate risks of production losses and loss of genetic diversity
of native potatoes (Practical Solutions, 2018). The droughts have caused a reduction of approximately 12.1% in
potato sowings (2022/2023 season) with respect to the average accumulated sowings up to October of the last 5
seasons, i.e., 21,028 ha less (MIDAGRI, 2022e). Evidence also indicates that farmers are responding to climate
change by increasing areas of potato cultivation in natural grassland areas in Puna areas, due to the increased
population and rate of pests and diseases that appear to be occurring at lower altitudes such as rancha, also known
as tizón tardío and seca seca.
47. Quinoa: Quinoa has many qualities that make it more resilient to climate change (Balakrishnan et al., 2022,
Hinojosa, et al, 2018) tyhan other crops, nevertheless quinoa is not immune to the negative impacts of climate
change, which can adversely affect its production and yield. Areas once suitable for quinoa cultivation may no
longer have the necessary conditions for sustained production. As temperatures rise and exceed the crop's
optimum threshold, production and yield decline. For instance, in Puno, a 1 °C temperature increase results in a
reduction of 112.2 Mt in production and 169.1 kg per ha in yield. Additionally, increased rainfall by 300 mm leads
to a reduction of 75.78 Mt in production and 127 kg per ha in yield (Carrasco, 2016). Drought is another significant
challenge that quinoa producers face, causing water scarcity for irrigation. In Ayaviri, Puno, the entire quinoa
harvest was lost during the 2023 season.
South American Camelids
48. Alpaca and Vicuña: Increasing temperatures and reduced rainfall have resulted in diminished pastures and a higher
incidence of pests and diseases and contribute to higher mortality rates among newborn. This situation is likely to
negatively impact vicuña and alpaca populations (Kasterine and Lichstenstein, 2018). Furthermore, climate change
has influenced the spatial dynamics of pastures, grazing areas, and the vicuña habitat. As grazing areas degrade,
vicuñas are forced to cover larger areas with lower-quality pastures and migrate to higher elevations where better
pastures can be found (Korswagen, 2015). Also, sudden changes in rainfall and the melting of glaciers are causing
disruption among both alpaca communities and the communities that rear them. A primary challenge currently
faced by alpaca producers is the scarcity of water due to reduced rainfall, directly affecting pasture and fodder
production for feeding the herd. Consequently, they are incurring additional expenses that were not present before
for the animals' breeding.
49. Sustainable management of South American camelids is therefore an ancestral activity and in several cases are
still, the most highly appreciated resource for Andean livelihoods (Vilá and Arzamendia, 2022). Although it is known
that South American Camelids are more efficient grazers, there is a need to ensure long-term sustainability of this
livestock system in a context of climate change by supporting communities in developing climate-resilient business
models for camelid breeding and fiber production. This includes improving the management and conservation of
water and pastures, adding sustainable value to the fiber products, combining primary production with
manufacturing, developing a stronger fiber quality control, promoting associations among camelid breeders to
achieve a higher professional level of their members, and taking charge of the direct commercialization on the
national and international market. Other productive practices (e. g., crop rotation, selection of adapted crop
varieties, agrobiodiversity conservation) related to agriculture value chains will also be promoted by the project
through the conservation and restoration of key ecosystem services (food provision, soil fertility, water regulation,

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17
B
nutrient cycling) with the aim to increase livelihoods diversification and to reduce the vulnerabilities of the
communities.
50. Additionally, the project will work on complementary value chains including traditional Andean crops, breeding
of small animal (guinea pigs), community based tourism and traditional handicrafts. Traditional crops include:
(i) Kiwicha (Amaranthus caudatus), (ii) Cañihua (Chenopodium pallidicaule), (iii) Tarwi, (iv) Oca (Oxalis tuberosa),
and (v) Mashua. Their vulnerabilities are related to those explained for the main crops (quinoa and potato), as well
as those related to animal livestock and tourism. Since Agricultural systems are highly sensitive to climate change,
most farm rural people in the Peruvian Andes hold diversified, low input cropping systems and intercropping as an
adaptation response to the intra-seasonal climate variability32.
51. Ecosystems based Adaptation (EbA) supports the sustainable use of resources and diversification of land and
livelihood options such as multi-cropping and agroforestry while reducing climate vulnerability for people at least
local scale but ideally at landscape scale33. The table below describes the impacts for each of the prioritized value
chains and theEbA measures that the project will promote in a complementary manner so climate resilience can
be increased in the SHAP. The EbA measures mentioned below has been revised and validated during stakeholder
consultations with different actors in the regions (local authorities, technical officials from rural extension programs,
Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities, producer organizations, cooperatives, non-governmental
organizations, academia, etc.).
Table 1. Climate change risks and impacts in the target Puna ecosystems and value chains, adaptation interventions and
benefits
Value chain / Impacts of climate Ecosystem based Adaptation
Threat / Climate risk Adaptation benefits
Ecosystem change measures
Highland crops - Increase in - Decreased crop Prioritized EbA measures for EbA measures ensure the
- Potato maximum yields and shorter highland crops include: provision of ecosystem services.
temperature. growing seasons - Conservation and restoration Therefore, water regulation
- Decrease of - Decrease in of wetland ecosystems functions of wetlands towards the
basins in times of low water levels
minimum production quantity (bofedales) – ancestral use to
represent an important measure to
temperature/ frost owing to water retain rainwater and regulate
make a significant contribution to
- Dry scarcity. runoff flows, increasing soil the challenges of water security,
periods/drought - Decreased crop moisture. Improvement in water integrated water resources
- Heavy rainfalls growth regulation at the source. management, and ensuring
- Glacial retreat and - Soil fertility - Qochas – ancestral water micro adequate water availability for
melting - Logistical problems reservoir natural water human supply (SDG6).
(harvest/ transport) reservoirs to retain rainwater
In a scenario of low provision of
due to floods - Integrated soil fertility
water, technologies to increase
- Increase in pests management (ISFM) – efficiency within the irrigation
and diseases that ancestral agricultural practice to systems is crucial. Solar pumping,
affect crop yield and enhance soil fertility, improves geotanks and sprinkler and srip
local population water retention, and even irrigation systems are also crucial
Highland crops - Increase in - Decreased crop reduces germination time to water management.
- Quinoa maximum yields through seed priming through
Improved soil fertility would
temperature. - Decline in crop e.g. crop rotation, camelids increase resilience to climate
manure (Liniger, Mekdaschi,
- Decrease of production and change, underpinning plant growth
Hauert, & Gurtner, 2011).
minimum quality. and optimising crop yields. This
temperature/ frost - Decrease in - Andenes/terraces -ancestral would promote food security and
- Dry production quantity technique to reduce water runoff environmental sustainability of
periods/drought owing to water and soil erosion, usually on agricultural systems. Sustainable
- Heavy rainfalls scarcity. steep slopes. Terraces maintain pest management and other
soil moisture and generate a adaptation practices will maintain
- Glacial retreat and - Logistical problems
suitable microclimate for crop and/or increase productivity and
melting (harvest/ transport)
diversification (HELVETAS product quality in a changing
due to floods
Swiss Intercooperation, 2017). climate context.
- Infiltration ditches -retain and Diversifying production will
infiltrate rainwater. The increase the resilience of
deposited water infiltrates the producers in the event of a climatic
soil and helps with aquifer event affecting economic activity.
recharge.
Women participate in the different
- Agroforestry measures -tree-
stages of agricultural work. They
crop interaction helps control
select and care for native seeds,
erosive processes and which are the basis of the food
increases water infiltration at biodiversity that sustains families.
32 Ponce, Carmen (2020). Intra-seasonal climate variability and crop diversification strategies in the Peruvian Andes. A word of caution on
the sustainability of adaptation to climate change.
33 Swiderska, K, King-Okumu, C and Monirul Islam, M (2018) Ecosystem-based adaptation:
a handbook for EbA in mountain, dryland and coastal ecosystems. IIED, London.

--- Table 1 on Page 21 ---
 | Value chain / |  | Threat / Climate risk |  | Impacts of climate |  |  | Ecosystem based Adaptation |  | Adaptation benefits
 | Ecosystem |  |  |  | change |  |  | measures |  | 
Highland crops
- Potato |  |  | - Increase in
maximum
temperature.
- Decrease of
minimum
temperature/ frost
- Dry
periods/drought
- Heavy rainfalls
- Glacial retreat and
melting | - Decreased crop
yields and shorter
growing seasons
- Decrease in
production quantity
owing to water
scarcity.
- Decreased crop
growth
- Soil fertility
- Logistical problems
(harvest/ transport)
due to floods
- Increase in pests
and diseases that
affect crop yield and
local population |  |  | Prioritized EbA measures for
highland crops include:
- Conservation and restoration
of wetland ecosystems
(bofedales) – ancestral use to
retain rainwater and regulate
runoff flows, increasing soil
moisture. Improvement in water
regulation at the source.
- Qochas – ancestral water micro
reservoir natural water
reservoirs to retain rainwater
- Integrated soil fertility
management (ISFM) –
ancestral agricultural practice to
enhance soil fertility, improves
water retention, and even
reduces germination time
through seed priming through
e.g. crop rotation, camelids
manure (Liniger, Mekdaschi,
Hauert, & Gurtner, 2011).
- Andenes/terraces -ancestral
technique to reduce water runoff
and soil erosion, usually on
steep slopes. Terraces maintain
soil moisture and generate a
suitable microclimate for crop
diversification (HELVETAS
Swiss Intercooperation, 2017).
- Infiltration ditches -retain and
infiltrate rainwater. The
deposited water infiltrates the
soil and helps with aquifer
recharge.
- Agroforestry measures -tree-
crop interaction helps control
erosive processes and
increases water infiltration at |  |  | EbA measures ensure the
provision of ecosystem services.
Therefore, water regulation
functions of wetlands towards the
basins in times of low water levels
represent an important measure to
make a significant contribution to
the challenges of water security,
integrated water resources
management, and ensuring
adequate water availability for
human supply (SDG6).
In a scenario of low provision of
water, technologies to increase
efficiency within the irrigation
systems is crucial. Solar pumping,
geotanks and sprinkler and srip
irrigation systems are also crucial
to water management.
Improved soil fertility would
increase resilience to climate
change, underpinning plant growth
and optimising crop yields. This
would promote food security and
environmental sustainability of
agricultural systems. Sustainable
pest management and other
adaptation practices will maintain
and/or increase productivity and
product quality in a changing
climate context.
Diversifying production will
increase the resilience of
producers in the event of a climatic
event affecting economic activity.
Women participate in the different
stages of agricultural work. They
select and care for native seeds,
which are the basis of the food
biodiversity that sustains families.
Highland crops
- Quinoa |  |  | - Increase in
maximum
temperature.
- Decrease of
minimum
temperature/ frost
- Dry
periods/drought
- Heavy rainfalls
- Glacial retreat and
melting | - Decreased crop
yields
- Decline in crop
production and
quality.
- Decrease in
production quantity
owing to water
scarcity.
- Logistical problems
(harvest/ transport)
due to floods |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18
B
small scale (HELVETAS Swiss While men tend to choose to plant
Intercooperation, 2017) . hardy crops that secure their yields,
- Restoration with native women’s preferences are more
species- ancestral practice often shaped by varieties that are
easier to grow, quick to cook,
using native species (such as
nutritious and palatable34. They
Buddleja coriacea, Alnus
therefore make a key contribution
acuminata or Polylepis
to food security and sovereignty
racemosa) have high soil
(SDG5)
retention capacity, stabilize
sudden temperature changes In Peru, the gender roles around
and hold soil and environmental potato production are clearly
moisture. differentiated. Seed potato
management has traditionally been
- Contour farming by orienting
the domain of women, who have
the crop rows following the
knowledge of the cooking quality
contour lines of the topography
and agronomic or storage
and other ancestral tillage
characteristics of different varieties.
systems. This practice helps to Women make decisions regarding
reduce water runoff and soil the selection, storage and use of
erosion. seeds at planting time, as well as
- Conservation agriculture - sale of seed or home consumption,
farming system that prevents and their knowledge is critical to the
soil disturbance and preservation of the thousands of
emphasizes maintenance of varieties that exist today35
permanent soil cover. The aim is
to enhance biodiversity and
improved and sustained crop
production. Also, it increased
water retention and runoff
reduction.
Other complementary adaptation
measures will be also supported.
Camelids - Dry periods/ - Low forage Prioritized EbA measures for the EbA measures will improve water
(alpacas and drought production South American camelid value harvesting during the rainy season
vicunas) - Increase in - Increase in herd chain in the intervention areas for distribution in times of drought
maximum morbidity and include: (see detail on measures by supplementing water from
temperature mortality. above) rainfall. This, together with efficient
- Heavy rainfalls - Decrease in drinking - Conservation and irrigation technologies, will improve
- Glacial retreat and water sources. restoration of wetland and make sustainable use of water
melting - Decrease in ecosystems (bofedales) - resources for fodder production.
- Decrease of production quality ancestral use to retain Also, grassland vegetation cover
minimum and quantity rainwater and regulate runoff protects soils from the effects of
temperature/ frost - Decrease in flows, increasing soil moisture erosion, reduces evaporation as
meat/fiber yield and fodder.
well as runoff. This not only
- Increase in presence - Qochas -ancestral water micro improves carbon sequestration,
of pests and reservoir natural water helping to mitigate greenhouse gas
diseases (animals reservoirs to retain rainwater. emissions from livestock
and farmers) - Infiltration ditches -retain and production, but also contributes to
infiltrate rainwater. The
improved soil quality by increasing
deposited water infiltrates the
soil porosity and water retention
soil and helps with aquifer
capacity (DDCC, 2019). Its
recharge.
sustainable management
- Sustainable management of contributes to increasing
natural pastures -ancestral
communities' resilience to climate
practice for overgrazing control,
change by buffering the effects of
increasing water infiltration and
extreme events and is also a
controlling erosion, grasslands
strategic social and economic
can be recovered and provide
element for camelid producers, as
enough fodder for livestock
a source of food and survival for
(HELVETAS Swiss
Andean vicuñas and alpacas.
Intercooperation, 2017).
- Agroforestry measures (see Diversifying production will
highland crops above) increase the resilience of
Restoration with native species -
ancestral practice using native
34 Women hold the seeds of a stronger food system for Peru / Las mujeres alimentarán nuestro futuro | CGIAR GENDER Impact Platform
35 https://www.potatonewstoday.com/2021/03/18/the-phoenixes-in-our-food-systems-women-farmers-in-peru-safeguarding-the-survival-of-
potato-biodiversity/

--- Table 1 on Page 22 ---
 |  |  |  | small scale (HELVETAS Swiss
Intercooperation, 2017) .
- Restoration with native
species- ancestral practice
using native species (such as
Buddleja coriacea, Alnus
acuminata or Polylepis
racemosa) have high soil
retention capacity, stabilize
sudden temperature changes
and hold soil and environmental
moisture.
- Contour farming by orienting
the crop rows following the
contour lines of the topography
and other ancestral tillage
systems. This practice helps to
reduce water runoff and soil
erosion.
- Conservation agriculture -
farming system that prevents
soil disturbance and
emphasizes maintenance of
permanent soil cover. The aim is
to enhance biodiversity and
improved and sustained crop
production. Also, it increased
water retention and runoff
reduction.
Other complementary adaptation
measures will be also supported. | While men tend to choose to plant
hardy crops that secure their yields,
women’s preferences are more
often shaped by varieties that are
easier to grow, quick to cook,
nutritious and palatable34. They
therefore make a key contribution
to food security and sovereignty
(SDG5)
In Peru, the gender roles around
potato production are clearly
differentiated. Seed potato
management has traditionally been
the domain of women, who have
knowledge of the cooking quality
and agronomic or storage
characteristics of different varieties.
Women make decisions regarding
the selection, storage and use of
seeds at planting time, as well as
sale of seed or home consumption,
and their knowledge is critical to the
preservation of the thousands of
varieties that exist today35 | 
 | Camelids
(alpacas and
vicunas) | - Dry periods/
drought
- Increase in
maximum
temperature
- Heavy rainfalls
- Glacial retreat and
melting
- Decrease of
minimum
temperature/ frost | - Low forage
production
- Increase in herd
morbidity and
mortality.
- Decrease in drinking
water sources.
- Decrease in
production quality
and quantity
- Decrease in
meat/fiber yield
- Increase in presence
of pests and
diseases (animals
and farmers) | Prioritized EbA measures for the
South American camelid value
chain in the intervention areas
include: (see detail on measures
above)
- Conservation and
restoration of wetland
ecosystems (bofedales) -
ancestral use to retain
rainwater and regulate runoff
flows, increasing soil moisture
and fodder.
- Qochas -ancestral water micro
reservoir natural water
reservoirs to retain rainwater.
- Infiltration ditches -retain and
infiltrate rainwater. The
deposited water infiltrates the
soil and helps with aquifer
recharge.
- Sustainable management of
natural pastures -ancestral
practice for overgrazing control,
increasing water infiltration and
controlling erosion, grasslands
can be recovered and provide
enough fodder for livestock
(HELVETAS Swiss
Intercooperation, 2017).
- Agroforestry measures (see
highland crops above)
Restoration with native species -
ancestral practice using native | EbA measures will improve water
harvesting during the rainy season
for distribution in times of drought
by supplementing water from
rainfall. This, together with efficient
irrigation technologies, will improve
and make sustainable use of water
resources for fodder production.
Also, grassland vegetation cover
protects soils from the effects of
erosion, reduces evaporation as
well as runoff. This not only
improves carbon sequestration,
helping to mitigate greenhouse gas
emissions from livestock
production, but also contributes to
improved soil quality by increasing
soil porosity and water retention
capacity (DDCC, 2019). Its
sustainable management
contributes to increasing
communities' resilience to climate
change by buffering the effects of
extreme events and is also a
strategic social and economic
element for camelid producers, as
a source of food and survival for
Andean vicuñas and alpacas.
Diversifying production will
increase the resilience of | 

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19
B
species (such as Buddleja producers in the event of a climatic
coriacea, Alnus acuminata or event affecting economic activity.
Polylepis racemosa) have high soil
Women have been playing a
retention capacity, stabilize sudden
fundamental role in the
temperature changes and hold soil
implementation and maintenance
and environmental moisture.
of these techniques (wetlands,
harvesting and sowing water), as
they also work in agriculture and
livestock farming.
Livestock raising is an activity
mostly carried out by women and
requires fodder in the dry season
(from June to October or
November) to maintain the size of
the herds, their productivity and
income. In this context, they
produce and transfer knowledge
about animal well-being and
grassland health.
When men migrate to access other
income in urban or peri-urban
areas, women remain in charge of
their agricultural units.
52. Many core elements and principles of the EbA approach coincide with traditional knowledge, management
practices, technologies, and values of High Andean communities. There are traditional communal
management practices to prevent degradation of wetlands through different systems:
53. The management of rustic reservoirs, known as qochas, to store rainwater for human use and animal consumption
and to promote groundwater recharge through seepage. Another traditional way to support water infiltration and
prevent soil loss through erosion is by constructing trenches following the contour of the land, thus, capturing
rainwater runoff (and soil) and subsequently feeding aquifers and springs to face water deficits in dry seasons.
54. Such infrastructure is complemented with ancient diversion canals conducting streamflow to infiltrate trenches from
which it can slowly seep and then re-emerge in micro-reservoirs or springs for agricultural use.
55. Moreover, the Southern Andes are well known for their terraced landscape, dating back to pre-Inca periods.
Terraces reduce the speed of runoff in areas with steep slopes, slowly seeping water into the ground and increasing
the surface of land that can be used for agriculture or animal grazing.
56. The management of natural grasslands and wetlands through the establishment of animal exclusion areas,
rotational grazing, and restoration allows ecosystems to recover and continue supplying services such as water
regulation and provision, fodder, control of soil erosion, and carbon sequestration.
57. These ancient technologies have been an integral part of traditional livelihoods in the SHAP for centuries, shaping
a particular way of living with and within nature. Furthermore, these technologies are not only based on the natural
infrastructure themselves but on the social network behind them, which demands a high degree of social cohesion
to successfully perform the required communal work to keep the technologies in place (Rolando et al., 2017).
58. Proven solutions with potential to be upscaled. The protection of grasslands and wetlands through fencing and the
restoration of flows in those areas that have been drained, have proven efficient in recovering their functionality in
terms of water regulation. Empirical evidence from studying ten peatland areas (bofedales) in Peru and Bolivia
showed that these Andean Puna ecosystems can reduce the climate change impact on water availability by
increasing the groundwater recharge during the rainy season (Cooper et al., 2019). Another research by Cervantes
(2022) demonstrated the contribution of ecosystems (peatlands, grasslands, and Polylepis forests) to water
regulation. According to this recent analysis in the Rontoccocha micro basin in the Peruvian region of Apurimac
from 2019, grasslands had the capacity to recharge 194 mm (194 l/m2) of water in one year and stored 15.1 percent
of the total rainfall water in one-unit area. Peatlands were shown to store 16.4 percent and recharge 211 mm (l/m2),
and Polylepis forests stored 15.4 percent and recharged 198 mm. As presented in the following chart, peatlands
have a greater water recharge capacity (water regulation ecosystem service) than grasslands and Polylepis forests
(Cervantes, 2022). Moreover, Mosquera et al. (2022) revealed that grasslands have an important and positive
hydrological function in the High Andes and, when conserved and restored, can improve soil water infiltration and
reduce soil erosion.

--- Table 1 on Page 23 ---
 |  |  | species (such as Buddleja
coriacea, Alnus acuminata or
Polylepis racemosa) have high soil
retention capacity, stabilize sudden
temperature changes and hold soil
and environmental moisture. | producers in the event of a climatic
event affecting economic activity.
Women have been playing a
fundamental role in the
implementation and maintenance
of these techniques (wetlands,
harvesting and sowing water), as
they also work in agriculture and
livestock farming.
Livestock raising is an activity
mostly carried out by women and
requires fodder in the dry season
(from June to October or
November) to maintain the size of
the herds, their productivity and
income. In this context, they
produce and transfer knowledge
about animal well-being and
grassland health.
When men migrate to access other
income in urban or peri-urban
areas, women remain in charge of
their agricultural units.

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20
B
Table 2. Results for each ecosystem under studyResults for each ecosystem under study (in mm and, in brackets, in %
of total precipitation).
Ecosystem Precipitation Interception Net Surface Actual Recharge
precipitation runoff evapotranspiration
Grassland 1 290 (100%) 51.5 (4.0%) 1 240 (96.0%) 324 (25.1%) 698 (54.2%) 194 (15.1%)
Peatland 1 290 (100%) 25.8 (2.0%) 1 260 (98.0%) 320 (24.9%) 765 (59.4%) 211 (16.4%)
Polylepis
1 290 (100%) 122 (9.5%) 1 170 (90.5%) 311 (24.2%) 696 (54.1%) 198 (15.4%)
forests
Source: Cervantes (2022)
59. A recent study analysed alternatives for water supply in the city of Lima. The combination of amuna restoration,
hydrological restoration of wetlands, animal exclusion, and rotational grazing in the puna ecosystem turned to be a
competitive alternative (0.51 USD/m3), compared to a desalinization plant (0.74 USD/m3) (Gammie and De Bievre,
2015). Ecosystem based solutions, are well known for their contribution to mitigation co-benefits.
B.1.6 Prioritized Project Areas
60. Due to the extent of the SHAP and limited project funds, areas where interventions could have the greatest potential
were prioritized in a two-stage process. In the first stage, the scope of analysis was defined according to a set of
criteria including vulnerable communities, high altitude Andean areas (above 3,500 m.a.s.l, including a buffer zone
between 2,800 to 3,500 m.a.s.l), presence of key Puna ecosystems (peatlands, grasslands and wetlands), distance
to degraded lands and to areas that have suffered deglaciation, and existence of agriculture and husbandry lands
with high or very high risks of droughts and high climate vulnerability. In the second stage, priority was given to
districts with the best enabling conditions for initiate interventions, considering social, economic, and environmental
factors. As a result of the first stage, 91 districts in the regions of Arequipa, Cusco, Apurimac, and Puno were
prioritized, covering 5,314,607 hectares. Of the 91 districts, 58 districts will be eligible for the Puna Facility (covering
4,116,475 hectares) and capacity building activities, while 33 districts will only benefit of capacity building activities.
Four Natural Protected Areas fall inside of some eligible districts which are: the Landscape Reserve of Nor Yauyos
Cochas in Lima region, the Landscape Reserve of Cotahuasi, the National Reserve of Salinas y Aguada Blanca in
Arequipa region, and the National Sanctuary of Ampay in Apurimac region. SERNANP is the governing entity of
these areas. A detailed explanation of the prioritization methodology and process is included in Annex 16b
“Explanatory note Area of intervention”. Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities in this area are 69% Quechua
speakers and the other 31% Spanish speakers (National Census, 2017)36. As depicted in the Map of Indigenous
People in Peru, there are no other Indigenous Groups in the target area of the project.
Figure 9. Map of prioritized districts by type of intervention Figure 10. Map of Indigenous Peoples in Peru
(Quechua in light pink)
36 Note that in 2012, 83% were Quechua speakers and 17% Spanish speaker within the project area of the project (CENAGRO, 2012)

--- Table 1 on Page 24 ---
Table 2. Results for each ecosystem under studyResults for each ecosystem under study (in mm and, in brackets, in %
of total precipitation). |  |  |  |  |  | 
Ecosystem | Precipitation | Interception | Net
precipitation | Surface
runoff | Actual
evapotranspiration | Recharge
Grassland | 1 290 (100%) | 51.5 (4.0%) | 1 240 (96.0%) | 324 (25.1%) | 698 (54.2%) | 194 (15.1%)
Peatland | 1 290 (100%) | 25.8 (2.0%) | 1 260 (98.0%) | 320 (24.9%) | 765 (59.4%) | 211 (16.4%)
Polylepis
forests | 1 290 (100%) | 122 (9.5%) | 1 170 (90.5%) | 311 (24.2%) | 696 (54.1%) | 198 (15.4%)

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21
B
Source: own Source: Ministry of Culture (2023)
Table 3. Prioritized districts by departments and type of intervention
Department Watersheds N° of districts N° of districts for Total
for Capacity Puna Facility +
Building Capacity building
Apurímac Inter-watershed Alto Apurimac 13 10 23
Arequipa Vitor Quilca Chili, sub-watershed 14 12 26
Cotahuasi- Ocoña
Cusco Vilcanota-Urubamba, Inambari 6 23 29
Lima Cañete - 4 4
Puno Azángaro, sub-watershed Coata - 9 9
Total 33 58 91
B.1.7 Direct beneficiaries of the project
61. The direct beneficiaries of the project are primarily Andean Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities from
vulnerable rural regions in the high Andean regions (for detailed beneficiary numbers, refer to section D.1.3). In the
majority of cases, project's direct beneficiaries are Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities engaged in
agriculture and animal husbandry activities in the high Andean zones. Both economic activities are essentially for
their subsistence and have a high dependency on climate (70% of agricultural activity depends on rainy season).
IPLCs in this part of the Andes as mentioned in the previous section are organized in peasant or local communities,
and in other forms (refer to the list below). to manage local development, administer common resources or provide
services to each other. These forms of organizations will be regarded as potential recipients of funding from the
Puna Facility, as outlined in section B.4.4. Special emphasis will be given to women’s participation in IPLCs,
enterprises, associations and cooperatives.
62. Local Communities37: Refers in most of the cases to peasant communities which are the most widespread and
important category in the region, as they represent a strong part of the Andean culture as they are descendants of
the Original Peoples of Peru. They are organizations of public interest, with legal existence and legal personality,
recognized by the government and protected by Peru’s Political Constitution, with rights over natural resources and
the territory they occupy. Peasant communities consist of families united together by ancestral, cultural, social and
37 Please note that the term of local communities is going to be used for this project in order to include a wider range of activities in which
they engage, as peasant communities are predominantly focused on agricultural activities.

--- Table 1 on Page 25 ---
Department | Watersheds |  | N° of districts |  |  | N° of districts for |  | Total
 |  |  | for Capacity |  |  | Puna Facility + |  | 
 |  |  | Building |  |  | Capacity building |  | 
Apurímac | Inter-watershed Alto Apurimac | 13 |  |  | 10 |  |  | 23
Arequipa | Vitor Quilca Chili, sub-watershed
Cotahuasi- Ocoña | 14 |  |  | 12 |  |  | 26
Cusco | Vilcanota-Urubamba, Inambari | 6 |  |  | 23 |  |  | 29
Lima | Cañete | - |  |  | 4 |  |  | 4
Puno | Azángaro, sub-watershed Coata | - |  |  | 9 |  |  | 9
Total |  | 33 |  |  | 58 |  |  | 91

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22
B
economic ties, who have communal ownership of the territories they inhabit. These communities operate through
democratic governance, involving a Communal Assembly and a Communal Board elected for terms ranging from
one to two years.
63. Community Enterprises: These are Local communities themselves that, using their legal status, organise and
administer their economic activities in a business manner, by generating productive units of communal goods and
services, to ensure the well-being of their members and contribute to the development of the community as a whole.
A local community can constitute one or more communal enterprises.
64. Producers’ Associations: Represent a stable organisation of natural or legal persons, or both, which through a
common activity pursues a non-profit purpose. In many cases, community’s members tend to form different types
of producer associations according to a specific economic activity, for example: artisans associations, alpaca
associations, quinoa producer associations, etc. For many years the Ministry of Agricultural Development and
Irrigation has promoted producer associativity, which comprises a process of voluntary grouping of individuals,
organisations or enterprises working in a coordinated and concerted manner to achieve their goals. This approach
aims to optimize the utilization of production resources, enhance earnings through associative marketing efforts,
and realize economic of scale, improved market access, and improved incomes.
65. Cooperatives: An agricultural cooperative is a society of persons that can also be the same members of a
community who carry out agricultural, forestry and/or livestock activities, who have joined voluntarily through a
jointly owned and democratically controlled company that complies with cooperative principles. The agricultural
cooperative is constituted with the purpose of providing services related to the agricultural, forestry and/or livestock
activity that its members carry out. Among the services that the cooperative can provide to its members are the
supply of products and services, marketing, processing, financing, technical advice, etc., as well as any other
related or complementary service that contributes to the realization of its objective. The agricultural cooperative
acquires the status of legal entity from its registration in the public registers, and to enjoy the benefits established
in this law, they must prove its registration in the National Registry of Agricultural Cooperatives in charge of the
Ministry of Agricultural Development and Irrigation (MIDAGRI).
66. Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs): Are an economic unit constituted by a natural or legal person, under any form
of organisation, whose purpose is to carry out activities of extraction, transformation, production, commercialisation
of goods or provision of services. According to the Legislative Degree 1086, micro enterprises have from 1 to 10
employees and annual sales up to 150 taxable tax units, while small enterprises have from 1 to 100 employees
and annual sales up to 1700 taxable tax units.
B.1.8 Related ongoing and forthcoming projects with synergies
67. Table B.1.1.3 provides a summary of the worth noting related past, ongoing and forthcoming interventions in the
SHAP (a more extended table and list can be found in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a) section 7.1.6 Gaps and
complementarity with other development initiatives in the sector).
68. Among the projects described below, it is worth noting some of them which the project will have some synergies.
For example, the project will scale up EbA pilot interventions on previous projects such as the Global Mountain
Ecosystem-based Adaptation programme38 implemented by UNDP and IUCN from 2011-2015 in Uganda, Nepal
and Peru. In Peru it was piloted only in a small area of Nor Yauyos Landscape Reserve to test methodologies and
decision-making tools for EbA planning and monitoring; implement pilot measures focused on water resources
management and built evidence and knowledge for decision making. Instituto de Montaña was IUCN implementing
partner so its experience, methodologies and lessons learnt will be replicated and scaled up into Resilient Puna
Project through Component 1 and 3 (in community monitoring systems and in territorial planning at different levels).
69. The Puna Facility will also complement and benefit from the experience of the Six Phase of GEF’s Small Grants
Programme implemented by UNDP until June 2021 and from the Seven Phase that goes until July 2025, covering
the regions of, Puno, Tacna and Cusco. The Puna Facility will fund EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value
Chains specifically if they have a climate adaptation purpose, rather than a biodiversity conservation/agricultural
development one such as the GEF’s SGP. The Puna Facility will start its first call for proposals at the beginning of
2025 avoiding overlaps with SGP but trying to complement the support to IPLCs and the existing multi-stakeholder
platforms. The GEF SGP’s six phase was successful in creating multi-stakeholder platforms, as well as knowledge-
exchange platforms that this project could leverage in Component 1. For example, through the SGP Peru
Knowledge Fair or “Encuentro de Saberes” where 50 communities in the Peruvian Andes have been sharing their
solutions based on nature and their ancestral knowledge39.Recommendations on how to strengthen Andean local
experts' capacities also will be taken in considerations for the implementation of sub-activity 1.1.2.1.
70. The USAID/Forest Trends/Canada “Natural Infrastructure and Water Security Project”, which promotes public-
private partnerships and ecosystem recovery to prevent hydrometeorological risks will serve to replicate tools and
38 Global Ecosystems Based Adaptation in Mountains Programme | UNDP Climate Change Adaptation (adaptation-undp.org)
39 When knowledge becomes power | Programa De Las Naciones Unidas Para El Desarrollo (undp.org)

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23
B
methodologies to identify where to implement EbA measures. Potential synergies with this project during
implementation in some territories will be closely coordinated.
71. The Helvetas/AVINA/IISD/IFAD “Resilient Andes project” which aim is to strengthen capacities in private-public
stakeholders living in poverty and vulnerability in Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru, aiming to improve their food and water
security. Component 3 pf this project will consider, and replicate family farming best practices and knowledges
gathered in “Encontrar” web platform.
72. The Sustainable Management of Agro-Biodiversity and Vulnerable Ecosystems Recuperation in Peruvian Andean
Regions through the Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems Approach (GEF- FAO) which aim is to
conserve and sustainable use agrobiodiversity in the high Andes. In component 1 of this project will replicate best
practices of farmer field schools for the cultivation of potato and quinoa and tools to connect producers with local
markets.
73. Alignment with existing GCF country programmes/ projects. Profonanpe is currently implementing two GCF
projects in Peru. As one of the main stakeholders, the project will build on previous experiences and include lessons
learned in its activities.
74. The project (FP001) Building the Resilience of Wetlands in the Province of Datem del Marañón seeks to facilitate
better land-use planning and management of the region’s wetlands, while strengthening sustainable, commercial
bio-businesses of non-timber forest products. It will entrust indigenous communities with the management of
resources, improve their livelihoods, and empower women in the decision-making processes.
75. Next to FP001, Profonanpe is also implementing and managing the Peruvian Amazon Bio Business Facility
(FP193), which was set up in November 2022. The Facility has the aim to invest in eco bio businesses (EBBs) to
provide mitigation benefits through enhancing carbon stocks. The Puna Facility which will invest in Climate Resilient
Value Chains will benefit from the experience of Profonanpe, which will have gained capacity and knowledge on
best practices and management from the implementation of the EBBF.
76. Furthermore, Peru is part of two additional GCF programs related to the Puna project activities: i) the in October
2021 approved (FP173) Amazon Bioeconomy Fund: Unlocking private capital by valuing bioeconomy products and
services with climate mitigation and adaptation results in the Amazon with the Inter-American Development Bank
as an Accredited Entity. The Amazon Bioeconomy Fund in six Amazon countries will deliver sustainable solutions
to reduce the impacts of climate change in the Amazon biome by prioritizing natural capital and delivering climate
benefits. The project has a similar approach, but its geographic implementation (Amazon basin) does not overlap
with the Puna. ii) (FP128) Arbaro Fund – Sustainable Forestry Fund, approved in March 2020, the Programme will
provide effective climate change mitigation outcome through investing in sustainable plantation forestry projects in
emerging forestry markets while also bringing adaptation co-benefits. This investment approach provides
developing countries and their rural communities with a solution to increase carbon sinks by producing wood in a
sustainable manner and conserving natural forests, whilst contributing to reduction of illegal logging.
Table 4. Related projects and potential synergies with the project
Project characteristics Objective and results Potential synergies
Title: Mountain EbA Objective: Strengthen national, regional and local This project serves as a “pilot” for this GCF project.
Budget: USD 3,276,637 capacities to implement EbA measures and reduce The proposed GCF project builds on the lessons
Implementation period: 2012- community vulnerability, emphasizing mountain learnt from this first project, specifically regarding
2016 ecosystems. LINK the implementation of EbA measures for better
Donor: BMU Results: Improved water availability and water management and agriculture in the Andes,
Agency: IUCN, UNDP management, as well as the rehabilitation of resulting in enhanced community resilience. The
grasslands in Canchayllo and Miraflores, with knock- Puna Facility, established under Activity 2.1.1 of
on benefits on biodiversity. Three prioritized EbA this project will also fund EbA activities. Moreover,
actions in three pilot sites: a) management of in a similar manner to the UNDP/IUCN project, this
vicuñas for the extraction of animal fibre. b) GCF project’s component 1 proposes activities
Community management of natural grasslands, such as strengthening community based EbA
including livestock c) sustainable water resources measures and monitoring impacts.
management, including rehabilitation of ancestral
water infrastructure and restoration of wetlands and
grasslands. Strengthened local capacities and
knowledge related to climate adaptation and the
importance of ecosystem services. This includes
park rangers and small landowners to municipal-
level workers. Creation of interest groups and
committees made up of academics and rural
communities that has reinforced locally led action.
Validity of EbA as an adaptation measure to be
invested in at regional and national levels as well as
“proof-of-concept”.
Title: Seventh Operational Objective: To build socio-ecological landscape Both programmes fund EbA interventions to
Phase of the GEF Small Grants resilience in the Southern Andes in Peru through enhance ecosystem services with agricultural and
Programme in Peru (UNDP) community-based activities for global environmental economic benefits in mind. This GEF Small Grants
Budget: 6,337,319 USD benefits and sustainable development. LINK Programme in the Peruvian Andes seeks to
address very similar challenges through providing

--- Table 1 on Page 27 ---
Project characteristics | Objective and results | Potential synergies
Title: Mountain EbA
Budget: USD 3,276,637
Implementation period: 2012-
2016
Donor: BMU
Agency: IUCN, UNDP | Objective: Strengthen national, regional and local
capacities to implement EbA measures and reduce
community vulnerability, emphasizing mountain
ecosystems. LINK
Results: Improved water availability and
management, as well as the rehabilitation of
grasslands in Canchayllo and Miraflores, with knock-
on benefits on biodiversity. Three prioritized EbA
actions in three pilot sites: a) management of
vicuñas for the extraction of animal fibre. b)
Community management of natural grasslands,
including livestock c) sustainable water resources
management, including rehabilitation of ancestral
water infrastructure and restoration of wetlands and
grasslands. Strengthened local capacities and
knowledge related to climate adaptation and the
importance of ecosystem services. This includes
park rangers and small landowners to municipal-
level workers. Creation of interest groups and
committees made up of academics and rural
communities that has reinforced locally led action.
Validity of EbA as an adaptation measure to be
invested in at regional and national levels as well as
“proof-of-concept”. | This project serves as a “pilot” for this GCF project.
The proposed GCF project builds on the lessons
learnt from this first project, specifically regarding
the implementation of EbA measures for better
water management and agriculture in the Andes,
resulting in enhanced community resilience. The
Puna Facility, established under Activity 2.1.1 of
this project will also fund EbA activities. Moreover,
in a similar manner to the UNDP/IUCN project, this
GCF project’s component 1 proposes activities
such as strengthening community based EbA
measures and monitoring impacts.
Title: Seventh Operational
Phase of the GEF Small Grants
Programme in Peru (UNDP)
Budget: 6,337,319 USD | Objective: To build socio-ecological landscape
resilience in the Southern Andes in Peru through
community-based activities for global environmental
benefits and sustainable development. LINK | Both programmes fund EbA interventions to
enhance ecosystem services with agricultural and
economic benefits in mind. This GEF Small Grants
Programme in the Peruvian Andes seeks to
address very similar challenges through providing

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24
B
GEF grant: 1,959,132 USD. Results: The programme is in its Seventh small grants (5000-50,000 USD) for community-led
Implementation period: 2021- Operational phase. The mid-term review for the projects in biodiversity conservation, improvement
2025 Sixth Operational phase noted that the programme of ecosystem services, as well as improving
Donor: GEF was especially successful in creating multi- agricultural value chains through soil and water
Agency: UNDP stakeholder platforms called Strategic Landscape conservation practices. The Puna Facility will fund
Platforms. These support participatory planning and similar activities to those of the GEF Small Grants
adaptive management of landscapes, and are programme. It is important to note, however, that
composed of 6-9 members, including community the Puna Facility will fund EbA activities and
platforms, local authorities, and private sector. climate-resilient value chains specifically if they
(UNDP, 2019). have a climate adaptation purpose, rather than a
conservation/agricultural development one.
Title: Peruvian Amazon Bio Objective: The Amazon Eco Bio Business Facility This facility, managed by Profonanpe, provides
Business Facility (EBBF) (FP193) will provide effective climate change repayable grants to EBBs that manage and
Budget: 10,000,000 USD mitigation outcomes by investing in eco bio conserve Peruvian forests in the Amazon, and
GCF grant: 8,972,400 businesses (EBBs) supporting the sustainable provide mitigation benefits through enhancing
Implementation period: 2022- management and conservation of Peruvian forests. carbon stocks. The Puna Facility, established
2032 LINK under Activity 2.1.1 of this proposed project, will
Donor: GCF invest in Climate Resilient Value Chains through
Agency: PROFOFONAPE Results: This project is still under implementation, the development of businesses that increase
but the EBBF aims to contribute to enhancing SHAP communities’ resilience to climate change,
carbon stocks and avoiding the emission of 3,8
and/or reduce the negative impacts of existing
million tonnes of CO2, with an estimated cost of 263
livelihood strategies on the puna ecosystem. The
USD / t CO2eq during its lifetime, and support
Puna Facility will also invest in EbA measures to
REDD+ infrastructure in Peru.
adapt to climate change impacts in the intervention
area.
Both facilities are managed by Profonanpe, which
will have gained capacity and knowledge on best
practices and management through implementing
the EBBF. However, the Puna Facility will fund
climate adaptation activities in the Puna biome.
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)
B2a.1. Theory of change and Project Goal
77. The following diagram shows the ToC for the project, which illustrates the change pathway and interactions of
different elements of the intervention logic proposed by the project. As shown in the theory of change diagram, the
project has established an integrated self-supporting approach, addressing the identified barriers and risks.

--- Table 1 on Page 28 ---
 | GEF grant: 1,959,132 USD.
Implementation period: 2021-
2025
Donor: GEF
Agency: UNDP | Results: The programme is in its Seventh
Operational phase. The mid-term review for the
Sixth Operational phase noted that the programme
was especially successful in creating multi-
stakeholder platforms called Strategic Landscape
Platforms. These support participatory planning and
adaptive management of landscapes, and are
composed of 6-9 members, including community
platforms, local authorities, and private sector.
(UNDP, 2019). | small grants (5000-50,000 USD) for community-led
projects in biodiversity conservation, improvement
of ecosystem services, as well as improving
agricultural value chains through soil and water
conservation practices. The Puna Facility will fund
similar activities to those of the GEF Small Grants
programme. It is important to note, however, that
the Puna Facility will fund EbA activities and
climate-resilient value chains specifically if they
have a climate adaptation purpose, rather than a
conservation/agricultural development one. | 
 | Title: Peruvian Amazon Bio
Business Facility
Budget: 10,000,000 USD
GCF grant: 8,972,400
Implementation period: 2022-
2032
Donor: GCF
Agency: PROFOFONAPE | Objective: The Amazon Eco Bio Business Facility
(EBBF) (FP193) will provide effective climate change
mitigation outcomes by investing in eco bio
businesses (EBBs) supporting the sustainable
management and conservation of Peruvian forests.
LINK
Results: This project is still under implementation,
but the EBBF aims to contribute to enhancing
carbon stocks and avoiding the emission of 3,8
million tonnes of CO2, with an estimated cost of 263
USD / t CO2eq during its lifetime, and support
REDD+ infrastructure in Peru. | This facility, managed by Profonanpe, provides
repayable grants to EBBs that manage and
conserve Peruvian forests in the Amazon, and
provide mitigation benefits through enhancing
carbon stocks. The Puna Facility, established
under Activity 2.1.1 of this proposed project, will
invest in Climate Resilient Value Chains through
the development of businesses that increase
SHAP communities’ resilience to climate change,
and/or reduce the negative impacts of existing
livelihood strategies on the puna ecosystem. The
Puna Facility will also invest in EbA measures to
adapt to climate change impacts in the intervention
area.
Both facilities are managed by Profonanpe, which
will have gained capacity and knowledge on best
practices and management through implementing
the EBBF. However, the Puna Facility will fund
climate adaptation activities in the Puna biome. | 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) |  |  |  | 
B2a.1. Theory of change and Project Goal
77. The following diagram shows the ToC for the project, which illustrates the change pathway and interactions of
different elements of the intervention logic proposed by the project. As shown in the theory of change diagram, the
project has established an integrated self-supporting approach, addressing the identified barriers and risks. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25
B
78. Goal: The aim of the project is to increase the resilience of communities, ecosystems and livelihood in the High
Andean region affected by climate change through the implementation of EbA measures, complemented by CRVC,
the establishment of public and private financing for investing in these measures and the support from multilevel
landscape governance instruments.
79. Goal Statement: IF public and private financing for investing in EbA measures to enhance climate resilient
livelihoods are accessible to vulnerable communities in the Puna Ecosystem, THEN the resilience of these
communities will be improved as a result of the conservation and restoration of ecosystems and ecosystem services
through EbA measures, BECAUSE local communities will scale up conservation and management of ecosystem
based on best practices and ancestral knowledge, develop climate resilient diversified livelihoods through better
market access and economic opportunities with support from multilevel landscape governance instruments.
80. The ToC diagram, goal and goal statement respond to a series of activities, outputs and outcomes (described in
detail in section B.3) that addresses the barriers and risks described below.

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26
B
B.2a.2. Identified Barriers
81. The barriers that the project will address in the prioritized districts in the SHAP region, including economic, financial,
technical, institutional, knowledge and information, are:
Economic and financial barriers
i) Barrier 1: Family farms have unequal participation in the agricultural value chain, lack economies of
scale, limited commercial activity, access to markets and financing. Excessive fragmentation in
agricultural production and supply creates barriers to market entry. Limited collaboration among agricultural
producers weakens their ability to negotiate effectively for input procurement and product sales, thereby
detrimentally impacting the seamless connection between agricultural producers and markets (Hernández
Calderón, 2006). According to Cannock et al (2016), the high transaction costs derived from the remoteness
and high geographical dispersion of agricultural productive areas hinders communication and interaction
between producers who could share information on input prices or sales channels. In a study conducted by
Escobal (cited by Cannock et al, 2016), applied to a sample of potato producers in two districts of the
department of Huancavelica, the author finds that transaction costs represent 50% of the value of sales and
that these costs are particularly higher for small producers compared to larger ones. The rural population is
being limited to the services offered by the formal financial system, which prevents them from investing and
improving their production, thus limiting their access to markets. The regulated IFI Intermediary Financial
Institutions perceive the agricultural sector as very high risk, since it presents conditions of high climate
vulnerability, fragmentation and dispersion of the population itself and mainly of the economic units that
generate income, which operate in small-scale volume with low levels of technology applied to the production
process with little specialized technical personnel, among other factors (PP121 MIDAGRI 2021). Potential
clients also face limited financial literacy and inadequate loan terms, as well as generally high financial
transaction costs and limited collateral (Sotomayor, Talledo, & Wong, 2018).
ii) Among camelid producers, the majority of alpacas and llamas in the region, around 85%, are owned by small-
scale farmers. These farmers usually possess less than 100 animals each within mixed herds. Also, the South
American camelid fiber value chain demonstrates inequality as its commercialization structure is characterized
by high intermediation, maintained by traditional relations that limit and condition the price and negotiation
terms to the detriment of the producers. The supply is dispersed and in small volumes, and producers seldom
have the negotiation capacity to present a collective offer due to their lack of organization (Moya & Torres,
2008). In the case of rural women, there is generally access to lower quality farmland, often in marginal areas,
where land is mainly cultivated for household consumption. Rural women raise domestic animals, process
primary products or sell their small surpluses in local markets, while men's participation in productive activities
is more closely linked to more competitive and profitable value chains40. In addition, another important gender
gap in the project’s region is related to land ownership and/or tenure, with women owning only 30.8% of
farmland in Peru (FAO 2018).
iii) Inequalities in income generation among women and men is also present in the target area of the project.
According to the National Agricultural Census (2012), there are more women with no income of their own. For
example, in Apurimac 32.8% of women no have income in their own compared to only 12.1% of men. In the
case of Arequipa women without income of their own (38.1%) while men (22.3%). In Cusco women (30.5%)
and men (18.2%). Finally in Puno, women 25.1% while men 17.4%. In the case of women in agricultural
occupations, 37.6% are unpaid family workers and only 46.3% of women in agricultural occupations received
cash income.
iv) Specifically, in terms of the project beneficiaries IPLCs in their various forms of organization face differentiated
barriers in regard to access to financing according on how they are organized which includes:
a) For communities, producers’ associations and cooperatives in the process of formalisation
i. Lack of economies of scale. Their production is mainly for self-consumption, because their
productivity is very low, and their production is very small.
ii. Limited commercial activity. The small part of their production that they manage to sell is sold
through middlemen who come to their farms. Consequently, they lack control over pricing,
generally resulting in very low prices.
iii. Limited access to finance. These organisations don’t have access to formal credits because they
don’t meet the legal and commercial requirements to apply for a credit lines. In some cases, they
receive advanced payments from middlemen and are then penalised with the price of their
products.
b) Micro and/or Small Enterprises, community enterprises and cooperatives with commercial capacities and
clear target markets and formalized producers’ organization
i. Partially self-consumption, but with an emerging group of clients. These organisations need to
increase the number of customers by finding niche markets that value the origin of their products.
40 retos y oportunidades de la agricultura familiar en perú : care perú

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27
B
ii. The organisation collects the products of its members and sells it together. Because of that, they
can access better prices, and sometimes can add value to their production. However, they still
need to improve their production process and quality controls to maintain their customers and
expand them sustainably.
iii. Limited access to finance. Their limited experience, low productivity, and sales figures hinder their
easy access to credit based on their technical capabilities, despite being legally eligible to do so.
i) Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate resilient/sustainable
development. Peru’s microfinance landscape comprises a limited number of institutions that provide loans to
small and medium-sized businesses pertinent to this project, particularly those catering to smallholder farmers
and communities in the High Andean areas. Financial institutions such as Financiera Confianza, Mibanco,
Financiera Compartamos, and Caja Rural Los Andes are notable due to their alignment with the project's target
borrowers, their presence in the project regions, and their emphasis on rural lending. Caja Rural Los Andes
and Caja Rural Inka Sur also extend microcredits to the rural and peasant population. The Arequipa -
Fondesurco Savings and Credit Cooperative is also active in the region, offering small "green loans" tailored
for agriculture and livestock purposes. The state-owned bank Agrobanco, which oversees Agroperu, an
independent agricultural lending fund, also holds significance due to its rural and sector-specific orientation.
Likewise, Cofide, Peru's development bank, also plays a role in this landscape. Regarding to access to loans,
in 2012 only between 5% and 20% of men farmers took out a loan; and for women farmers it is even lower,
between 4% and 12% (INEI 2012). The extreme shortage of capital of small producers does not allow them to
invest in infrastructure (e.g. planting and harvesting water, sheds, greenhouses, road improvements), or to
introduce new cultivation and grazing practices (e.g. sprinkler irrigation for pasture cultivation, mobile roosts to
facilitate herd management) for the benefit of their families, and particularly women.
Technical barriers
i) Barrier 3: Limited technical capacity prevents family farmers from accessing investment and in
participating in decision-making processes. The legislation and norms on the participatory budget allow the
involvement of the communities, both in the formulation of the budget and in the planning of the territory;
however, their participation is limited, due to, among other causes, ignorance of the legislation, lack of interest
and difficulty of the institutions responsible for calling and bringing communities together to inform them,
discuss, negotiate and put their needs on the agenda of territorial management (Doughty, 2014). In terms of
women participation on decision making process the tendency is low whether at national, sub-national or
community level. This geographical dispersion is a very serious limitation for the associativity of the rural
communities, which, in turn, prevents them from accessing technical and financial assistance offered to
increase productivity by the MIDAGRI programs in the area, conditional on loans, which imply compliance with
multiple requirements, unattainable for farmers, due to the complex procedures. This prevents small producers,
particularly women, from participating in the camelid value chain, mainly higher up the chain in accessing
international markets, as well as technological advances for highly valued products such as vicuña fibre
(MIDAGRI, 2023). In the case of Andean women, they struggle with a position of gender inferiority regarding
access and control over natural resources such as land, water, production and commercialisation of agricultural
products. This translates into under representation in different type of organisations. Despite this, women
actively participate in the management of key natural resources such as water and land. While men concentrate
their participation and decision making in agriculture and husbandry, women are responsible for water supply
for subsistence farming, food preparation, cleaning and hygiene of family members, including the ill and disable
(Carrillo & Remy, 2022).
v) In addition to the economic and financial barriers mentioned above the project beneficiaries face differentiated
barriers in regard to organizational barriers and technical capacities which includes:
c) For communities, producers’ associations and cooperatives in the process of formalisation
i. Organizational barriers:
a. Organizations without internal organisational and commercial capacities and clear target
markets. This means lack of business organizations. Such organisations do not have
commercial purposes; therefore they cannot directly commercialize any product for the
purpose of distributing profits among their members, nor can they set aside profits for the
purpose of repayment.
b. Sell individually through middlemen. They usually organise themselves to work on
common goods (irrigation canals, schools, etc.), but they lack organisational structures to
sell together, coordinating the marketing and distribution of commercial gains.
ii. Limited technical capacities: Community members are generally unaware of the types of
requirements needed to apply to credit lines. Furthermore, due to the individual production, the

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28
B
training provided by different sources fail to reach all members of the communities, putting the most
vulnerable at a disadvantage by denying access to technological improvements.
d) Micro and/or Small Enterprises, community enterprises and cooperatives with commercial capacities and
clear target markets and formalized producers’ organization
iv. Organizational barriers:
a. Organizations with commercial capacities and clear target markets. These organisations
have commercial purposes, so they are accredited to generate profits, distribute profits,
and make payments on a joint basis.
b. They have established a minimum level of internal entrepreneurial organisation for their
business’ operations, marketing and distribution of their financial benefits.
v. Limited technical capacities: These organisations are initiating the processes to improve their
productivity by providing training to their members (cooperatives) and workers (micro-enterprises).
However, they face the difficulties of physical distances, insufficient resources, and little knowledge
of the market.
ii) Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into territorial planning, government
processes and M&E systems. Different stakeholders do not possess systematic methods to plan EbA and
climate resilient practices into policies, plans, budgets and investments. MIDAGRI extension services do not
register or keep track of progress in climate change adaptation impact of their training or structural interventions,
so there is no way to monitor and evaluate progress in adaptive capacity neither at the Ministry nor at local
levels. Traditional methods for decision-making based on observation and ancient knowledge exist but are
being lost. On top, in some instances, they are no longer relevant in the new climate context and are often not
well understood by regional and national decision-makers. According to Cerdan et al (2022)41, the main
challenges that must be overcome to optimize EbA investments include reducing the time of the budget
allocation process from public funds to EbA investments. Sometimes, it depends on the political decision of
both regional and local authorities. On the other hand, it was evidenced that only 16% of the project investments
include a monitoring system, for example hydrological, what makes more complex to verify the impacts that the
interventions on the quantity and quality of water resources, among other variables. Finally, the incorporation
of the gender approach is a pending and necessary task in the investment projects, it is necessary to include
conceptual frameworks and formal tools of the State that incorporate the needs and women's visions from the
formulation, implementation and evaluation of projects.
Knowledge and information barriers
i) Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not sufficiently disseminated and
scaled-up. In this field, a very important barrier refers to the fact that the best practices and ancestral
knowledge linked to EbA are not disseminated or expanded sufficiently. Ancestral practices and knowledge on
EbA are being lost due to: (i) the processes of emigration of young people and (ii) the lack of appreciation and
recognition of the value of such knowledge and technologies by national, regional, and local institutions.
Climandes project carried out a survey to identify the existence of a common practice among the farmers,
named here “Ancestral Visual Indicator”. It consists of a hereditary climate-related knowledge, based on the
observation of the sky. This usage is mainly spread among old farmers (older than 70 years), for whom it has
higher credibility than the information provided by SENAMHI. In contrast, young farmers tend not to adopt this
ancestral knowledge, refusing non-modern and for them unreliable habits42. The rural areas of SHAP have
experienced a significant decrease in population due to migration. While some highland communities migrate
in anticipation or in reaction to hazards, others stay in spite of the challenges/dangers. The vulnerability of
highlanders is often based on a function of the extent, quality, and location of household resources, including
land and livestock, and demographic factors such as family size, age, and health.43 Outmigration is
deteriorating family’s structures, culture, traditions and local knowledge44. López-i-Gelats et al. (2015) found
that migration may weaken the adaptive capacity as traditional knowledge and labour resources are being lost.
41 Eliana Cerdán Estrada, Mia Smith, Mirtha Camacho Hernández y Claudia V. Grados Bueno. Recuperando la fluidez: Estado de la inversión
en acciones en infraestructura natural para la seguridad hídrica en el Perú, 2022.
42 G. Rosas, S. Gubler, C. Oria, D. Acuña, G. Avalos, M. Begert, E. Castillo, M. Croci-Maspoli, F. Cubas, M. Dapozzo, A. Díaz, D. van
Geijtenbeek, M. Jacques, T. Konzelmann, W. Lavado, A. Matos, F. Mauchle, M. Rohrer, A. Rossa, S.C. Scherrer, M. Valdez, M. Valverde,
G. Villar, E. Villegas, (2016). Towards implementing climate services in Peru – The project CLIMANDES, Climate Services, Volume
4,2016,Pages 30-41.
43 Oliver-Smith, A. (2014) Climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction in highland Peru. In: Adapting to Climate Change: Lessons
from Natural Hazards Planning (B.C. Glavovic and G.P. Smith, eds.). Springer, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 77–100.
44 Bergmann, J., K. Vinke, C.A. Fernández Palomino, C. Gornott, S. Gleixner, R. Laudien, A. Lobanova, J. Ludescher and H.J. Schellnhuber
(2021). Assessing the Evidence: Climate Change and Migration in Peru. Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK), Potsdam, and
International Organization for Migration (IOM), Geneva.

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29
B
As the younger population of the SHAP has moved to urban areas, 40 % of the population remaining are now
over 54 years old45. In addition, gender traditional norms in the Andes often prevent women from achieving the
same level of visibility as men, or benefit from the same opportunities and recognition, despite their deep
knowledge of agriculture, water and ecosystems. For example, women alpaca herders in the Andes continue
to be side-lined in technical discussions at local and national level around animal health and pasture
management, the same as, in discussions about agrifood systems and crop diversification46.
Institutional barriers
ii) Barrier 6: Limited alignment and coordination among stakeholders to reinforce positive impact on the
territory. The weak intersectoral and intergovernmental articulation and coordination is one more reason for
policies in Peru to fail. According to A. Fernández (2017)47, the Peruvian State presents a complex and
hierarchical structure organizational that limits the channels of coordination between ministries, levels of
governments, among other institutions in the implementation of public policies which generates the appearance
of critical knots that make the correct continuity of the policy impossible. The implementation of public policies
in Peru is the weakest link in the decentralization process and public management, due to the ineffectiveness
of the instances, platforms or spaces of articulation and coordination where the government authorities of the
three levels of government (national, regional and local) have not achieved consensus and/or agreements to
establish a shared vision of territorial development in search of closing economic and social inequalities48.
Despite the existing normative on participatory involvement of communities in budget and territorial planning,
community’s involvement is limited due to the lack of awareness, weak capacities to dialogue, negotiate and
put their needs in the territorial agenda.
iii) Barrier 7: Limited institutional knowledge hinders the implementation of PES schemes. From the
institutional point of view, barriers are related to the roles of regional and local governments in prioritizing
investments to improve the impact of the actions developed within the framework of the hydrological MERESE
stand out. For the specific case of the water utilities (EPS49), they need to adapt their organizational structure
to address the challenges present in the design of the MERESE and the execution of the funds raised, as well
as to incorporate conservation and recovery of water sources in their institutional culture and strategies (Tristan
et al 2021). Technical barriers are mainly related to the limited knowledge to understand the functioning and
management of MERESE and therefore to design projects oriented to the conservation, recovery and
management of ecosystems. On the other side, limited capacities and methodologies to monitor and evaluate
the impacts of the green investments on the hydrologic ecosystem services (HES); the lack of information on
which activities are effective for the recovery, conservation and sustainable use of HES source ecosystems;
and on methodologies to evaluate the return on investment for retribuyentes50, such as EPS (Tristan et al 2021).
iv) Barrier 8: Limited integration of EbA into regulatory frameworks. Although there is a State Policy No. 34
of Territorial Planning and Management, there is still no Land Management Law, which establishes the
necessary instruments to channel efforts to regulate the occupation and appropriate use of the territory,
establishing objectives and actors responsible for its implementation, monitoring and vigilance for compliance
(Ojea, E, 2015). Another aspect is the absence of policies for the recognition and valuation of ecosystem
services, which establish the responsibility to protect and conserve the ecosystems that produce them, as well
as the way to reward the work of restoration and conservation of ecosystems. the same. An advance in this
sense is Law 30215, Mechanisms for Retribution for Ecosystem Services - MERESE, (LSE, 2014) which is
fulfilled through the companies that provide water and sanitation services and must be used for the restoration
and conservation of ecosystems that provide hydrological services, among others. The progress achieved with
this law opens a new range of technical and social needs and limitations that must be overcome. Since
MERESE resources are insufficient for the recovery needs of ecosystem services, it is necessary to design
regulatory frameworks which facilitate other public actors could be engaged and committed.
B.2a.3. Alignment of proposed outcomes, outputs and activities with identified barriers
82. The identified barriers will be addressed by the three project outcomes and related outputs and activities.
Specifically, in the following paragraphs a clear explanation on how each barrier will be addressed by the project
outputs and activity is provided. Table B.2a.1 provides a summary of the linkages between barriers addressed and
45 Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática (INEI) - IV Censo Nacional Agropecuario 2012.
46 Caine, A (2021) “Who Would Watch the Animals?”: Gendered Knowledge and Expert Performance Among Andean pastoralists. Culture,
Agriculture, Food and Environment ISSN 2153-9553, eISSN 2153-9561.
47 Fernández, A. (2017). Análisis de la gestión articulada orientada a reducir la desnutrición crónica y la anemia infantil, distrito de Sancos –
Ayacucho. [Trabajo presentado para obtener el grado académico de Magister en Gestión pública]. Universidad del Pacifico.
48 Chessman, Yuri (2022). The intergovernmental articulation and coordination mechanisms of National and Territorial policies in Peru.
49 EPS refers to the sanitation service providers, for more information, please see https://www.sunass.gob.pe/prestadores/empresas-
prestadoras/
50 The retribuyentes is the natural or legal person, public or private, who obtains an economic, social or environmental benefit, and rewards
contribuyente for the ecosystem service received.

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30
B
corresponding outcome/outputs and activities. The unequal participation of family farms, in particular women, in the
agricultural value chain, lack economies of scale, limited commercial activity, access to markets and financing
(Barrier 1) will be addressed by Output 1.1 (the implementation of EbA measures at the local landscape level) and
Output 2.1 (Financial mechanisms for the implementation of EbA measures established). The insufficient supply of
financial products (Barrier 2) will be address by Outputs 1.1 as well as 2.1.
83. The limited technical capacity of farmers, particular of women (Barrier 3), will be addressed by technical assistance
for implementing EbA measures (Activity 1.1.3), the recovery, innovation and scale up of ancestral knowledge and
practices (Activity 1.2.1) and strengthen capacities to develop and implement innovative mechanisms for EbA
(Activity 2.1.2). The limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into territorial planning, government
processes and M&E systems (Barrier 4) will be addressed by implementing community monitoring and observation
systems to measure the impact of EbA measures and provide feedback on regional and national policies (Activity
1.2.2), strengthening capacities to develop and implement innovative mechanisms for EbA with a gender
responsive approach in high Andean ecosystems (Activity 2.1.2) and the improvement of multilevel landscape
governance through strengthening of national capacity, regulatory frameworks and M&E systems (Output 3.1).
84. The limited dissemination, particularly limiting women and scale-up of best practices and ancestral knowledge
linked to EbA (Barrier 5), will be addressed by Output 1.2. (use of EbA knowledge is recovered and disseminated,
and local monitoring committees and observation systems are implemented) and trough strengthening the
capacities for territorial planning and governance processes integrating EbA and climate resilience (Activity 3.1.1).
85. The limited alignment and coordination among stakeholders (Barrier 6) will be addressed by activity 3.1.1. The
limited institutional knowledge for the implementation of PES schemes (Barrier 7) will be addressed by activity
2.1.2. Finally, the limited integration of EbA into regulatory frameworks (Barrier 8) will be addressed by activity
3.1.2.
Table 5. Overview of Project’s outcomes, outputs and activities and their link to barriers addressed

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31
B
Outcome Output Activity Sub-activities Barriers addressed
1.1.1.1 • Barrier 1: Smallholder farmers and associations, in particular women, have
1.1.1 unequal participation in the agricultural value chain, lack economies of scale,
1.1.1.2
limited commercial activity, access to markets and financing.
1.1.2.1 • Barrier 1: Family farms, in particular women, have unequal participation in
the agricultural value chain.
1.1.2
1.1.2.2 • Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate
1.1.
resilient/sustainable development.
1.1.3.1
• Barrier 3: Limited technical capacity, particularly of women.
1.1.3.2
1.1.3 • Barrier 1: Family farms, in particular women, have unequal participation in
1.1.3.3 the agricultural value chain.
• Barrier 3: Limited technical capacity, particularly of women.
1
• Barrier 3: Limited technical capacity, particularly of women.
1.2.1.1 • Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not
sufficiently disseminated and scaled-up.
1.2.1
1.2.1.2
• Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not
1.2.1.3
sufficiently disseminated, particularly for women and scaled-up.
1.2.1.4
1.2.
1.2.2.1 • Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
1.2.2.2 territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems.
• Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
1.2.2
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems.
1.2.2.3
• Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not
sufficiently disseminated and scaled-up.
2.1.1.1 • Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate
2.1.1.2 resilient/sustainable development.
• Barrier 1: Smallholder farmers and associations, in particular women, have
2.1.1 unequal participation in the agricultural value chain, lack economies of scale,
2.1.1.3 limited commercial activity, access to markets and financing.
• Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate
resilient/sustainable development.
• Barrier 3: Limited technical capacity, particularly of women, prevents family
farmers of accessing investment and in participating in decision-making
processes.
2.1.2.1
2 2.1. 2.1.2 • Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems.
• Barrier 7: Limited institutional knowledge hinders the implementation of PES
schemes.
• Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate
2.1.3.1
resilient/sustainable development.
• Barrier 1: Smallholder farmers and associations, particularly women, have
2.1.3 unequal participation in the agricultural value chain, lack economies of scale,
2.1.3.2 limited commercial activity, access to markets and financing.
• Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate
resilient/sustainable development.
• Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
3.1.1.1 territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems
• Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not
sufficiently disseminated and scaled-up.
• Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems.
3.1.1
• Barrier 6: Limited alignment and coordination among stakeholders to
3.1.1.2
reinforce positive impact on the territory.
• Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not
3 3.1.
sufficiently disseminated, particularly for women and scaled-up.
• Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
3.1.1.3
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems.
• Barrier 8: Limited integration of EbA and climate resilience approaches into
3.1.2.1
regulatory frameworks.
• Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
3.1.2
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems.
3.1.2.2
• Barrier 8: Limited integration of EbA and climate resilience approaches into
regulatory frameworks.
B.2a.4. Project co-benefits.
86. The project will generate several co-benefits including:
i. Maintenance of ecosystem services in the project area.
ii. GHG emissions are avoided through the conservation and restoration of degraded ecosystems.
iii. Improvement of local economy through better economic opportunities for poverty reduction.

--- Table 1 on Page 35 ---
 | Outcome |  |  | Output |  |  | Activity |  |  | Sub-activities |  |  | Barriers addressed | 
1 |  |  | 1.1. |  |  | 1.1.1 |  |  | 1.1.1.1 |  |  | • Barrier 1: Smallholder farmers and associations, in particular women, have
unequal participation in the agricultural value chain, lack economies of scale,
limited commercial activity, access to markets and financing. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.1.1.2 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 1.1.2 |  |  | 1.1.2.1 |  |  | • Barrier 1: Family farms, in particular women, have unequal participation in
the agricultural value chain.
• Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate
resilient/sustainable development. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.1.2.2 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 1.1.3 |  |  | 1.1.3.1 |  |  | • Barrier 3: Limited technical capacity, particularly of women. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.1.3.2 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.1.3.3 |  |  | • Barrier 1: Family farms, in particular women, have unequal participation in
the agricultural value chain.
• Barrier 3: Limited technical capacity, particularly of women. |  | 
 |  |  | 1.2. |  |  | 1.2.1 |  |  | 1.2.1.1 |  |  | • Barrier 3: Limited technical capacity, particularly of women.
• Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not
sufficiently disseminated and scaled-up. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.2.1.2 |  |  | • Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not
sufficiently disseminated, particularly for women and scaled-up. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.2.1.3 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.2.1.4 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 1.2.2 |  |  | 1.2.2.1 |  |  | • Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.2.2.2 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.2.2.3 |  |  | • Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems.
• Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not
sufficiently disseminated and scaled-up. |  | 
2 |  |  | 2.1. |  |  | 2.1.1 |  |  | 2.1.1.1 |  |  | • Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate
resilient/sustainable development. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2.1.1.2 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2.1.1.3 |  |  | • Barrier 1: Smallholder farmers and associations, in particular women, have
unequal participation in the agricultural value chain, lack economies of scale,
limited commercial activity, access to markets and financing.
• Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate
resilient/sustainable development. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 2.1.2 |  |  | 2.1.2.1 |  |  | • Barrier 3: Limited technical capacity, particularly of women, prevents family
farmers of accessing investment and in participating in decision-making
processes.
• Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems.
• Barrier 7: Limited institutional knowledge hinders the implementation of PES
schemes. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 2.1.3 |  |  | 2.1.3.1 |  |  | • Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate
resilient/sustainable development. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2.1.3.2 |  |  | • Barrier 1: Smallholder farmers and associations, particularly women, have
unequal participation in the agricultural value chain, lack economies of scale,
limited commercial activity, access to markets and financing.
• Barrier 2: Insufficient supply of financial products and support for climate
resilient/sustainable development. |  | 
3 |  |  | 3.1. |  |  | 3.1.1 |  |  | 3.1.1.1 |  |  | • Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems
• Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not
sufficiently disseminated and scaled-up. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 3.1.1.2 |  |  | • Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems.
• Barrier 6: Limited alignment and coordination among stakeholders to
reinforce positive impact on the territory.
• Barrier 5: Best practices and ancestral knowledge linked to EbA are not
sufficiently disseminated, particularly for women and scaled-up. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 3.1.1.3 |  |  | • Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 3.1.2 |  |  | 3.1.2.1 |  |  | • Barrier 8: Limited integration of EbA and climate resilience approaches into
regulatory frameworks. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 3.1.2.2 |  |  | • Barrier 4: Limited capacity to integrate EbA and climate resilience into
territorial planning, government processes and M&E systems.
• Barrier 8: Limited integration of EbA and climate resilience approaches into
regulatory frameworks. |  | 

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32
B
iv. Awareness raising and capacity building of local stakeholders.
v. Gender responsive approaches mainstreamed in EbA and CRVC measures.
87. See section D.3 (sustainable development potential) for further details on the identified co-benefits, and section E.5
for the co-benefit indicators.
B.2a.4. Risks and Assumptions.
88. Risks. Project risks related to technical and operational, credit, governance and legal risks, among others, are
described in detail in Chapter F, and environmental and social risks are described within Chapter G.1. Amongst
others it includes:
• Insufficient financing may put at risk the long-term sustainability of the public or private investment.
Insufficient public or private financial flows may put at risk the long-term sustainability of the project. Market
intake for EbA options, especially those promoted via microfinancing may be insufficient. Fluctuations in the
market value of cash products (South American camelid fiber, quinoa) may limit economic activity and
entrepreneurship.
• Local stakeholders are not sufficiently organized, engaged and interested in participating in the
project. Participation from local stakeholders in the project activities may not be as high as expected due to
the lack of interest.
• Coordination among regional government stakeholders is insufficient to sustain project results.
Coordination among government stakeholders is insufficient and the lack of interest and ownership of the
project may limit the sustainability of project results.
• Risk of continuity due to political instability. The project is constructed on the assumption of sustained
commitment from the Government of Peru to fulfil its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) goals and from
MIDAGRI to continue its open and proactive engagement. Political instability in Peru may affect project
continuity.
• Maladaptation and degradation of ecosystems and social structures. Improved economic opportunities
in the SHAP may lead to increased pressure on ecosystems (e. g., number of cattle heads increases as a
result of business-oriented approaches). Moreover, the promotion of certain EbA’s such as agrotourism may
result in maladaptation. Social structures may continue to deteriorate because of increased ecosystem
degradation.
• Difficulties and delays in unlocking technical and financial support. Access to MIDAGRI programs as
well as technical and financial support from the Puna Facility will be on a voluntary basis. This may limit the
ability of the project to meet its targets or have sufficient concentration of interventions to show tangible results.
Unlocking of public financing via MERESE schemes may require lengthy negotiations beyond the life of the
project.
89. Assumptions. The project design is based on the following assumptions (assumptions are further described in
sections E.3 and E.5 for each relevant project indicator):
• No adverse external events (public health emergencies, natural disasters) disrupt timely implementation of
key project elements.
• Market forces in the agri-business value chains remain stable during project implementation.
• Improved coordination, access to finance and information on increasing climate variability and climate
resilient approaches will help to convince family farms to adopt and scale up EbA measures and Climate
Resilient Value Chains .
• Local communities, especially woman and youth are motivated to actively participate in implementing EbA
measures for enhancing Climate Resilient Value Chains.
• MIDAGRI and other local authorities embrace the transformation for improved coordination among its
programs, other sectors and vulnerable communities.
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
90. Each of the project Outcomes identified in section B.2(a) map to the GCF results area as follows:
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
Outcome MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
number Energy Low-emission Building, Forestry and Most Health, well- Infrastructure Ecosystems
generation transport cities, land use vulnerable being, food and built and
and access environment

--- Table 1 on Page 36 ---
iv. Awareness raising and capacity building of local stakeholders.
v. Gender responsive approaches mainstreamed in EbA and CRVC measures.
87. See section D.3 (sustainable development potential) for further details on the identified co-benefits, and section E.5
for the co-benefit indicators.
B.2a.4. Risks and Assumptions.
88. Risks. Project risks related to technical and operational, credit, governance and legal risks, among others, are
described in detail in Chapter F, and environmental and social risks are described within Chapter G.1. Amongst
others it includes:
• Insufficient financing may put at risk the long-term sustainability of the public or private investment.
Insufficient public or private financial flows may put at risk the long-term sustainability of the project. Market
intake for EbA options, especially those promoted via microfinancing may be insufficient. Fluctuations in the
market value of cash products (South American camelid fiber, quinoa) may limit economic activity and
entrepreneurship.
• Local stakeholders are not sufficiently organized, engaged and interested in participating in the
project. Participation from local stakeholders in the project activities may not be as high as expected due to
the lack of interest.
• Coordination among regional government stakeholders is insufficient to sustain project results.
Coordination among government stakeholders is insufficient and the lack of interest and ownership of the
project may limit the sustainability of project results.
• Risk of continuity due to political instability. The project is constructed on the assumption of sustained
commitment from the Government of Peru to fulfil its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) goals and from
MIDAGRI to continue its open and proactive engagement. Political instability in Peru may affect project
continuity.
• Maladaptation and degradation of ecosystems and social structures. Improved economic opportunities
in the SHAP may lead to increased pressure on ecosystems (e. g., number of cattle heads increases as a
result of business-oriented approaches). Moreover, the promotion of certain EbA’s such as agrotourism may
result in maladaptation. Social structures may continue to deteriorate because of increased ecosystem
degradation.
• Difficulties and delays in unlocking technical and financial support. Access to MIDAGRI programs as
well as technical and financial support from the Puna Facility will be on a voluntary basis. This may limit the
ability of the project to meet its targets or have sufficient concentration of interventions to show tangible results.
Unlocking of public financing via MERESE schemes may require lengthy negotiations beyond the life of the
project.
89. Assumptions. The project design is based on the following assumptions (assumptions are further described in
sections E.3 and E.5 for each relevant project indicator):
• No adverse external events (public health emergencies, natural disasters) disrupt timely implementation of
key project elements.
• Market forces in the agri-business value chains remain stable during project implementation.
• Improved coordination, access to finance and information on increasing climate variability and climate
resilient approaches will help to convince family farms to adopt and scale up EbA measures and Climate
Resilient Value Chains .
• Local communities, especially woman and youth are motivated to actively participate in implementing EbA
measures for enhancing Climate Resilient Value Chains.
• MIDAGRI and other local authorities embrace the transformation for improved coordination among its
programs, other sectors and vulnerable communities.
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
90. Each of the project Outcomes identified in section B.2(a) map to the GCF results area as follows:
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
Outcome MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
number Energy Low-emission Building, Forestry and Most Health, well- Infrastructure Ecosystems
generation transport cities, land use vulnerable being, food and built and
and access environment

--- Table 2 on Page 36 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) |  |  |  | GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Outcome | MRA 1 | MRA 2 | MRA 3 | MRA 4 | ARA 1 | ARA 2 | ARA 3 | ARA 4
number | Energy | Low-emission | Building, | Forestry and | Most | Health, well- | Infrastructure | Ecosystems
 | generation | transport | cities, | land use | vulnerable | being, food | and built | and
 | and access |  |  |  |  |  | environment | 

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33
B
industries, people and and water ecosystem
appliances communities security services
Outcome 1 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒
Outcome 2 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒
Outcome 3 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒
91. The following co-benefits identified in section B.2(a) map to the following corresponding category:
Co-benefit number Co-benefit
Environmental Social Economic Gender Adaptation Mitigation
Co-benefit 1
Maintenance of ecosystem services ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
in the project area
Co-benefit 2
GHG emissions are avoided through
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒
the conservation and restoration of
degraded ecosystems
Co-benefit 3
Improvement of local economy
☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐
through better economic
opportunities and poverty reduction
Co-benefit 4
Awareness raising and capacity ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
building of local stakeholders
Co-benefit 5
Gender responsive approaches
☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐
mainstreamed in EbA and CRVC
measures
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)
92. Overall, the project will support MIDAGRI in promoting a paradigm shift in the management of Puna
ecosystems (wetlands, peatlands and grasslands) and productive practices to increase climate resilience of some
of the most vulnerable groups in the country which include rural farming and herding communities depending on
these ecosystems for their livelihoods. Puna ecosystems and associated livelihoods are threatened by increased
temperatures, droughts, precipitation variability, and overall decrease in water availability. The project will address
identified financial, ecological, social, institutional, and regulatory barriers (as described in section B.2 (a)) to
improve structural conditions that will enable rural communities in the High Andes to use and manage Puna
ecosystems in a more sustainable and climate-smart way, offering alternatives to reduce unsustainable practices
contributing to ecosystem degradation and magnifying climate change impacts. This is consistent with the need for
a comprehensive approach on Ecosystem-based Solutions and a focus on the implementation and upscaling of
ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) measures51.
93. In order to achieve this, the project consists of three components (1) Resilient ecosystems and communities, (2)
Public and private investments for scaling up EbA measures aligned and leveraged and (3) Multilevel territorial
governance for the incorporation of EbA measures which are aligned with the three outcomes, as depicted below.
The overall project design is presented in detail below52.
51 Ecosystem-based Adaptation, Nature-based Solutions, and Natural Climate Solutions are similar concepts describing slightly different
approaches of using nature or natural infrastructure to tackle the climate problem. The focus on Ecosystem-based Adaptation stems from the
experience gathered in the country and alignment with current national policies. The terms, however, may be used interchangeably to describe
the ancestral practices being recovered through the project, which have adaptation benefits and mitigation co-benefits.
52 For more information on the description of the project design please see the activity sheets in section 8.6 of the Feasibility Study (Annex
2a).

--- Table 1 on Page 37 ---
industries, people and and water ecosystem
appliances communities security services
Outcome 1 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒
Outcome 2 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒
Outcome 3 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒
91. The following co-benefits identified in section B.2(a) map to the following corresponding category:
Co-benefit number Co-benefit
Environmental Social Economic Gender Adaptation Mitigation
Co-benefit 1
Maintenance of ecosystem services ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
in the project area
Co-benefit 2
GHG emissions are avoided through
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒
the conservation and restoration of
degraded ecosystems
Co-benefit 3
Improvement of local economy
☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐
through better economic
opportunities and poverty reduction
Co-benefit 4
Awareness raising and capacity ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
building of local stakeholders
Co-benefit 5
Gender responsive approaches
☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐
mainstreamed in EbA and CRVC
measures
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)
92. Overall, the project will support MIDAGRI in promoting a paradigm shift in the management of Puna
ecosystems (wetlands, peatlands and grasslands) and productive practices to increase climate resilience of some
of the most vulnerable groups in the country which include rural farming and herding communities depending on
these ecosystems for their livelihoods. Puna ecosystems and associated livelihoods are threatened by increased
temperatures, droughts, precipitation variability, and overall decrease in water availability. The project will address
identified financial, ecological, social, institutional, and regulatory barriers (as described in section B.2 (a)) to
improve structural conditions that will enable rural communities in the High Andes to use and manage Puna
ecosystems in a more sustainable and climate-smart way, offering alternatives to reduce unsustainable practices
contributing to ecosystem degradation and magnifying climate change impacts. This is consistent with the need for
a comprehensive approach on Ecosystem-based Solutions and a focus on the implementation and upscaling of
ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) measures51.
93. In order to achieve this, the project consists of three components (1) Resilient ecosystems and communities, (2)
Public and private investments for scaling up EbA measures aligned and leveraged and (3) Multilevel territorial
governance for the incorporation of EbA measures which are aligned with the three outcomes, as depicted below.
The overall project design is presented in detail below52.

--- Table 2 on Page 37 ---
 |  |  | industries, |  | people and | and water |  | ecosystem
 |  |  | appliances |  | communities | security |  | services
Outcome 1 | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐ | ☒
Outcome 2 | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐ | ☒
Outcome 3 | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐ | ☒

--- Table 3 on Page 37 ---
Co-benefit number |  | Co-benefit |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Environmental |  |  | Social |  |  | Economic |  |  | Gender |  |  | Adaptation |  |  | Mitigation | 
Co-benefit 1
Maintenance of ecosystem services
in the project area | ☒ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  | 
Co-benefit 2
GHG emissions are avoided through
the conservation and restoration of
degraded ecosystems | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☒ |  | 
Co-benefit 3
Improvement of local economy
through better economic
opportunities and poverty reduction | ☐ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  | 
Co-benefit 4
Awareness raising and capacity
building of local stakeholders | ☐ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  | 
Co-benefit 5
Gender responsive approaches
mainstreamed in EbA and CRVC
measures | ☐ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  | 

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34
B
Figure 10. Overall project Overview
B.3.1. Outcome 1: Puna ecosystems are restored, conserved and better managed through the implementation
of EbA measures complemented by CRVC:
94. This outcome will promote resilient Puna ecosystems and value chains by financing and co-financing the
implementation of climate-focused investments led by IPLCs at local landscape level. By implementing community-
based investments on the ground, the aim is (i) to maintain or improve the provision of Puna ecosystem services
for climate resilience of the Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities and (ii) to strengthening Climate Resilient
Value Chains that are dependent on and impacting on those ecosystems. iii) to monitor and evaluate the impact of
the implementation of EbA measures iv) to nurture the dialogue between and within Indigenous Peoples and Local
Communities to recover ancestral knowledge from older women and men to younger generations and to
disseminate it and scaled up into Local Initiatives. A series of technological packages, trainings, information
materials and communities’ exchanges will be implemented to co-produce knowledge and foster local innovation
that will result in investment on the ground. The outcome will enhance access to information obtained at local level,
which is expected to trigger a change in behaviour towards conservation of ecosystems and their services and the
potential of developing Climate Resilient Value Chains , through two main outputs:
i. Investments for EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains are implemented at the local
landscape level
ii. The use of EbA knowledge is recovered and disseminated, and local monitoring committees and
observation systems are implemented.
Activities in this outcome will address the barrier of limited economic opportunities by supporting the development
of Climate Resilient Value Chains and enhanced entrepreneurship in the SHAP region.
Output 1.1. Investments for EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains are implemented at the local
landscape level:
95. The project aims at supporting investments led by IPLCs for resilient ecosystems at local landscape level and
strengthening Climate Resilient Value Chains with access to markets. This output will address the urgent need of
direct finance to reduce the degradation of ecosystems and reduced services that result from climate change and
unsustainable land management practices and to redress the lost linkage between ancestral practices and EbA. At
the same time addresses weak associativity, limited economic opportunities and low access to finance and markets
for Climate Resilient Value Chains in the SHAP region. Therefore, this output will cover the whole cycle from
setting up the basis for the financing and implementation of EbA and Climate Resilient Value Chains (CRVC),
through the provision of financial support and up to the provision of technical assistance for the implementation
EbA measures and CRVC. Part of the financial and technical support provided in this output will be implemented
through a call for proposal (launched by a, through this project established, Facility (the Puna Facility, for more
information please see sub-activity 2.1.1.1.), for the implementation of integrated Local initiatives with an a)

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35
B
Ecosystem based adaptation component and a b) CRVC component53. The Local initiatives supported within this
output will therefore focus mainly on investments in EbA measures meant to protect and restore the puna
ecosystem and therefore re-establish its ecosystem functions and services to enhance its resilience against the
effects of climate change and in investments in CRVC specifically investments aimed at increasing the resilience
of Puna relevant value chains against the effects of climate change. The financial support will be complemented by
technical support to project beneficiaries who are primarily IPLCs in its different forms of organizations (e.g.,
peasant/local communities, producers’ associations, cooperatives (formalized and or in the process of
formalization), MSE, community enterprises, producers’ organizations (hereafter project beneficiaries) who
implement the Local initiatives in order to add value to their products and facilitate access to markets. In addition,
public resources for public investment projects and to provide technical assistance will be provided by different
MIAGRI’s programs.
96. Figure 11 below shows the cycle of the Local initiative implementation which will be implemented within Output 1.1.
Figure 11. Local initiative implementation cycle
Activity 1.1.1. Setting up the basis for financing and implementing EbA measures and climate resilient value
chains (CRVC):
97. This activity will focus on creating a communication strategy to develop awareness among the local stakeholders
about the project and create the basis for the implementation of IPLCs led Local Initiatives that comprises EbA
measures and CRVC at landscape and/or micro water basin levels that will be financed by the Puna Facility. In this
regard, IPLCs in their different forms of organizations (communities, community enterprises, associations, MSEs,
cooperatives) will be able to receive technical support in order to participate in the call for proposals. The process
of selecting beneficiaries has two important stages. The first is described in sub-activity 1.1.1.1 in which the districts
of the prioritized project area (58 districts) will be visited to identify potential beneficiaries interested in participating
in the Call for Proposals mechanism. Those IPLCs and their different forms of organizations willing to participate
then will receive technical support in sub-activity 1.1.1.2 to develop participatory community diagnostics and plans
and they will need to propose Local Initiatives where they prioritize EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value
Chains that contribute to their resilience. In sub-activity 1.1.2.1, the potential beneficiaries will apply their Local
Initiatives to the Puna Facility (managed by Profonanpe) to be evaluated based on a list of eligibility criteria that will
be established in the Puna Facility Operations Manual. This activity includes the following sub-activities:
98. Sub-activity 1.1.1.1. Inform and identify communities, associations, cooperatives and Civil Society
Organisations interested in participating in the project (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to inform local
authorities and ILPCs about all project activities and specially Puna facility criteria (refer to step 1 of Figure 11)
53 The selection of the EbA measures and CRVC will be based on the eligibility list as shown in table 6 of the Operations Manual (Annex
21). And Pub+lishi
P e r u
s s m n a t o n o f t ro t a n
n t f a t o n o fo m m n t s n
o o r n a t o n t
n a l s s s ta n fo r t
la o ra t o n o f
a ll fo r ro o s a ls
n a l a s s s ta n
fo r m l m n ta t o n
o c a l in itia tiv e s
u p to ,
L o c a l c o m m u n itie s /p ro d u c e r
a s s o c ia tio n s , o rg a n is a tio n s ,
c o o p e ra tiv e s , M S E s
o a l n t a t s la o ra t o n
O
o aF l n t a t
n n
s
m l m n ta t o n
a
m
n a l
s s s ta n fo
o m m n t
o n to r n a n
o m m n t
a n s
r

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36
B
within the 58 prioritised districts to identify potential project beneficiaries interested in participating. A gender and
culturally sensitive strategy for beneficiary engagement and communication will be developed by a consulting
service in coordination with the project’s communication team, MIDAGRI, Profonanpe, Instituto de Montaña (IdM),
and SERNANP. This strategy will comply with the different plans (Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP), Gender Action Plan (GAP) and Indigenous Peoples and Local Community Engagement Plan (IPLCEP))
developed based on the GCF Social and Environmental Safeguards and Gender and Indigenous Peoples Policies,
as well as, on Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) principles to allow IPLCs to actively participate in the design,
implementation and monitoring of their own Local Initiatives. Before engaging with communities, regional
government and district municipality authorities will be contacted to identify specific local needs and priorities
regarding climate change adaptation and avoid isolated or nonaligned actions. It will be also important to actively
engage local authorities from the beginning to promote support and increase awareness for EbA funding and
inclusion in planning instruments (sub-activity 3.1.1.3). To this end, the communication strategy will be in place,
and it will be coordinated with municipalities, NGOs and local radio stations. At this stage, the eligibility criteria to
apply to the Puna Facility (described in Operations Manual - Annex 21) will be disseminated and potential
beneficiaries who meet the eligibility criteria will be encouraged by hired GIZ local promoters to prepare ideas. To
promote the coordination with the water MERESE, awareness-raising actions carried out in the areas of water
MERESE, explaining the benefits they bring to local development and the synergy with the Project. All Indigenous
Peoples and Local Communities and their forms of organization such as local communities, producers’
associations, cooperatives, community enterprises and/or MSEs who agreed to participate in the project will present
to GIZ their signed community agreements giving their informed consent to participate in the project and an attached
form for a Local initiative idea (including a simplified explanation of the climate problem and a proposal on how to
solve the climate change problem/s based on the eligibility list of EbA measures and CRVC as shown in table 6 of
the Operations Manual (Annex 21)). Once GIZ receives all the Local initiatives ideas, a team of experts from GIZ,
MIDAGRI, SERNANP and local authorities will evaluate and select the best proposed ideas. Then, in activity
1.1.1.2, the territorial diagnostics and intervention plans will be developed to continue preparing the Local initiative
proposals for the Puna Facility. It is expected that after implementing the sub-activity at least 100 Communities,
associations, cooperatives and/or micro and small enterprises have been selected to continue the support in sub-
activity 1.1.1.2, in order to start the process of preparing them to access funding to implement EbA measures and
CRVC to recover ecosystems and ensure climate resilient livelihoods.
99. Sub-activity 1.1.1.2. Development of site-specific climate diagnostics and preparation of participatory
intervention plans (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to support project beneficiaries to identify and prioritise
through a participatory process resilient measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains in their territories through
comprehensive climate diagnostics and intervention plans (refer to step 2). In this context, Indigenous Peoples and
Local Communities and their other forms of organization such as MSEs, community enterprises, cooperatives,
producer’s associations and/or organizations whose idea were selected (sub-activity 1.1.1.1) will receive support
from local promoters or CSOs in the development of participatory site-specific climate diagnostics to not only better
understand climate and non-climate threats to ecosystem and livelihoods but also social and economic aspects.
IPLC’s own concepts and perceptions will provide an empowering and culturally appropriate way for communities
to assess climate change impacts on their territories and plan adaptation solutions that build on their traditional
knowledge and may be combined with modern scientific findings. When developing diagnostics, it will be also
important to identify the causes of vulnerability in the specific sites such as communal organization, gender roles
and inequalities over resources uses and access to basic services, etc. As well as understand which are their
livelihood strategies and how ecosystems and their services in its site support them. The specific areas in each
locality to be intervened with EbA measures and CRVC will be defined in this sub-activity and will depend on case-
by-case (local consultations, specific site diagnostics and viability). For the development of an intervention plan per
community, prioritization of EbA and CRVC will be held through a comprehensive and participatory process, where
respective members of each IPLCs will be broadly consulted, ensuring active participation of women, young and
elderly people during design phase, which will need to be ultimately approved by the respective decision-making
body. Along with this, the interested project beneficiaries in applying to the Puna Facility will already have the basis
to prepare their Local initiatives to apply to the call for proposal. The interested project beneficiaries will receive in
this regard support to be prepared to apply to the Puna Facility (refer to step 3). To continue fostering the
participatory process, potential IPLCs beneficiaries must designate “local researchers” (composed by women and
men), who will lead and facilitate the diagnostics and planification process inside its community and encourage the
intergenerational dialogue among community members to recover men and women traditional knowledge, discuss
their concerns and identify solutions together (activity 1.2.1). Finally, local researchers will establish the community
monitoring committees supported in activity 1.2.2. In addition, in this sub-activity, interventions in EbA and CRVC
by different public and private actors (e.g., MIDAGRI through its programmes, SERNANP, water utilities and others)
will be identified in order to determine early on whether a coordination/synergy with the potential Local initiatives is
needed in the case the Initiative is financed by the Puna Facility. The rationale behind is to seek for complementarity
and avoid duplication in the same territory.

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37
B
Activity 1.1.2. Financing and implementing of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains:
100. This activity will focus on promoting climate resilient Puna ecosystems and CRVC through the implementation
of climate-focused Local initiatives at local landscape level. The activity will provide financial support for Local
initiatives through the Puna Facility (established under Activity 2.1.1) and through public resources (MIDAGRI’s
programmes). The two types of financial support are complementary and contribute to a general objective of
improving the climate resilience of the IPLCs in the target territories.
101. Sub-activity 1.1.2.1. Implementation of Local initiatives financed by the Puna Facility 54 (EE:
Profonanpe): This sub-activity has the objective to channel GCF and BMZ funds through a competitive selection
process (open call for proposals (see step 4 in Figure 11)) in the high Andes of Peru involving investments in EbA
measures and CRVC. The disbursement for each Local initiative will be differentiated according to three sub-
windows: (i) Non-Repayable Grant Sub-Window: for IPLCs with their different forms of organization (local
communities, producers’ associations and cooperatives in the process of formalization), applying with the support
of local CSOs trusted by communities; (ii) Results-based Repayable Grant Sub-Window: for Micro and or/ Small
Enterprises, community enterprises and cooperatives permitted by law with commercial capacities and clear target
markets; and (iii) Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Window: for formalized producers’ organizations (small and/or
medium) with commercial capacities and clear target markets, that are eligible for the MIDAGRI support programme
Agroideas55. The selection process for the Local initiatives from preparation and approval for call for proposals to
the signing of Local initiatives Agreements is described in the Operations Manual (see Annex 21) section 5. Within
the process of evaluation and selection, the Local initiative selection criteria and scoresheet will include a gender
representation criterion weighted with 20% and a gender quota of at least 30% of the selected Local initiatives
should either support a women’s association, cooperatives, organizations and/or a women led enterprise in order
to ensure the equal access between men and women of the funds. It is expected that after implementing this sub-
activity, 127 Local initiatives Grant Agreements will have been signed (with a total value of up to EUR 14.4 million),
for the three sub-windows and a total of 23,914 hectares would have been restored and/or conserved (see step 5
in Figure 11. The beneficiaries are expected to provide contributions of at least 25% of the value of the Local
initiatives, which may be contributed to labour or from another source, such as water utilities.
102. The management and governance structure56 of the Facility will include: Profonanpe as the main EE who will
have the responsibility to manage the Puna Facility through the Puna Facility Management unit (established within
sub-activity 2.1.1.1.), an Independent Technical Assessment Committee (in charge of shortlisting Local initiatives
evaluation), the Project Steering Committee (PSC) (composed by MIDAGRI, MINAM and GIZ) and the Project
Management Committee (PMC) who will revise and approve amongst others the final list of Local initiatives
evaluated according to the established processes and criteria. More information on the Puna Facility in regard to
the different sub-windows (including repayment conditions) and sustainability can be found in B.4.5 and B.6.1
respectively.
103. Sub-activity 1.1.2.2. Financial support through MIDAGRI (EE: MIDAGRI): In this sub-activity, MIDAGRI,
through its programmes (AGRORURAL, Sierra Azul, Irrigation Subsector Program (PSI), (National Institute for
Agrarian Innovation) INIA, Agroideas and National Forestry and Wildlife Service (SERFOR) and Agroperu Fund),
will finance additional interventions in the SHAP area that in some cases will complement the 127 Local Initiatives
financed by the Puna Facility (as in the specific case of the Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Window) in the same
territory and will contribute to increase the resilience of High Andean populations to climate change. These will
comprise three types of public interventions:(i) Public investment projects, which, on the one hand, include
adaptation interventions such as the recovery of degraded High Andean grasslands, sowing and harvesting of
water and technical irrigation to improve the efficiency of water resource application. These interventions are
implemented directly by MIDAGRI’s programs: AGRORURAL, Sierra Azul and PSI. On the other hand, INIA and
SERFOR will implement public investment projects that will contribute to research and technology transfer in High
Andean livestock and sustainable use of the vicuña, among others. It is expected that at least eight (8) public
investment projects are implemented directly by MIDAGRI. (ii) Agroideas Program Non-reimbursable funds for
business plans, which require co-financing from producers, to strengthen the adaptive capacities of climate change
resilient value chains including guinea pigs, camelids and High Andean crops. This includes the acquisition of
agricultural technology (e.g., machinery, infrastructure, vehicles and tools) in order to reduce costs and improve
production systems and agricultural productivity. They contribute to increasing the resilience of value chains. The
54 For more information on the establishment of the Puna Facility please see sub-activity 2.1.1.1. and for the operationalization Annex 21
Operation Manual.
55 The Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Window is meant to finance through a complementary grant support the development of more advanced
CRVC businesses that also qualify for the existing Agroideas government program from MIDAGRI. Agroideas promotes agricultural
development (via promoting cooperatives, strengthening of business management and adoption of sustainable environmental agricultural
technologies) through non-reimbursable grants covering 60-80% of the investment required by an eligible agro-business, with a cap of ~EUR
315.000.
56 For more information, please see chapter 3 Institutional arrangements and responsibilities for managing the financial mechanism of the
Operations Manual (Annex 21).

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38
B
producers’ organisations who can prove to have been selected by Agroideas will be also eligible to apply to the
third sub-window (Agroideas Matchmaking) of the Puna Facility to complement the financing of their business plans
with financing from the Facility for Ecosystem based Adaptation measures. (iii) Individual credit lines and producer
organizations credit lines provided by MIDAGRI through the Agrarian Development Bank (Agrobanco). The credits
offered by MIDAGRI through Agrobanco possess certain features that complement the financing provided by the
Puna Facility. One of the key features is their repayment period of 18 months, making it more suitable for business
with rapid turnover. For instance, in the alpaca value chain, these credits can serve as working capital for alpaca
cooperatives to gather and process fiber, resulting in a higher market price compared to individual sales from farms.
Simultaneously, these same alpaca breeders can access financing from the Puna Facility for investments in EbA.
The benefits of these investments are realized in the long term and contribute to mitigating climate change risks.
Activity 1.1.3. Technical Assistance for implementing EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains at
local landscape level:
104. The activity will be three folded. It will provide Technical Assistance (TA) complementary to sub-activity 1.1.2.1
for the refinement of proposals within the call for proposals for the Puna Facility and during Local initiative
implementation (including TA for EbA and CRVC implementation, business development and access to finance).
Complementary to sub-activity 1.1.2.2. it will also include the TA provided by MIDAGRI within their programs (which
includes hiring extensionists and commercial coordinators, development of courses and events, among others). In
addition, the project will also enhance organizational and entrepreneur skills, formalization and competences to
access markets and develop economic opportunities for CRVC including EbA. Finally, the project will ensure
women’s access to technical assistance including financial education, and access to markets.
105. Sub-activity 1.1.3.1. Technical assistance for the refinement of proposals and Local initiatives
implementation (including EbA implementation, business development and access to finance) through the
Puna Facility (EE: Profonanpe): The objective of this sub-activity is to provide Technical Assistance (TA) that will
accompany the financial support provided through the Puna Facility (sub-activity 1.1.2.1). The Puna Facility will
offer Technical Assistance (TA) through a service provider hired by Profonanpe and in the case of the Non-
repayable Grant Sub-Window optionally in conjunction with the CSO supporting the applicant (see step 6). The TA
packages will be differentiated between:
i) TA for the refinement of the local initiative proposals, provided by the TA provider: This support will include
a series of workshops held at regular intervals before the final proposal submission. The workshops aim to help
applicants refine their local initiative proposals and address any concerns raised by the Facility Management
Unit during the evaluation process. The workshop content will be tailored to the specific proposal types and
FMU feedback. Further technical studies (e.g., soil studies) required to refine technical proposals will be
supported.
ii) TA for the implementation of the Local initiatives provided by the TA provider and optionally in conjunction
with the CSO in the case of the Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window: After signing the agreement with applicants,
TA during the implementation will focus on three key areas: 1) Implementation of EbA and CRVC measures,
including participatory approaches for planning, implementing, monitoring and reporting using the community
monitoring approach (related to sub-activity 1.2.2.1, as well as recovering un upscaling ancestral knowledge)
2) Business development, and 3) Access to finance, including financial literacy.
106. Sub-activity 1.1.3.2. Technical assistance through MIDAGRI (EE. MIDAGRI): In this sub-activity, MIDAGRI,
through its programmes will provide technical assistance and technology transfer for the implementation of EbA
measures and value chains planned by MIDAGRI’s programmes ((INIA, SENASA, Agrorural, Sierra y Selva
Exportadora and SERFOR). This includes hiring extensionists and commercial coordinators, development of
courses and events, among others. The TA topics foreseen include amongst others (1) commercial technical
assistance; (2) technology transfer in value chains prioritised by the project, such as guinea pigs, pasture and
forage, roots and tubers, Andean grains and legumes, and South American camelids; (3) technical assistance for
the improvement of sustainable camelid breeding, including animal health actions etc. Through this sub-activity an
integrative result in the territory will be achieved. Moreover, around 9,647 producers are expected to be trained.
107. Sub-activity 1.1.3.3. Promote market access and economic opportunities for climate resilient and
sustainable value chains (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity will focus on supporting project beneficiaries to have a better
market access for their Climate Resilient Value Chains . The project will support commercial connections between
producers and buyers for the more prominent businesses, including women led business (e.g., participating in local
markets or fairs, connections with gastronomic routes, etc.), as well as support with the development of market
studies and market strategies for specific products. Under this sub-activity, the project team will also explore the
potential for a partnership with the SIPAM project, and the online sales platform tool that was developed “Kusikuy”.
Potential partnerships with MIDAGRI programs such as Agrorural and Sierra y Selva Exportadora will also be
considered. It is expected that through this sub-activity a digital platform for sale of puna products is operating. This
will facilitate the access to market opportunities for project beneficiaries for their Climate Resilient Value Chain
products.

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39
B
Output 1.2. The use of EbA knowledge is recovered and disseminated, and local monitoring committees and
observation systems are implemented:
108. This output 1.2 will complement output 1.1 establishing local monitoring committees and observation systems within
the Local Initiatives that were selected by the Facility while recovering ancestral knowledge and practices, to
empower high Andean communities to take a proactive role for increased participation in building climate resilience
and to monitor their own progress in enhancing overall resilience. Through its activities it will induce a behavioural
change and address the limited access to relevant information to support decision-making in the SHAP region,
which will also be essential to recover disseminate and scale up adaptation ancestral practices and knowledge.
Activity 1.2.1. Recover, innovate and scale up ancestral knowledge and practices:
109. This activity seeks to develop and strengthen the capacities of communities, local experts (called yachachiqs57 or
kamayocs), and technical experts from national and regional institutions to increase the implementation of ancestral
water and land management practices and technologies during project implementation and after project finalisation.
This activity will also encourage the use and exchange of ancient knowledge and practices from both women and
men in the Local Initiatives financed by the Puna Facility. In addition, it will promote dialogues on ancient practices
and innovation within members of communities, building intergenerational memory (e.g., children, youth and adults)
and fostering discussions on gender roles as well on women knowledge at the community level. In this sense, the
project will support the recognition and appreciation of people’s own values, knowledge and practices, improving
their self-esteem and strengthening their identity with the territory. It will also expand on gender roles to reflect on
their place in and relationship with ecosystems. For this to be effective, studies and communication materials
(printed, radio spots, videos, etc.) in native languages (Quechua and Spanish) will be produced to capture lessons
learned and promote replication of success stories. Exchange between communities will be financed by the project
to encourage peer-to-peer learning and ownership of implemented solutions. Of particular importance is the transfer
of experience already gathered from recuperating ancient practices and promoting participatory agreements in the
Nor Yauyos Cochas landscape reserve. Special attention to ancestral practices that contribute to hydrological
ecosystem services, generating contributions to the water MERESE.
110. Sub-activity 1.2.1.1. Capacity building of local experts for the transfer of ancestral and innovative
knowledge linked to EbA and CVCR measures (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to strengthen the capacities of
local experts (yachachiqs58, kamayocs, talentos rurales59, rural extensionists, among others) to increase the
application and replication of ancestral practices and technologies linked to EbA measures and CRVC in other
communities in the territory. The role of local experts is to teach and transfer knowledge, using a peasant-to-peasant
methodology, to implement and manage ancestral and innovative techniques for small irrigation systems,
installation of greenhouses, animal breeding, cultivating pastures, and growing crops. This sub-activity will identify
local experts in all of the 91 districts of the project, including i) entities at national and subnational level, ii) local
CSOs working in the territory, and iii) community and/or association leaders that can potentially collaborate in the
transfer of local knowledge (yachachiqs, kamayocs, rural talents). A capacity building programme for local experts
will be developed, tailored to the profile (e.g., level of education and technical capacities) of the identified local
experts and ancestral and innovative knowledge. It is expected that after implementing the training program, the
program achieves to strengthen the capacities of local experts (a) within the project beneficiaries and (b) within the
technical teams of national and subnational institutions. In this context, the project aims to strengthen the capacities
of at least 910 local experts.
111. Sub-activity 1.2.1.2. Production and dissemination of information materials on lessons learned from
ancestral practices and innovation in a context of change (EE: Instituto de Montaña60): The objective of
this sub-activity is to produce studies and communication materials (printed (e.g., brochures with infographics),
digital, radio spots, videos, etc.) in Quechua and Spanish to capture lessons learned and promote the replicability
of successful implementation of EbA and CRVC experience. This sub-activity will be based on identifying and
systematising successful past experiences and lessons learned from communities that combine ancestral and
innovative practices when implementing EbA measures and climate resilient agricultural practices. This will include
successful experiences from the Nor Yauyos Cochas Landscape Reserve. Other existing systematisations of
57 A yachachiq is an indigenous expert who obtained his practical knowledge on agricultural and livestock practices by an ancestral ways and
transfers its knowledge to others
58 Indigenous experts who obtained their knowledge to manage agricultural and livestock practices in ancestral ways.
59 The “talentos rurales” are men and women who live in peasant communities and are known for their capacities and abilities to experiment,
adapt, develop and teach good intercultural practices and rural innovations.
60 Instituto de Montaña will place special emphasis on facilitating the implementation of quality participatory processes through coordination
with local CSOs supporting beneficiary communities, producers’ associations and cooperatives in the process of formalization during Local
initiative implementation. These processes are intergenerational dialogue on ancestral practices and innovation, knowledge sharing with a
gender perspective, and community monitoring to estimate the impacts of EbA measures. Capacity building of trainers (local CSOs and other
stakeholders) will facilitate the training of villagers on the causal relationship between implemented activities and their impacts, and the
benefits obtained. Capacity building will ensure a common understanding of concepts and working methodologies to facilitate participatory
planning, implementation and monitoring processes that promote ownership and thus sustainability of EbA measures.

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40
B
ancestral practices will be revised such as the ones developed by MIDAGRI61, ENCONTRAR Platform62, Encuentro
de Saberes Small Grants Program-GEF63. The systematisation will also include new experiences generated by
IPLCs in general, and with a special focus on the ones generated by women groups during the project. As a result,
this sub-activity will produce documents and communication materials in Quechua and Spanish on lessons learned
from ancestral practices and innovation and disseminate these lessons through events and/or dissemination
spaces. This sub-activity will be implemented in coordination with MIDAGRI (through their programs), MINAM and
SERNANP, Regional Governments, Profonanpe, and Sectoral and/or Territorial governance platforms as the good
governance platform.
112. Sub-activity 1.2.1.3: Knowledge sharing among beneficiary communities with a gender perspective (EE:
Instituto de Montaña): This sub-activity aims to support the recognition and appreciation of IPLCs ancestral
practices regarding to the management of agriculture, livestock, water and ecosystems, contributing to promote the
participation and leadership of Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities in recovering ancestral knowledge and
encouraging a collective reflection on gender roles. The project will promote and facilitate exchanges between local
communities who have been selected to receive funds from the Puna Facility (through sub-activity 1.1.2.1 and
1.1.3.1) or are being supported by MIDAGRI (through sub-activity 1.1.2.2. and 1.1.3.2) to foster peer to peer
learning and to share innovations and practices developed between communities. Particular attention will be placed
on recognizing diverse gender roles and expertise related to agriculture, livestock, water, and ecosystems
management. This focus aims to prevent the exclusion of women participants and acknowledge their valuable
expertise and knowledge. Additionally, it seeks to highlight their significant contributions towards building climate
resilience within communities. At least one exchange among IPLCs women from different communities will also be
promoted, (e.g agropastoralist, artisan women networks, etc) who possess substantive knowledge and skills in
these different fields. These exchanges can work as space for women empowerment and inspiration. As part of
this sub-activity, a community knowledge sharing plan with a gender perspective will be developed. This plan will
define the implementation strategy, both interregional and intraregional exchanges, and the methodology for
selecting experiences and means of exchange (meetings, workshops, internships, and others). This sub-activity
will be implemented in coordination with MIDAGRI (through their programs), SERNANP, Profonanpe, Local
Governments.
113. Sub-activity 1.2.1.4: Facilitating intergenerational dialogue on ancestral practices and innovation in a
changing context (EE: Instituto de Montaña): This sub-activity aims to build intergenerational memory (children,
youth and adults) on ancestral practices and innovation in a context of change (climate, markets, and others) in
selected beneficiaries of each Puna Facility call. An intergenerational dialogue on ancestral practices and
innovations strategy and implementation plan will be prepared, containing the methodology, means and instruments
(videos, books, games, others). Local researchers (composed by women and men) in each community will be
trained to facilitate the intergenerational dialogue on site with the participation of women, children, youth, adults,
and older adults. The spaces to carry out these dialogues could be schools or farmer field schools. Intergenerational
dialogues will serve to recover and considerate different gender perspectives, roles, knowledge embedded within
communities during the design, implementation and monitoring phases of the Local Initiatives that will be
implemented in sub-activity 1.1.2.1. The intergenerational dialogue plan will be implemented through workshops,
surveys, and other activities, depending on each selected community design. The results and achievements of the
sub-activity will be systematised and disseminated. Relevant institutions involved in this sub-activity are: MINEDU
(through local schools) and, MIDAGRI through its attached institute INIA, and SERNANP (in the case of Natural
Protected Areas).
Activity. 1.2.2. Implement community monitoring and observation systems to measure the impact of EbA
measures and provide feedback for regional and national policies:
114. This activity will be implemented in alliance with the IPLCs implementing Local initiatives and supporting local
CSOs. The EE Instituto de Montaña will conduct a Training of Trainers (ToT) for local CSOs that will support
beneficiary communities that were selected in Puna Facility’s Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window and will provide
technical assistance to facilitate the participatory design of indicators and protocols for participatory community
monitoring. This activity will build upon Community Monitoring Committees (CMC), which applicants to the Puna
Facility are required to create when applying their Local Initiatives. These Committees that will be composed by
“local researchers” (composed by women and men) (designated previously in sub-activity 1.1.1.2) will lead the
participatory monitoring process designed based on each community knowledge and interest. Then CMC will inform
about the progress of the Local Initiative to the community members . Within this activity the capacities of local
researchers and committees will be strengthened through facilitation, dialogue, training and other capacity-building
measures. This will enable knowledge weaving and co-production to understand how traditional practices and
61 repositorio.midagri.gob.pe
62 Plataforma EncontrAR - Agricultura familiar andina (encontrarandes.org)
63 PPD Perú – Programa de Pequeñas Donaciones (ppdperu.org)

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41
B
scientific findings can explain the ecosystem functions and the effectiveness of EbA. Target populations will
establish climate vulnerability social and biophysical indicators based on local knowledge as the observation of
fauna and/or flora species as indicators of the ecosystem health, and other indicators based on men and women
community member’s interest. This also includes establishing and monitoring rough estimates on the potential for
carbon storage and sequestration, water storage and climate regulation, as well as the provision of fodder, fiber
and food, among other relevant ecosystem services. Committees will learn and discuss how to develop local
indicators and technical protocols to assess changes in ecosystem service provision over time as the EbA
measures are implemented and mature. The data produced by the local monitoring system will feed regional and
national institutions studies and research on impacts and effectiveness of EbA measures, thus contribute to policy
decision making processes. Follow-up on this activity will be coordinated at all levels of intervention, including from
the local (community) level, in coordination with the national actors responsible for M&E systems and the NDCs.
115. Sub-activity 1.2.2.1: Training and implementation of Community Monitoring Committees (CMC) to
develop local monitoring systems (EE: Instituto de Montaña): This sub-activity seeks to make project
beneficiaries aware of the impact of climate change and poor landscape management on high Andean ecosystems,
as well as the benefits obtained and the causal relationship between the implementation of EbA measures and their
impacts on the recovery and conservation of their ecosystems and ecosystem services. Local Researchers
(composed by women and men) designated in sub-activity 1.1.1.2 will form Community Monitoring Committees
(CMC). CMC will collect information about the impact of the implemented EbA measures in a context of climate
change through indicators proposed together with community members. Local researchers will lead and facilitate
the community monitoring process since the selection of indicators to assess socio-economic, ecosystem and
ecosystem service impacts. In the areas of water MERESE communities, the monitoring will seek to contribute to
water utilities monitoring systems. This sub-activity will allow beneficiary communities to take a proactive role in
monitoring their own progress and building climate resilience. CMC will participate in trainings and dialogue for
selecting sites for monitoring, setting a baseline information for their Local Initiative and collecting data using an
app that will be developed in sub-activity 1.2.2.2. Collected data will then feed into a data-driven information
management system that will be also developed in sub-activity 1.2.2.2. This system will be connected to the Puna
Facility monitoring system and to the project monitoring system. The information produced by the system will be
used to report to MIDAGRI and SERNANP national monitoring systems that contributes to the NDCs. Therefore,
discussions among all executing entities need to be conducted to agree guidelines and indicators for community
monitoring. During this sub-activity, community monitoring protocols will be discussed with local researchers in
each community in the frame of the agreed guidelines and provided to the information system responsible (sub-
activity 1.2.2.2). Thus, a capacity building plan will be prepared by Instituto de Montaña and implemented to monitor
the planned EbA measure’s impacts in the selected recipients of the Puna Facility. The work will be carried out
together with fund recipients under the Repayable and Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Windows and the local CSOs
that are supporting local communities, producers’ associations and cooperatives under the Non-repayable Grant
Sub-Window. Local CSOs will provide support in the territory and will bring permanent assistance to the community
monitoring committees.
116. Sub-activity 1.2.2.2. Development and implementation of a local data-driven information management
system using digital technologies innovation measures (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to develop a Cloud
based system that will store the data and information provided by the community monitoring committees (sub-
activity 1.2.2.1). This information will be related to the baseline condition of the ecosystems and their ecosystem
services (prior Local Initiative implementation); and the outcomes of the selected EbA measures and CRVC. The
materials and equipment to be used for monitoring will be procured by GIZ and will be provided to the community
monitoring committees when needed. The Cloud based system must be later hosted in one of the existing
MIDAGRI´s and/or SERNANP’s national monitoring system. This system will be identified during implementation
(sustainability condition). This sub-activity will include data collection tools and protocols for processing and sharing
information. For data collection it will be developed an app to facilitate data gathering by the community monitoring
committees. Special consideration will be given to hire a consultancy from a research specialized institution such
as universities or other scientific centres at the beginning of this activity to support the establishment of this
information gathering process that will be hosted in an existing national monitoring system. The collected data will
be processed and can be used to provide feedback on local, regional and national policies or as a source for
analysis linked to sub-activity 1.2.2.3.
117. Sub-Activity 1.2.2.3. Analyse collected information on the impact of EbA measures (EE: GIZ): This
sub-activity aims to improve evidence of EbA effectiveness while at the same time increasing the knowledge and
understanding of EbA measures for future decision-making processes (i.e., increasing community awareness and
values about EbA, donor investment in EbA and support to strengthen and further mainstream the integration of
EbA across relevant ministries, water utilities and public investments). Therefore, this sub-activity will develop
studies and research using data generated by the community monitoring committees, thus contributing to the
dissemination of coupled indigenous and scientific knowledge. Main topics to analyse will include impact
measurement of EbA (carbon sequestration, ecosystem recovery and water regulation), cost-benefit analysis, cost

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42
B
risk reduction in business operations, cost effectiveness and the type of ecosystems to be investigated (e.g.,
peatlands, wetlands, grasslands, others). The generated evidence about the EbA impact will be used to increase
awareness and the engagement of potential investors in the Puna Facility (sub-activity 2.1.1.2) and the integration
of EbA measures into policy and budgetary processes (sub-activities of component 3). In addition, a methodology
for assessing carbon stock changes resulting from the implementation of EbA measures in the Puna ecosystem
will be developed in coordination with MIDAGRI and MINAM. This will create the basis to prepare the national and
local actors to improve the carbon inventory in the high Andean zone, especially the basis for considering how the
implementation of adaptation NDCs that contribute to the conservation/maintenance of Puna ecosystems also
contribute to climate change mitigation. Under this sub-activity, the methodology will be tested in at least one area
within the Natural Protected Area System with committed communities that obtain conservation agreements signed
(under the Puna Facility in sub-activity 1.1.2.1). Alliances with research centres, scientific and university entities will
be sought for this purpose and the results of studies and research will be disseminated through the corresponding
channels such as webpages, events, emails, journals, seminars, regional platforms according to the project
objective.
B.3.1. Outcome 2: Public and private financing for EbA measures and climate resilient livelihoods are
accessible and being actively used by vulnerable communities in the Puna ecosystem:
118. This outcome will align and leverage public and private financing for EbA measures and CRVC at different and
coordinated levels. It will focus on the alignment, leveraging, mobilization and upscaling of private and public funds
to finance EbA and CRVC activities on the ground. On one hand will support the establishment of an innovative
financial mechanism called Puna Facility that will finance Local Initiatives though a call for proposals that will be
operationalized in sub-activity 1.1.2.1 at the same time that mobilizes private and other donors’ funds . On the other
hand, the activity will aim at enhancing the offer and access to micro green financial products and increase the
access to public programmes from MIDAGRI (e.g., Agroideas, Sierra Azul and Agrorural). This outcome has one
main output, which is “Financial mechanisms for the implementation of EbA measures and improvement of Climate
Resilient Value Chains are established and accessible to vulnerable communities in the Puna ecosystem”.
Output 2.1. Financial mechanisms for the implementation of EbA measures and improvement of climate
resilient livelihoods in the Puna ecosystem are established:
119. This output will focus on mobilizing different public-private mechanisms to finance EbA measures and CRVC,
through the implementation of three main activities which will include: activity 2.1.1 to establish the Puna Facility
for long-term financing of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains; activity 2.2.1 to strengthen capacities
to develop and implement innovative mechanisms for EbA in high Andean ecosystems including hydrological
payment for ecosystem services (MERESE), activity 2.1.3 to facilitate access to greener microfinance products and
services that promote EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains. These activities will address the limited
medium to long-term financing for ecosystem-based climate solutions, while creating incentives to finance Climate
Resilient Value Chains, as well as the lack of alignment and coordination of financing interventions on the ground
and support beneficiaries to tackle limited economic opportunities in the SHAP.
Activity 2.1.1. Establish the Puna Facility for long-term financing of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value
Chains:
120. This activity aims to unlock investment for EbA measures in Puna ecosystems and Climate Resilient Value
Chains through the “Puna Facility”, managed by Profonanpe. The Puna Facility will be composed of the financial
window that will have three sub-windows (linked to activity 1.1.2): i) Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window, ii) Results-
based Repayable Grant Sub-Window, iii) Matchmaking Agroideas Sub-Window. In addition, to engage with the
private sector and other international donors, a sustainable financial strategy will be developed by Profonanpe with
the support of the technical advice of GIZ during the firsts years of implementation to mobilise resources from the
private sector and different donors to secure amongst others the sustainability of the Puna Facility. In this regard,
the sustainable financing strategy will include criteria for selecting interested companies (e.g., companies
committed to social and environmental responsibility, without potential conflicts, linked to CRVC and key
ecosystems), criteria for selecting demonstration sites, and an effective communication and marketing strategy to
engage with the private sector. The sustainable financial strategy will be validated with the different private
stakeholders and then approved by the Resilient Puna Project Steering Committee. Finally, to increase alignment
and use of public funds for actions related EbA and CRVC, the activity will seek to increase the mobilisation of
resources from public programmes for the High Andean population and their associated ecosystems. To this end,
access to and alignment of investments from MIDAGRI and SERNANP and other government programmes will be
promoted for EbA and CRVC measures through the development of dissemination material (e.g., Flyers) to facilitate
the access to public financing.
121. Sub-Activity 2.1.1.1. Preparation and continuous improvement of the allocation of resources of the
Puna Facility (EE: Profonanpe): To unlock investment in Puna ecosystems and CRVC, an innovative financial
mechanism will be established and will be called “Puna Facility”. The name "Facility" is based on its role as facilitator

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43
B
in leveraging, mobilising and channelling different financial resources. In this context, the Facility is at the centre of
the financial exit strategy (for more information please see B.6.1.), opening the possibility of channelling additional
resources from multiple sources. This facility will target local communities, producers’ associations, cooperatives,
SMEs, community enterprises and producer’ organizations and will finance Local initiatives with EbA measures and
CRVC that enable adaptation to climate change. The operationalization of the Puna Facility from the awarding of
Local initiatives and the provision of technical support to the selected applicants will be carried out in component 1
through sub-activity 1.1.2.1 and sub-activity 1.1.3.1 respectively. Through the sub-activity 2.1.1.1. with the technical
support of GIZ, Profonanpe as EE will establish a Facility Management Unit which will be responsible for
coordinating the Puna Facility under the supervision of Profonanpe’s Monitoring and Evaluation Department. It will
also coordinate with the Administration and Finance Management to grant funds and report on Local initiatives, and
with the Innovation and Strategic Management Directorate to coordinate the leveraging of funds for the facility. The
FMU will also coordinate the establishment of the Independent Technical Evaluation Committee, which will involve
the selection and hiring of its members. It will also manage the selection and contracting of the technical assistance
provider organization. Next to the management structure of the Facility, the Governance structure of the project
through the Project Steering Committee and Project Management Committee will also play an important role in
addition to their roles and responsibilities related to the overall project. After the call cycles are finalized, lessons
learned will be systematized and if required, processes will be improved for the subsequent calls.
122. Sub-Activity 2.1.1.2. Development and implementation of an innovative strategy to mobilize resources
from the private sector and different donors (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to facilitate and secure funding
through leveraging, mobilising and channelling financial resources from the private sector and other donors for EbA
investments in Puna ecosystems and CRVC as part of the project's financial exit strategy. For this sub-activity, it is
necessary to develop a sustainable financing strategy for the mobilization of future funds through Profonanpe.
Therefore, the engagement of potential investors such as, private sector actors and different donors will be crucial
to ensure the sustainability of the Puna Facility and the continuation of financing for EbA measures and CRVC. In
order to elaborate the financing strategy, first a mapping of potential private sector actors and different donors will
be conducted as it will be key to have a portfolio/directory of potential donors and their projects or initiatives that
integrate EbA and CRVC measures in the High Andean areas. In addition, for the selection of companies to be
targeted by the strategy, consideration will be given to those businesses interested based on Corporate Social
Responsibility and that depend on the ecosystem services provided by the Puna ecosystems. For instance, those
that benefit from the camelids fibre produced in the upper parts of the watersheds or those who benefit from water
provision and regulation ecosystem services in the lower parts of the watersheds. Other type of businesses can be
those who are part of the value chains promoted by the Puna Facility. For example, businesses that buy products
to small producers. In addition, a narrative will be developed based on results from Puna Facility’s Local initiatives
systematizations and on the results of the studies developed in sub-activity 1.2.2.3. This will show how EbA
measures reduce costs and risks in business operations and provide opportunities and benefits to the operation of
various industries (e.g., hydroelectric, cement, water, mining, agro-industrial, etc.). In addition, events will be
organized to attract the interest of several companies and/or international donors and to disseminate
communication materials to inform on the effectiveness and impact of EbA measures. Travel to present good
practices will be also coordinated. The strategy will also include a communication strategy. If the interests of the
companies do not match with the Puna Facility, the project will facilitate the investments directly with potential
beneficiaries.
123. Sub-Activity 2.1.1.3. Promote access and alignment of investments and other government programs
for EbA and Climate Resilient Value Chains (CVCR) measures (EE: GIZ): The objective of this sub-activity is
to increase the mobilisation of resources from public programmes related to sub-activity 1.1.2.2 and other
government programmes for the High Andean population and their associated ecosystems. In coordination with
MIDAGRI this sub-activity will develop simplified and user-friendly materials (e.g., flyers) out of guidelines for
potential beneficiaries to access the different support options provided by MIDAGRI programmes and services; and
other relevant government programmes that contribute to the implementation of EbA measures and/or CRVC.
These materials will also support local governments in their alignment with the national government. In addition,
there will be workshops for producers and local64 governments to disseminate the information on the different
public programmes. Promoters will be hired (the same as for 1.1.1.1 sub-activity) to support beneficiaries explaining
the requirements of different public programs and how to access them. This will be carried out in coordination with
Profonanpe, the General Directorates, programmes and funds of MIDAGRI (Agroideas, Sierra Azul, Sierra y Selva
Exportadora, AgroBanco, Catastrophic Insurance, Rural and Indigenous Women’s Fund), Regional Government
64 In some cases, government programmes are designed to work with local governments to serve producers.

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44
B
(ProCompite) and MIDIS (social programmes)65. In addition, support will be provided for establishing the required
coordination mechanisms to integrate the implementation of water MERESE with other government programs.
Activity 2.1.2. Strengthen capacities to develop and implement innovative mechanisms for EbA in high Andean
ecosystems:
124. The activity will seek to overcome the barriers faced by public water utilities that have established or are willing
to establish a mechanism for payment for ecosystem services (MERESE) schemes. Therefore, activities will be
focused on strengthening stakeholders’ capacities to identify and overcome bottlenecks and gaps in the
implementation of MERESE. Local water utilities will receive technical support in planning, evaluation and selection
of intervention projects; development of agreements with communities; and analysis of gender aspects to be
included in MERESE’s processes. During the trainings for water utility officers the participation of women will be
secured. The related sub-activities will be developed in close coordination with the Ministry of Environment and the
National Superintendence of Water Supply and Sanitation of Peru (SUNASS). In addition, the activity will include
technical assistance for the establishment of a methodology to calculate carbon in the Puna ecosystems and
provide capacity building for local actors (e.g., communities, local government, academia) aligned with national
legal and institutional arrangements for carbon markets.
125. Sub-activity 2.1.2.1. Technical assistance to improve existing hydrological MERESE processes in the
project areas (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to strengthen water utilities capacities to identify and overcome
bottlenecks and gaps for the implementation of the hydrologic PES (which in Peru it is called Retribution Mechanism
for Ecosystem Services-MERESE) and thus mobilise financial resources not only for the conservation of High
Andean ecosystems but also to increase water availability. The objective is to engage with men and women officers
of water utilities that implement MERESE in key watersheds of the project as a complementary intervention to the
Resilient Puna project and other public-private initiatives. The sub-activity will first include technical assistance for
hydrologic MERESE which are already underway, such as the MERESEs in: Arequipa (1), Lima (1), Cusco (2) and
Apurimac (1). In the project target area five water utilities have hydrologic MERESE in place including EMUSAP
Abancay, SEDAPAR Arequipa, EMAPA Cañete, EMSAPA CALCA in Cusco, SEDA Cusco. For more information
on these water utilities see Table 25 in Annex 23. Given the gradual implementation of the hydrological MERESE
in the target area, this sub-activity will provide technical assistancethat will be focus on the a) establishment and/or
strengthening hydrologic MERESE’s good governance platforms, b) development of methodological tools for
implementation, c) provision of technical information for the identification of water MERESE interventions, d)
contributing to the design of the monitoring system, e) supporting the capacity development for the implementation
of different implementation modalities as described under Section 3.1 in Annex 2d, f) establishment of contractual
agreements with communities, g) development of EbA public investment projects, h) analysis of gender aspects to
be included in MERESE’s processes and systematization of learning experience at the end of the process. To
consolidate the implementation of MERESE in each region, the specific technical assistance package will be
assessed on a case-by-case basis according to the needs of each MERESE.66
Activity 2.1.3. Support the greening of microcredits to promote EbA and Climate Resilient Value Chains:
126. This activity will focus on two main topics: (1) Supporting the greening of microcredit lines and business models
and (2) supporting the dissemination of green financial products and services. In order to increase the supply of
microfinance products and services to finance integrated EbA and CRVC initiatives, the project will support either
the development of specific financial products or the greening of existing financial products for EbA measures and
CRVC (aligned with the lists of EbA measures and CRVC developed in sub-activity 1.2.1.1) in Puna ecosystems.
This will include the integration of gender-sensitive aspects in financial products to promote EbA and Climate
Resilient Value Chains. The design will include a diagnostics identifying gender gaps and needs. Microcredit
institutions officials will receive training to increase the capacity of MFIs to finance businesses with EbA measures
with a gender approach. In addition, a communication strategy to disseminate the green financial products will be
developed and implemented, raising awareness regarding the requirements and conditions, with a focus on the
beneficiaries of the project.
127. Sub-activity 2.1.3.1: Support to financial institutions in greening microcredits (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity
aims to develop and introduce greener microcredits for financing not only Resilient Puna beneficiaries but also
65 In particular, the National Action Platforms for Social Inclusion Programme (PAIS), which is located in the most remote localities of the
project and is designed to facilitate and coordinate the provision of services for programmes, projects and activities in social, economic and
productive areas of public and private entities, in order to improve the quality of life of the rural and dispersed rural population.
66 Also, the operationalization and diversification of MERESE schemes to leverage funds from beneficiaries of these services downstream
to local communities upstream is one of the economic benefits of the project. EPSs will be supported to operationalize the MERESE
scheme in their watershed with a potential of mobilizing USD 5-6 million by following EPS, EMAPA CAÑETE S.A., EMPSSAPAL S.A.,
EMUSAP ABANCAY S.A.C., SEDA CUSCO S.A.).

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45
B
beneficiaries in other regions interested in implementing EbA measures and CRVC (aligned with the lists of EbA
measures and CRVC developed in sub-activity 1.2.1.1) within the Puna ecosystems. Microfinance institutions
(MFIs) with a presence in the project area and with interest on expanding their credit portfolio to small-scale farmers
for adaptation measures will be selected (e.g., Caja rural los Andes, Caja Cuzco, Microfinance BBVA Foundation-
Confianza), and technical assistance will be provided to either adjust existing products (including existing financial
products for women) or develop new ones, incorporating the EbA approach in the financial risk analysis for
prioritised value chains. In order to achieve this, first, MFIs’ portfolio will be analysed, taking into account data
disaggregation by gender and employing a cross-cutting approach. The goal is to identify the value chains
prioritised in the project with the greatest exposure to climate risks, as well as to assess the exposure to credit risk
based on gender. Then mitigation activities (EbA measures) will be proposed and included in the value chain
business model to reduce these climate risks and thus reduce the negative economic impacts that climate events
have on agricultural producers, men and women, and the credit portfolio of microcredit institutions. Moreover,
through working sessions (peer-to-peer exchanges) and studies, we will seek lessons learned from current
processes related to green financial products and financial products specifically designed for women. This review
will encompass crucial stages, spanning from credit approval to loan disbursement and subsequent follow-up. The
overarching objective is to integrate these insights into the development of microcredit greening activities. In
parallel, market demand studies will also be carried out including diagnostics for identifying gender gaps and needs
for accessing to microcredits. Demonstrating the viability of the proposed EbA and CRVC measures business model
is essential. Therefore, concrete and tailor-made business models will be developed using the information
generated and analysed in activity 1.2.2. In addition, demonstration sites will also be identified to showcase good
practice and serve as models to be replicated and scaled up. Based on the results of the analysis, the microcredits
to be adapted will be identified, as well as gender aspects to be included. In particular, to improve women's
accessibility to credit, taking into account the diversity of women's technical, financial, digital and entrepreneurial
capacities, including adapted services to women's specific challenges. During the adaptation phase, management
tools (including digital tools, guidelines, and protocols) will be modified to include the EbA approach. This will include
aspects such as sustainability and climate risk management criteria and development of tools for credit analysis
based on agro-climatic and risk reduction information. The option of developing new green microcredit lines will be
assessed by each microfinance institution based on their product development strategy. Relevant institution
involved in this activity will be the microfinance institutions.
128. Sub-activity 2.1.3.2. Raise awareness of greener microcredits to promote EbA and Climate Resilient
Value Chains (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to promote the greener microcredits (either adapted or newly
developed in the previous sub-activity) and includes the development and implementation of an awareness
campaign for potential clients, with a focus on the project beneficiaries selected by the Puna Facility. In order to
achieve this, the sub-activity will capacitate field personnel of financial institutions, which will promote the greener
microcredits including trainings on requirements and conditions. Financial institution front office and field personnel
will also be trained to effectively market and disburse loans to beneficiaries in remote rural areas in the High Andean
zone. In addition, risk management of financial institutions will be strengthening, with a special focus on addressing
climate risks within their portfolio. Credit officers from these institutions will receive training on the EbA approach,
climate risks, gender considerations for rural financial market and innovative strategies to promote greater
sustainability in businesses. Subsequently, the greener microcredits will be disseminated through different
channels. This will include a launch event and an awareness campaign for the population of the project areas,
especially for the beneficiaries of the Puna Facility. This will provide them other sources for financing their present
and future EbA measures and CRVA.
B.3.3. Outcome 3. EbA and climate resilience are mainstreamed into multilevel landscape governance
instruments:
129. This outcome will promote integrated landscape planning and policy improvement and coordination, by
fostering dialogue and improving coordination among stakeholders that intervene in the landscape (local, regional
and national governments, local communities, producers’ organizations, watershed committees, and MIDAGRI
extension services, among others). The corresponding activities proposed in this outcome will directly address
identified barriers regarding i) lack of understanding of the causal relations of EbA practices to increase climate
resilience, ii) poor coordination among national and subnational governments on the ground, including MIDAGRI
programs, SERNANP and other sectors, iii) weak governance structures for a sustainable management of the
landscape and its natural resources and iv) limited local capacities to adapt to climate change, v) Insufficient and
lack of policies and regulatory framework enforcement for implementing the EbA approach and Climate Resilient
Value Chains.
130. Output 3.1. Multilevel landscape governance is improved through strengthening of national capacity,
regulatory frameworks and M&E systems The approaches that will be promoted by Resilient Puna require

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46
B
progressive development of capacities of governmental Executing Entities67, local actors, and subnational
governments to promote the replicability and sustainability of the changes introduced by the project. Therefore, in
order to promote the mainstreaming of EbA and climate resilience approaches at landscape and water basin levels
into the national, regional and local planning processes (i.e., development plans, including budgets and further
public investment project planning), women and men’s official capacities at different levels (national, regional and
local) will be strengthened and gender, intergenerational and interculturality cross-cutting approaches will be
considered as well as the valuation of ancestral knowledge and practices. The output will also provide technical
support to MIDAGRI and SERNANP to improve the regulatory framework for the promotion and implementation of
EbA measures and CRVC in the High Andean areas of the country.
Activity 3.1.1. Strengthen the capacities for territorial planning and governance processes integrating EbA and
climate resilience:
131. The activity aims to strengthen participatory sectoral and territorial platforms68 so that EbA measures and CRVC
developed by project beneficiaries can be replicated and scaled up. Through this activity the project will enable that
lessons learned from the community’s experiences in EbA and CRVC planning, and implementation are considered
and scaled up in the agenda of government platforms69 and in local and regional governments plans. In order to
strengthen territorial planning processes, the activity aims to: (1) Strengthen the capacities of relevant government
stakeholders for the incorporation of EbA and CRVC measures, integrating the gender perspective in their
processes and interventions in the territory, (2) Strengthen participatory sectoral and territorial platforms for the
articulation and scaling up of EbA measures and CRVC within the scope of the project by promoting IPLCs
participation. Special emphasis will be given to encouraging women's participation in decision-making and planning
processes. (3) Integrate EbA measures and CRVC in territorial planning and management instruments. Lessons
from local planning processes, especially those derived from monitoring activities, should be integrated into
territorial planning in the target watersheds (watershed management plans).
132. Sub-activity 3.1.1.1. Strengthen the capacities of relevant national, regional and local government
stakeholders for the incorporation of EbA and CRVC measures, integrating the gender perspective70 in
their processes and interventions in the territory (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to strengthen the capacities
of relevant public officials working in thematic and geographical areas of the project at the national, regional, and
local levels. The identification of specific participants will be based on pre-assessed capacity needs (for more
information see Annex 2h) defined in through a participatory approach with SERNANP as part of MINAM and
MIDAGRI. Personnel (both women and men) from both entities in charge of national programmes and rural
extension services will undergo training. This training aims to enhance the incorporation and reinforcement of EbA
and CRVA at landscape and water basin levels. It also aims at promoting the coordination with water MERESE (if
any in the area), promote traditional practices and integrate gender consideration into agricultural extension
programs. These efforts will enable officials to be able to recognize the diverse needs and roles of men and women
farmers in agriculture. As a result, it will progressively encourage more involvement in women's roles, thus
contributing to the reduction of gender inequalities in the agricultural sector. Training topics will include: i) EbA and
CRVC: Climate risk assessment, territorial, landscape and water basin approach, ecosystem monitoring and
evaluation, prioritisation of adaptation measures, MERESE, identification of indicators that match with the
respective monitoring system. ii) Gender awareness and intergenerationally: Improve gender and intergenerational
awareness among public officials and develop tools for gender and intergenerational mainstreaming in their
processes and interventions in the territory. In order to provide capacity building, as a first step, content and
materials will be developed for online and/or presential training modules, based on lessons learned generated by
other project experiences and those generated during project implementation (based on the data generated in
activity 1.2.2.). The relevant institution involved in this sub-activity are Instituto de Montaña as they will provide
inputs from their past and present experience to develop the contents of the training modules, MIDAGRI through
its Directorates-General, programmes and affiliated public bodies will contribute and participate in de design and
implementation of training modules, SERNANP as they will contribute and participate in de design and
implementation of training modules, and Subnational governments as they will participate of training modules.
67 Please see Annex 2c were the capacities of the two governmental EEs MIDAGRI and SENRANP where assessed.
68 By platforms is meant spaces officially formed to bring together different public and private stakeholders to discuss issues that are of interest
to them and then coordinate, decide and plan concrete actions to address them. These topics can be based on the management of a specific
territory such as the Natural Protected Areas Committees, or based on water management such as River Basin Councils, or based on the
coordination of the agricultural sector in the territory such as the CGRAs, or based on the planning and coordination of the MERESE in a
specific sub- basin such as the platforms of good governance of the MERESE.
69 Platforms refer to formally established spaces where diverse public and private stakeholders convene to discuss about issues relevant to
them.
70 By gender perspective is meant being aware of and taking into account the different outlooks, roles and behaviours of me and women
(may be also boys and girls – depending on their involvement).

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47
B
133. Sub-activity 3.1.1.2. Strengthen participatory sectoral and territorial platforms for the articulation and
scaling up of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains within the scope of the project (EE: GIZ):
This sub-activity has three specific objectives: (i) Promote the participation of IPLCs in decision-making processes
at the local and regional platforms71, (ii) disseminate successful Local initiatives experiences financed in component
1 for scaling up EbA and CRVC measures, specially the one led by IPLCs women organizations and (iii) coordinate
public and private interventions in EbA and CRVC measures at landscape and water basin level of each territory
integrating a gender approach. The first step within this sub-activity involves identifying sectoral and/or territorial
platforms that hold official recognition and social acceptance in each territory. These platforms will serve as forums
where diverse public, private, and civil society organizations in the project area convene to foster dialogue, address
concerns, and collaborate on coordinated efforts related to EbA investment and CRVC, both at the landscape and
water basin levels. Potential platforms include Regional Committees for Agriculture Management (CGRA), Good
Governance platforms of MERESE, Natural Protected Areas Management Committees, the Council of Basins, and
others. The project will support the participation of IPLCs in its different forms of organizations (local community
and producers’ associations representatives) to bring to the platforms their best practices and concerns when
implementing EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains. Participation of women in these spaces of
dialogue and decision making will be supported and facilitated. In addition, methodological guides for the analysis
of the social context for the identification of actors and promotion of Good Governance Platforms will be developed
and implemented. The project will facilitate the exchange of available data and information produced by each
institution (e.g., climate, hydrological, finance, etc.). and will foster the inclusion of climate risk vulnerabilities in their
planning processes, prioritisation of adaptation solutions, and promote agreements among platform members for
future funding. Finally, successful EbA and CRVC experiences that have emerged because of the implementation
within the project at landscape and water basin level (through the implementation of activities in component 1 will
be disseminated.
134. Sub-activity 3.1.1.3. Integration of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains in territorial
planning and management instruments (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims at increasing influence on subnational
governments (regional and local) through their planning and budgeting instruments in order to leverage and
increase public finance in EbA measures and CRVC in the medium and long term. The specific tasks assigned to
this sub-activity will vary based on the level of intervention, encompassing local and regional levels, as outlined
below. Technical assistance will be provided to local and regional government officers interested in developing or
improving their development plans and budgeting instruments by incorporating EbA measures, gender and CRVC
in
i) Local and/or Regional Concerted Development Plans: The technical assistance for local and regional officers
will be focused in improving their participatory process and the prioritisation and planification of adaptation
measures at landscape and water basin level. Additionally, climate risk analysis will be developed in territorial
plans. Based on prior identification, the project will support local and/or regional governments in developing
climate risk and vulnerability studies as part of the preparation of their local, regional or basin development
plan. Including strengthen territorial planning with watershed approach for the adequate coordination, synergies
and alignment of water MERESE.
ii) Local Climate Change Plans and/or Regional Climate Change Strategies: Technical support to local or regional
technical officers will be focused in developing participatory Regional Climate Change Strategies and/or Local
Climate Change Plans to prioritize and integrate EbA and Climate Resilient Value Chains measures into those
climate change instruments.
iii) Regional and local budget & investment projects: Technical support to local and regional technical officers to
prioritize and design EbA and Climate Resilient Value Chains within the local and regional public budgets,
including budget for EbA M&E
iv) Natural Protected Areas´ Master plans: the technical assistance for SERNANP will be focused in integrate the
EbA approach in the participatory process of updating master plans. Support to update their climate risk and
vulnerability studies will be done.
Activity 3.1.2. Strengthen regulatory frameworks and M&E systems at national level:
135. The activity aims to provide technical support to MIDAGRI and SERNANP to improve the regulatory framework
for the promotion and implementation of EbA measures and CRVC in the High Andean areas of the country, as
well as ensuring the participation of IPLCs in resolutions related to their participation in decision making process
71 Ibid

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48
B
for the management of the territory and its ecosystems. In addition, it will provide technical support for the national
long-term M&E systems of the different government entities to measure impact of EbA interventions and ensure
data disaggregation by gender. Partnerships will be established with local universities and research institutes to
support the monitoring of progress resulting from the interventions implemented by the different actors in the
territory. This activity will also support MIDAGRI in improving its agricultural policy monitoring and evaluation efforts
while complying with 4 Peru's NDC targets to which the project will contribute to: i) (AGRI7- Natural grassland
management to secure feed for livestock and reduce vulnerability to climate change; ii) AGRI11 - Management of
wild South American camelids (vicuñas) considering the effects of climate change; iii) AGRI16.- Implementation of
business strategies that incorporate risk and opportunity management in the face of climate change; iv) AGU2 -
Implementation of interventions related to planting and harvesting water for agricultural water security in watersheds
vulnerable to climate change.
136. Sub-Activity 3.1.2.1. Improving national regulatory frameworks linked to EbA measures and Climate
Resilient Value Chains (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to improve the regulatory framework at the national level
(norms, laws, budget, and investment guidelines) for the promotion and implementation of EbA measures and
CRVC in the High Andean areas of the country. The sub-activity will develop proposals or draft standards based
on the assessment of legal barriers related to ecosystem restoration and conservation, agricultural productive uses,
sowing, and harvesting of water, IPLCs participation, water MERESE, among others. It will also include studies
required for explanatory statements. Subsequently, consultancies to improve norms, plans, strategies will be made
and will work in close coordination with the Regulatory offices in MIDAGRI, MINAM and SERNANP. As a third step,
an Advocacy Plan will be developed for regulatory or legislative entities. In addition, a work plan will be developed
in coordination with the Planning and Budget Offices of MIDAGRI and SERNANP to adjust or update budget
programs and investment guidelines at national level. Then, these documents will be used by the ministries and
regional and local governments to increase the allocation of public resources for EbA projects and CRVC.
137. Sub-Activity 3.1.2.2: Improve coordination of EbA monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems at the
national level linked to project and NDC purposes (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to support the nationwide
monitoring system with adequate protocols and measurement methodologies that allows MIDAGRI and SERNANP
systematically collect, analyse data and information in order to detect the impacts of EbA interventions. This will
allow policy makers to understand whether or in what extent EbA public investments are meeting their results, as
well as monitor EbA effectiveness and evaluate progress towards the national adaptation climate contributions
(NDCs). To this end, technical advice will be provided to MIDAGRI and SERNANP for the integration of the EbA
approach and aspects of NDCs in its monitoring and evaluation processes and consider data disaggregation by
gender. This sub-activity will be closed coordinated with the General Directorate of Climate Change and
Desertification of MINAM that manages the Monitoring System for Mitigation an Adaptation measures (SIMOM).
Community monitoring systems supported in activity 1.2.2 will also contribute with data and information to the
national systems. This will be an exercise of exchanging information (data, tools for collecting data, interpretations,
etc) from the local perspective and knowledge to national level and vice-versa. The project will also support
MIDAGRI in the improvement of it reporting system for the NDCs in the agricultural and water NDCs to which the
project will contribute to, by the development of adequate protocols and methodologies to gather field information
and measure the impacts of MIDAGRI interventions and report MIDAGRI´s NDCs progress implementation. To this
regard, close coordination with the newly MIDAGRI´s Agriculture and Irrigation Commission on Climate Change
(CSARCC)72 created by Ministerial Resolution N° 0187-2023-MIDAGRI will be promoted. All actions mentioned
above will be mainly coordinated with the General Directorate of Climate Change and Desertification of MINAM.
Potential synergies with other relevant institutions such as SENAMHI, ANA, INAIGEM, SUNASS, and others for
potential synergies will be promoted. Relevant entities involved in this activity will be Instituto de Montaña that will
contribute to the design of the protocols to integrate community monitoring data M&E systems, MIDAGRI through
its technical Directorates implementing Monitoring and Evaluation systems for ecosystems, and MIDAGRI´s
Agriculture and Irrigation Commission on Climate Change, SERNANP will contribute to the design of protocols in
the of Natural Protected Areas, MINAM and affiliated entities such as SENAMHI and INAIGEM will contribute in the
design of protocols and SUNASS will contribute to the design of protocols in the case of EPS target areas.
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
B.4.2 Project management, implementation and execution structure
Role of GIZ as AE:
138. The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH is a German-based private, limited
liability, non-profit company owned by the Federal Republic of Germany; it is the Accredited Entity (AE) of this
project, while the same GIZ with its management structure in Peru will operate as an Executing Entity (see next
72 The aim of this CSARCC is to monitor the implementation processes of climate adaptation and mitigation measures under responsibility
of MIDAGRI, as well as develop annual reports regarding the advances of MIDAGRI´s NDCs.

--- Table 1 on Page 52 ---
for the management of the territory and its ecosystems. In addition, it will provide technical support for the national
long-term M&E systems of the different government entities to measure impact of EbA interventions and ensure
data disaggregation by gender. Partnerships will be established with local universities and research institutes to
support the monitoring of progress resulting from the interventions implemented by the different actors in the
territory. This activity will also support MIDAGRI in improving its agricultural policy monitoring and evaluation efforts
while complying with 4 Peru's NDC targets to which the project will contribute to: i) (AGRI7- Natural grassland
management to secure feed for livestock and reduce vulnerability to climate change; ii) AGRI11 - Management of
wild South American camelids (vicuñas) considering the effects of climate change; iii) AGRI16.- Implementation of
business strategies that incorporate risk and opportunity management in the face of climate change; iv) AGU2 -
Implementation of interventions related to planting and harvesting water for agricultural water security in watersheds
vulnerable to climate change.
136. Sub-Activity 3.1.2.1. Improving national regulatory frameworks linked to EbA measures and Climate
Resilient Value Chains (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to improve the regulatory framework at the national level
(norms, laws, budget, and investment guidelines) for the promotion and implementation of EbA measures and
CRVC in the High Andean areas of the country. The sub-activity will develop proposals or draft standards based
on the assessment of legal barriers related to ecosystem restoration and conservation, agricultural productive uses,
sowing, and harvesting of water, IPLCs participation, water MERESE, among others. It will also include studies
required for explanatory statements. Subsequently, consultancies to improve norms, plans, strategies will be made
and will work in close coordination with the Regulatory offices in MIDAGRI, MINAM and SERNANP. As a third step,
an Advocacy Plan will be developed for regulatory or legislative entities. In addition, a work plan will be developed
in coordination with the Planning and Budget Offices of MIDAGRI and SERNANP to adjust or update budget
programs and investment guidelines at national level. Then, these documents will be used by the ministries and
regional and local governments to increase the allocation of public resources for EbA projects and CRVC.
137. Sub-Activity 3.1.2.2: Improve coordination of EbA monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems at the
national level linked to project and NDC purposes (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity aims to support the nationwide
monitoring system with adequate protocols and measurement methodologies that allows MIDAGRI and SERNANP
systematically collect, analyse data and information in order to detect the impacts of EbA interventions. This will
allow policy makers to understand whether or in what extent EbA public investments are meeting their results, as
well as monitor EbA effectiveness and evaluate progress towards the national adaptation climate contributions
(NDCs). To this end, technical advice will be provided to MIDAGRI and SERNANP for the integration of the EbA
approach and aspects of NDCs in its monitoring and evaluation processes and consider data disaggregation by
gender. This sub-activity will be closed coordinated with the General Directorate of Climate Change and
Desertification of MINAM that manages the Monitoring System for Mitigation an Adaptation measures (SIMOM).
Community monitoring systems supported in activity 1.2.2 will also contribute with data and information to the
national systems. This will be an exercise of exchanging information (data, tools for collecting data, interpretations,
etc) from the local perspective and knowledge to national level and vice-versa. The project will also support
MIDAGRI in the improvement of it reporting system for the NDCs in the agricultural and water NDCs to which the
project will contribute to, by the development of adequate protocols and methodologies to gather field information
and measure the impacts of MIDAGRI interventions and report MIDAGRI´s NDCs progress implementation. To this
regard, close coordination with the newly MIDAGRI´s Agriculture and Irrigation Commission on Climate Change
(CSARCC)72 created by Ministerial Resolution N° 0187-2023-MIDAGRI will be promoted. All actions mentioned
above will be mainly coordinated with the General Directorate of Climate Change and Desertification of MINAM.
Potential synergies with other relevant institutions such as SENAMHI, ANA, INAIGEM, SUNASS, and others for
potential synergies will be promoted. Relevant entities involved in this activity will be Instituto de Montaña that will
contribute to the design of the protocols to integrate community monitoring data M&E systems, MIDAGRI through
its technical Directorates implementing Monitoring and Evaluation systems for ecosystems, and MIDAGRI´s
Agriculture and Irrigation Commission on Climate Change, SERNANP will contribute to the design of protocols in
the of Natural Protected Areas, MINAM and affiliated entities such as SENAMHI and INAIGEM will contribute in the
design of protocols and SUNASS will contribute to the design of protocols in the case of EPS target areas.
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
B.4.2 Project management, implementation and execution structure
Role of GIZ as AE:
138. The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH is a German-based private, limited
liability, non-profit company owned by the Federal Republic of Germany; it is the Accredited Entity (AE) of this
project, while the same GIZ with its management structure in Peru will operate as an Executing Entity (see next

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49
B
section). To avoid conflicts of interest, these two functions - accreditation and implementation function - are strictly
separated, with different management structures within GIZ.
139. As the AE, GIZ will assume oversight responsibility of the project, as defined in the Accreditation Master
Agreement (AMA) between GCF and GIZ (AE). As AE, GIZ will administer project funds on behalf of the GCF and
will provide oversight guidance and quality assurance of Profonanpe and Instituto de Montaña as EEs receiving
GCF funds through its relevant head office units.
140. In order to implement the Project, GIZ will need to establish legal arrangements with MIDAGRI, SERNANP,
Profonanpe and Instituto de Montaña - see Figure 12. Legal below):
• The German Federal Ministry for Cooperation and Development (BMZ) will commission GIZ with the
implementation of the GCF project (amended commissioning agreement). The GCF will transfer funds based
on the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) to the Accredited Entity GIZ.
• GIZ (as EE) will receive an internal task assignment from the AE for the implementation of the project.
• GIZ (AE) will amend an existing implementation agreement (i.e., subsidiary agreement), based on GIZ standard
operating procedures with the MIDAGRI as the political partner of the project and Executing Entity executing
activities with own funds (related to the BMZ commission and signed between GIZ and MIDAGRI).
• SERNANP as an Executing Entity executing activities with own funds will sign a cooperation agreement (i.e.,
subsidiary agreement), based on GIZ standard operating procedures with GIZ (AE).
• Finally, GIZ (AE) will sign with Profonanpe and Instituto de Montaña grant agreements (i.e., subsidiary
agreements), based on GIZ standard operating procedures. These subsidiary agreements establish the legal
basis on which GIZ makes the GCF Proceeds available to Instituto de Montaña to implement project activities
and Profonanpe to set up, manage and operate grant disbursement through the Puna Facility, in accordance
with the AMA and FAA.
Figure 12. Legal arrangements
GIZ as Executing Entity [Executing Entity-GCF funds]:
141. GIZ has been active in Peru since over 50 years and currently employs approximately 210 staff members, most
of them Peruvian nationals. Specifically, GIZ Peru has been working on climate change and biodiversity issues in
Peru since 2003 and current technical assistance in the sector amounts to approx. EUR 60 million.
142. In its capacity as an EE, GIZ will lead, and provide overall management of, the Technical Assistance (TA) to
the project at national and subnational levels. It will be responsible for:
• Liaising with government institutions for overall coordination and alignment of objectives, managing technical
assistance activities and ensuring full compliance with the expected project results and that adequate
monitoring and evaluation procedures are implemented.
• Ensuring compliance with the Social and Environmental Safeguards, the Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP), the Gender Action Plan (GAP) and the Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities
Engagement Plan (IPLCEP).

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50
B
• Providing technical assistance to MIDAGRI and SERNANP to mainstream Ecosystem based Adaptation (EbA),
climate resilience and gender aspects in all their programmes and to improve coordination between their
operational units and collaboration with other sectors.
• GIZ Peru, will also provide technical assistance to Profonanpe to improve their capacities to sustainable
manage and promote the Puna Facility.
• Technical assistance for the promotion of the "Mechanism for Remuneration for Ecosystem Services
(MERESE)" schemes will also be under the responsibility of GIZ Peru and in close coordination with MINAM.
143. GIZ Peru, will also act as the technical secretariat within the Project Steering Committee and as the executive
coordination within the Project Management Committee as well as the Implementation Unit, including the territorial
teams.
144. In their role as technical secretariat GIZ Peru will keep the Steering Committee and the Management Committee
informed in a timely manner about the main decisions or recommendations made by the GCF in the framework of
the project implementation.
145. GIZ as an EE will be responsible for a GCF budget of EUR 19.315 million.
Profonanpe [Executing Entity-GCF funds]
146. Profonanpe is a non-profit private law institution organized under the laws of the Republic of Peru in accordance
with Decree Law No. 26154. It is the only environmental fund in Peru and a direct access entity accredited before
the GCF, with extensive experience in the management of environmental funds (Regional Water Fund in Piura,
MERESE for Arequipa, etc.). Its mandate is to provide stable, long-term funding and to develop and implement
innovative strategies for the conservation and management of protected areas. Its local, national and international
partnerships with donors, its experience in managing environmental funds, and its strong fiduciary standards will
ensure efficient and effective delivery of results.
147. Profonanpe will be responsible for the management of the “Puna Facility” (which will be set up under activity
2.1.1.) a competitive fund, which will provide through sub-activity 1.1.2.1. non-repayable and repayable grants,
through calls for proposals aimed at promoting Local initiatives to implement Ecosystem based Adaptation
measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains. In addition to the financial support, the Puna Facility will also provide
Technical Assistance (through sub-activity 1.1.3.1) through a service provider for the implementation of the Local
initiative, access to finance and business development.
148. In order to manage the Facility, Profonanpe will set up a Facility Management Unit (FMU). Among its functions73
will be to:
• Ensure that all activities promoted and developed by the Puna Facility are in accordance with the strategic
guidelines established by the Project Steering Committee.
• Ensure submission of information to the Project Management Committee in case any modifications or updates
are required at the operational or strategic level of the Puna Facility.
• Develop the terms of reference for the calls for proposals.
• First review of applications and pre-selection according to the terms of reference and established criteria and
proposal for evaluation by the Project Management Committee (shortlist).
• Negotiate Local Initiative Grant Agreements.
• Monitor the execution of funded Local initiatives.
149. Under the supervision of GIZ AE, Profonanpe will ensure that all GCF and GIZ fiduciary standards are followed,
complying with the stipulations of the Grant Agreement, always within the legal framework of the project (AMA,
FAA).
150. Profonanpe will also participate in the Project Management Committee (PMC) and will be part of the Territorial
Implementation Units (TIU).
151. In addition, it will liaise and coordinate with other project partners to guarantee the integral fulfilment of the
expected results of the project.
152. Profonanpe as an EE will be responsible for a GCF budget of EUR 19.175 million.
The Ministry of Agricultural Development and Irrigation of Peru (MIDAGRI) [Executing Entity-Own
contributions]
153. MIDAGRI is the Peruvian government institution in charge of the agricultural sector. It was created by Law 9711
on January 2, 1943. Its main function is to supervise and regulate the country's agricultural sector. The main
objectives of MIDAGRI are: i) Strengthen producers' organizations and promote their integration under watershed
and production chain management approaches; ii) Promote technological innovation and training linked to the
business management of agricultural producers, providing technical assistance; iii) Establish an agricultural
information system to enable economic agents to make efficient management decisions; iv) Facilitate agricultural
producers' access to legal, administrative, management, financial, technical assistance, health and other services
73 For more information, please see Annex 21 Operations Manual chapter 3.

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51
B
that will enable them to improve their management capacity; v) To facilitate the linkage of small-scale agriculture
with the market economy through the establishment of policies for the appropriate use of natural resources.
154. MIDAGRI as the main political partner of the project will also act as an Executing Entity executing activities
through own funds through following relevant programs Agrorural, Sierra Azul, SERFOR, PSI, SSE, INIA, SENASA
and Agroideas.
155. In addition, amongst his function in the project MIDAGRI will:
• Chair the Project Steering Committee and participate in the Project Management Committee and Territorial
Implementation Unit.
• Coordinate with the project partners to guarantee the integral fulfilment of the expected results of the project.
• Ensures the efficient execution of its co-financing in its sector through the aforementioned programs and
contribute to the achievement of the project's activities.
• Lead coordination with aforementioned programs and the attached public bodies: SERFOR and INIA within
the project structure and in the territory.
• Internally, MIDAGRI will set up a sectoral commission to guarantee the coordination and harmonization of the
interventions and co-financing of its units with the implementation of the project.
The National Service of Natural Protected Areas by the State (SERNANP) of the Ministry of the Environment
(MINAM) [Executing Entity- Own contributions]
156. SERNANP is a specialized technical public agency attached to the Ministry of the Environment, in charge of
directing and establishing technical and administrative criteria for the conservation of Natural Protected Areas
(NPAs) and ensuring the maintenance of biological diversity. SERNANP is the governing entity of the National
System of Natural Areas Protected by the Peruvian government (SINANPE), and as the technical-normative
authority, it carries out its work in coordination with regional and local governments and landowners recognized as
private conservation areas. It leads SINANPE with ecosystem, integral and participatory perspective with the aim
of sustainably managing its biological diversity and maintaining the ecosystem services that provide benefits to
society.
157. SERNANP will act as an Executing Entity executing project activities with own funds and amongst its functions
it will:
• Coordinate with the project partners to guarantee the integral fulfilment of the expected results of the project.
• Participating in both the Project Management Committee (PMC) and Territory Implementation Units (TIU).
158. In particular, SERNANP will co-finance and participate in the execution of the activities implemented within the
Natural Protected Areas that are part of the project and together with MIDAGRI in the buffer zones.
Instituto de Montaña (IdM) [Executing Entity-GCF funds]
159. IdM is a non-profit organization that works for the conservation of the natural, cultural and spiritual values of
mountain peoples and ecosystems. They have been working in the Andes since 1995 and in Peru they have
programs in the highlands of Ancash, Piura, Junín and Lima.
160. It will act as Executing Entity, by contributing and scaling up its experience in the implementation of EbA
measures in the Nor Yauyos Cochas Landscape Reserve to the other regions of the project. It will use participatory
tools for participatory design, implementation and monitoring of EbA measures, which contribute to the ownership
and sustainability of the Local initiatives supported by the project.
161. Amongst its functions in the project IdM will:
• Participate in the Project Management Committee and in the territory as part of the Territorial Implementation
Units
• Liaise and coordinate with other project partners to guarantee the integral fulfilment of the expected results of
the project.
162. IdM as an EE will be responsible for a GCF budget of EUR 1.5 million.
B.4.2. Summary of the Capacity Needs Assessment
163. In the frame of the Funding Proposal development a Capacity Needs Assessment (see Annex 2h) was
developed in order to assess the capacity needs and institutional gaps from the EEs (besides GIZ) for project
implementation. This included evaluating EEs current capacities in relation to the project components, identification
of gaps, and providing recommendations for capacity development to address these gaps effectively.
164. In this regard, the Capacity Needs Assessment draw two key conclusions. Firstly, in some cases, capacities
exist, but enabling conditions are weak, at the same time the implementation process of EbA, climate resilience
and gender approaches are making progress as it is the case of MIDAGRI for example, even though it has the
capacities (established functions) to develop specific guidelines, methodologies and tools to incorporate a gender
and climate resilience approach into sector planning, budgeting and investments; however, these are insufficient.
Secondly, there is the need to enhance existing capacities and establish new ones where gaps exist as in the case

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52
B
of MIDAGRI, even though it has several agricultural support programmes, there is little promotion of these in the
high Andean zones.
165. A list of recommendations for each EE, based on the gaps identified can be found in section 5 of the Capacity
Needs Assessment (Annex 2h).
B.4.3. Project Governance structure
166. The project Governance structure (shown in
167. Figure 13) was extensively discussed, developed and validated by the project partners. Following bodies will
be established:
Project Steering Committee (PSC)
168. The highest level of governance will be overseen by a Steering Committee consisting of GIZ, MIDAGRI and
MINAM.
169. MIDAGRI through the Vice Minister of Family Agriculture Development and Agrarian Infrastructure will chair
the PSC meetings. The substitute is the General Director of the General Office of Planning and Budget of MIDAGRI.
Specifically, PSC participating members will include:
• MIDAGRI Vice-Minister of the Vice-Ministerial office for Family Farming Development and Agrarian
Infrastructure.
• MINAM Vice-Minister of the Vice-Ministerial office for Strategic Development of Natural Resources, which will
provide the required climate guidance and its alternate will be the General Directorate of Climate Change and
Desertification.
• Representative of GIZ
• The PSC will provide policy and strategic guidance to the Project Management Committee (PMC), while
ensuring compliance with the Funding Proposal approved by the GCF, the legal agreements, policies and
requirements of the GCF, and the climate and national socio-economic development objectives.
170. As part of the responsibilities the PSC will:
• Acknowledge proposed tools, directives and/or standards presented by the PMC and advocate for their
inclusion in public policy.
• Encourage national authorities to take ownership of actions addressing climate issues and ensure project
coherence within the international and national contexts.
• Provide guidance for the fulfilment of legal agreements.
• Monitor compliance with the project's commitments to social and environmental safeguards, the Indigenous
Peoples policy, and the objectives and implementation of the respective plans (ESMP, IPLCEP and GAP).
• Ensure effective inter-institutional and inter-sectoral coordination, as well as collaboration with civil society.
• Resolve any disputes that arise within the Project Management Committee and holds decision-making
authority for their resolution.
• Annually approve the project Annual Operating Plan (AOPs), evaluate and provide approval for the execution
of the AOPs (technical and financial execution reports).
• Provide strategic guidance for project management and provides feedback on the AOP, based on systematic
reporting of outcome and impact indicators.
• Oversee the timely and adequate delivery of the respective contributions of the partners to the project.
• Supports process transparency and the harmonization of working approaches in the territory.
171. The Project Steering Committee (PSC) will establish a Technical Secretariat, operated by GIZ Peru. The
Secretariat will provide technical information to the members of the PSC and will serve as a bridge between the
PSC members and the Project Management Committee (PMC). In addition, it will coordinate (before, during and
after) all related aspects of the PSC sessions.
172. The PSC will meet at least 2 times a year and more frequently, when necessary.
173. PSC members have the option to organize extended PSC meetings where non-permanent PSC members can
participate, for example for accountability and/or consultation with the NDA (Ministry of Economy and Finance), as
well as to seek inputs on project-related matters with other stakeholders such as national, regional, and local
authorities, donors, community and producer organizations, women's groups, Indigenous Peoples representatives,
NGOs, private sector representatives, and thematic experts.
Project Management Committee (PMC)
174. The Project Management Committee (PMC) will be responsible for overseeing and coordinating the project's
execution among the Executing Entities and ensuring its implementation within the designated territory. The PMC
will also provide regular reports to the Steering Committee.
175. It is the decision-making body for the management and implementation of the project. The PMC will be
coordinated by GIZ Peru and will have its offices within MIDAGRI. If necessary, thematic working groups could be

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53
B
created to coordinate cross-cutting activities in depth (e.g., on safeguards, gender, financial management or
EbA/value chains, etc.).
176. The PMC will additionally be responsible to:
• Review, reflect, and systematize lessons learned from the project, proposing their integration into tools,
directives or standards to be considered by Executing Entities.
• Generate proposals in response to changes, effects, or events in the project areas that may be attributable to
climate change, based on intersectoral reviews with experts and agreements with the GCF.
• Mobilize timely technical expertise from EEs and other stakeholders when project development issues are
identified.
• Timely share guidelines with the PSC and offer feedback to enhance project coherence on both national and
international levels, while also facilitating the flow of information from the territories to the PSC.
• Supervise the implementation and compliance with Social and Environmental Safeguards and Gender policies
(i.e., ESMP, GAP and IPLCEP).
• Ensure compliance with project management directives, guidelines, and information flow among Executing
Entity members.
• Coordinate and ensure the timely implementation of activities by each Executing Entity in the designated
territory outlined in the Annual Operating Plan, systematically informing the PSC and promoting a common
understanding among Executing Entities regarding the theory of change and its mainstreaming across all
project activities.
• Foster inter-institutional and inter-sectoral coordination and collaborate with civil society.
• Oversee technical and budgetary project progress, aligning with approved plans, budgets, and indicators
related to territorial needs outlined in Annual Plan documents.
• Provide technical feedback on Terms of Reference (ToRs) and other selection processes for regional
coordinator positions in Territorial Implementation Units.
• Lead mid-term and final evaluations of the project.
177. The PMC will meet at least 2 times a year and permanent PMC members will include according to the entity:
• MIDAGRI as an EE with a technical personal and financial person designated by MIDAGRI.
• GIZ as an EE with the project manager, technical manager and financial manager.
• Profonanpe as an EE with a technical manager and financial manager.
• SERNANP (MINAM) as an EE with a technical manager and financial manager.
• Instituto de Montaña as an EE with a technical manager and financial manager.
178. Likewise, a Consultative Committee will be established. It will be invited to participate in the Project
Management Committee (PMC) meetings through following members: the General Directorate of Climate Change
and Desertification (DGCCD) of MINAM; the General Directorate of Agricultural Environmental Affairs (DGAAA)
and General Directorate of Livestock Development (DGDG) of MIDAGRI, each with directorate and technical
representatives; providing technical assistance on the project issues related to climate change, within the
framework of its institutional competencies, including those corresponding to the implementation, monitoring,
evaluation and reporting of nationally determined contributions (NDC). The Management Committee will issue the
corresponding meeting invitation and agenda.
179. When necessary, extended Management Committee meetings can also be held, including the following
MIDAGRI’s programs, MINAM´s General Directorates, National Institute for Glacier and Mountain Ecosystem
Research (INAIGEM), National Service of Meteorology and Hydrology of Peru (SENAMHI). Other public or private
entities, women’s groups and/or Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities representatives, according to the
subject to be addressed at the respective meeting.
Figure 13. Governance structure

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54
B
Coordination of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU):
180. The governance structure will also include a Project Implementation Unit. The Coordination of this level will be
in charge of GIZ, and its responsibilities will include:
• Ensuring consistency, providing feedback, and validation of learnings made by territorial teams, local
communities, organizations and institutions around ecosystem management, conservation and restoration,
territorial governance and the coordination of collaborative efforts at institutional and social levels.
• Systematizes knowledge about changes/events occurring in the intervention areas that could be attributable to
climate change and the effects they generate in populations and ecosystems.
• Transmits in a timely and appropriate manner PSC orientations regarding to the national and international
context and, where appropriate, follows up on their implementation by the territorial teams.
• Executes the recommendations of the PMC and ensures that the recommendations of the Territorial
Implementation Units (TIUs) are discussed and addressed.
• Ensures compliance with the Social and Environmental Safeguards and Gender policies (i.e., ESMP, GAP and
IPLCEP).
• Promoting a common understanding of the theory of change and mainstreaming it in all project activities by the
territorial teams to ensure adaptive project management in order to foster information exchange and synergies
among project experts and advisors.
• Guaranteeing the harmonized work with stakeholders in each territory and an adequate identification of the
tasks and additional requirements that must be addressed in connection with the project.
• Ensuring the implementation of the project in accordance with the project proposal approved by the GCF.
• Coordinating and integrating the Territorial Annual Operating Plan into the general Annual Operating Planning
of the project to be reviewed by the PMC and approved by the PSC.
• Coordinating the M&E system and monitoring the technical and budgetary progress of the project, in
accordance with the approved Annual Operating Plan and budget. Including monitoring of a timely
implementation in the territory and systematically informs the PMC in this regard.
• Preparation of project reports.
• Overseeing the progress of the indicators in charge of each EEs in the monitoring system and ensures that
the implementation progress reports are consistent with the reports to be provided to the GCF.
• Ensuring exchanges among territorial teams to assess the project progress, challenges and lessons learned
in each territory.

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55
B
Territorial Implementation Unit (TIU):
181. For an efficient, coordinated and articulated implementation in the territory, the executing entities will be formed
into implementation units in each region of the project area, coordinated by the GIZ. Part of the responsibilities of
the TIU will include:
• Generate knowledge and learning regarding the project implementation, and the engagement with
beneficiaries, public-private stakeholders, and other issues related to project implementation.
• Identify, record, report changes/events occurring in the intervention areas that could be attributable to climate
change and the effects they generate in populations and ecosystems.
• Implement PMC guidance regarding the national and international context in project actions.
• Follows PSC and PMC guidance.
• Comply with the Social and Environmental Safeguards and Gender policies (i.e., ESMP, GAP and IPLCEP).
• Participate in the Regional Agricultural Management Committees (CGRAs) meetings to inform, and coordinate
issues of interest for the region and the Project.
• Participate/promote dialogue/working groups or other coordination bodies, when needed.
• Promote strategic alliances with local governments, regional governments, private sector, civil society
organisations, to generate synergies during project implementation.
• Coordinate the implementation of project activities in each territory, according to the Project's management
instruments.
• Prepare territorial Annual Operating Plan to feed the project Annual Operating Plan, in accordance with the
approved Logical Framework. Report the progress of goals, indicators, bottlenecks, etc. to the PIU Coordinator,
• Promote the participation of beneficiaries in the different public-private financing mechanisms and identify the
needs of actors in the territory linked to the project's themes.
• Supervise and monitor the implementation of project activities in the territory
• Identify other local and regional initiatives that may have potential synergies with the interventions planned by
the project and inform the PIU Coordination.
• Identify the potential private sector financing in the territories and report to the PIU Coordination.
182. Part of the members of the Territorial Implementation Unit:
• GIZ: With regional technical coordinator.
• MIDAGRI: With regional technical specialists of Agroideas, Sierra Azul, Agrorural, Serfor
• SERNANP: With regional technical specialists.
• Profonanpe: With regional technical specialists.
• Instituto de Montaña: With regional technical specialists.
183. Depending on the specific approaches and developments in the implementation of the project in each of the
territories, TIUs may occasionally invite other participants such as representatives of Indigenous Peoples and Local
Communities, women’s groups, producers’ associations cooperatives, civil society organizations, local
governments and regional governments to participate in the meetings. At the request of a specific TIU and
depending on the fulfilment of the TIU's work plan, the TIU coordinator may authorize the regular inclusion of one
or more of these representatives.
Figure 14. Structure of the Territorial Implementation Unit (TIU)

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56
B
B.4.4 Flow of Funds
184. The following Figure 15 depicts the overall flow of funds for the project. Funds from GCF will be transferred to
GIZ as AE, who will then transfer funds through the Puna Facility (manage by Profonanpe (in its role as EE) to the
beneficiaries and directly to GIZ Peru and Instituto de Montaña (in their respective role as EEs). The Government
of Peru through SERNANP and MIDAGRI will provide co-financing.
185. Additional funds either from Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) (as a result from the provided TA within the activity
2.1.2) in form of loans or mobilized resources in form of grants from the private sector and different donors (as a
result of the TA provided to Profonanpe within sub-activity 2.1.1.2) could be leveraged. These funds will either flow
directly through the MFIs to the project beneficiaries or through the Puna Facility to continue financing Local
initiatives. For the later, initial discussions have already started with the Government of Canada who has expressed
their interest in channelling grants through the Puna Facility.
Figure 15. Flow of funds

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57
B
B.4.5 Puna Facility Funding Windows
186. As described above, GIZ will make GCF proceeds available to Profonanpe to then channel funds to Indigenous
Peoples and Local initiatives in their different form of organization (e.g., local communities, producers’ associations,
cooperatives (formal and in the process of formalization), Micro and/or Small Enterprises (MSEs)74, community
enterprises and producers’ organizations75) to finance Local initiatives combining EbA measures and the
development of Climate Resilient Value Chains based on predefined eligible EbA measures and CRVC (as shown
in table 6 of the Operations Manual (Annex 21). Further detailed procedures are outlined in the Operations Manual
(Annex 21).
187. Profonanpe, as described in the Operations Manual (Annex 21), will be responsible for the management (with
guidance of the PSC and PMC) and transfer of GCF funds to beneficiaries, including all related financial monitoring
and auditing and ensuring compliance with the GCF ESS and Gender requirements. Detailed responsibilities and
the role of PSC and PMC are stated under chapter 3 Institutional arrangements and responsibilities for managing
the financial mechanism in the Operations Manual.
188. Grant disbursements channelled through the Puna Facility will be through call for proposals (up to three within
the project implementation) and will be differentiated by three sub-windows (see
189. Figure 16) based on the recipient of the funds. Mainly:
a. Non-Repayable Grant Sub-Window for formal/legal Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities in their
different forms of organization (communities, producers’ associations and cooperatives76 in the process of
formalization)77 (from here on IPLCs), applying with the support of local CSOs.
The Non-repayable Sub-Window is meant to finance a maximum non-repayable grant amount per Local
initiative activities (including both EbA and CRVC interventions) of up to EUR 100,000.
b. Results-based Repayable Grant Sub-Window for micro and or/ small enterprises community enterprises and
cooperatives permitted by law with commercial capacities and clear target markets. Hence:
- Formal/legal micro and/or small enterprises
- Formal/legal community enterprises according to the law Nº 24656
74 Micro and/or small enterprises are defined according to the Legislative Degree 1086. Micro enterprises have from 1 to 10 employees and
annual sales up to 150 taxable tax units (Unidad Impositiva Tributaria), while small enterprises have from 1 to 100 employees and annual
sales up to 1700 taxable tax units (Unidad Impositiva Tributaria).
75 Small and/or medium agricultural producers under any organizational form permitted by law: associations, native communities, peasant
communities, limited liability companies, public limited companies, cooperatives and other forms allowed by law. The definitions of small and
medium agricultural producers as well as the forms of organizations are defined by the Agroideas eligibility criteria that can be accessed here.
76 Cooperatives working on the topics related to the project.
77 The Law No. 31335, law on the improvement of the association of agricultural producers in agricultural cooperatives was recently regulated
on July 21, 2023. From this regulation some associations will migrate to cooperatives, regime in which they will be able to commercialize and
have net benefits in an associative way, with which in the future they will be able to demonstrate the generation of income, but the process
will involve some requirements that may not allow them to apply to sub-window 2 in the first call.

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58
B
- Formal/legal Cooperatives according to the legislation in force.
The Results-based Repayable Sub-Window is meant to finance a maximum repayable grant amount per
Local initiative activities (including both EbA and CRVC interventions) of up to EUR 200,000.
c. Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Window for formalized producers’ organizations with commercial capacities
and clear target markets, that are eligible for the MIDAGRI support programme Agroideas. Hence:
- Small and/or medium agricultural producers organized under any organizational form permitted by law:
associations, native communities, peasant communities, limited liability companies, public limited
companies, cooperatives and other forms allowed by law.
The Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Window is meant to finance a maximum results-based repayable grant
amount per Local initiative activities (including only EbA measures) of up to EUR 75,000.
Figure 16. Operation of the Puna Facility: Sub-Windows
Puna acility
on repayable rant ub indow esults based epayable rant ub indow atchmaking groideas ub indow
inancial support up to , inancial support up to , inancial support up to ,
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PROVIDER
0 .12.2023
190. The principle underlying the differentiation between the different sub-windows is related to the segmentation of
the potential beneficiaries which are reflected in the differences between their a) current internal organizational and
commercial capacities and b) the level of barriers they face (please see section B.2a.2. for more information). In
this regard the Non-Repayable Grant Sub-Window is meant to benefit local communities, producers’ associations
and cooperatives in the process of formalization without commercial capacities and clear target markets and the
Results-based Repayable Grant Sub-Window is meant to benefit Micro and/or Small Enterprises, community
enterprises and cooperatives with commercial capacities and clear target markets. Moreover, the Agroideas
Matchmaking Sub-Window (also for Results-based repayable grants) – in line with the guidelines of the Agroideas
programme – is meant to benefit formalized producers’ organizations with commercial capacities and clear target
markets conforming to the rules and regulations of the Agroideas programme.
191. Reflecting the fact that Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window beneficiaries lack the required level of preparedness
and ability to submit and implement Local initiative proposals on their own, applicants of the Non-repayable Grant
Sub-Window will partner with qualified local CSOs to submit and implement approved Local initiatives (while
ensuring that beneficiaries are proactively involved in the process and their capacity is built). Error! Reference
source not found. in the Operations Manual (Annex 21)Error! Reference source not found. lists the eligible
recipients for the three Sub-Windows in more detail.
192. Up to 100% grant repayments (if applicable for Sub-Window 2 and 3) will be based on specific performance
triggers established case-by-case and agreed including but not limited to:
i. Percentage or absolute increase in revenues compared to the revenues in the year before application to
the Puna Facility, or the average revenues over a certain number of years before application;
ii. Percentage or absolute increase in profits over the same reference period;

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59
B
iii. Percentage or absolute increase in cash flows or cash balances over the same reference period;
iv. Increase in business volumes, such as volumes of crop sold, alpaca fiber sold, alpaca heads in herd or
similar indicators;
v. Other initiative-specific triggers, such as winning a large sale contract or gaining a new large client (e.g.,
commitment by alpaca fiber processor to buy large volumes).
193. Upon achieving the performance trigger, grant repayment will follow a specific repayment schedule tailored to
each Local initiatives to address the particularities of the EbA and CRVC interventions. The Puna Facility will aim
to achieve full repayment within five years from the last grant tranche disbursement, however it is possible that
repayment could take longer for certain local initiatives, depending on the timing of the trigger achievement and
cashflow profile of the initiative. More information on the repayment conditions can be found in the Operations
Manual chapter 6 and 7. Grants repaid will flow back to the Puna Facility. More information on the use of repaid
grants and sustainability of the Puna Facility can be found in section B.6.1.
194. The Financial Window aims to support up to 127 local initiatives over 5.5 years for a total disbursed grant
amount of up to EUR 14.4 million. The preliminary breakdown78 of the funds between the sub-windows will be as
indicated in the table below.
Table 6. Preliminary Grant Breakdown per Sub-Window
Sub-Window Funding Cost per Estimated # of Estimated Funding
instrument project in EUR Local initiative Grants in EUR source
up to per Sub-Window
up to
1. Non- Non- 100,000 75 7,500,000 GCF and
repayable repayable BMZ
Grant grants
2. Results-based Results- 200,000 24 4,800,000 GCF and
Repayable based BMZ
Grant repayable
grants
3. Matchmaking Results- 75,000 28 2,100,000 GCF and
Agroideas based BMZ
repayable
grants
Total 127 14,400,000 GCF and
BMZ
195. In parallel to financial support, the Puna Facility will offer Technical Assistance (TA) through a service provider
hired by Profonanpe and in the case of the Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window optionally in conjunction with the
CSO supporting the applicant. The TA packages will be differentiated between:
a. TA for the refinement of the local initiative proposals, (please see Step 5 in Section 3.3. of the Operations
Manual (Annex 21) provided by the TA provider and
b. TA for the implementation of the local initiatives (please see Step 10 in Section 3.3.) provided by the TA provider
and optionally in conjunction with the CSO in the case of the Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window
196. The total amount of TA that will be provided to the beneficiary by either the TA service provider or (in applicable)
the CSOs will be of up to EUR 3.17 million.
B.4.6 Regulation, taxation and insurance
Privileges, immunities and taxation
197. The Federal Republic of Germany has concluded Framework Agreements on Technical Cooperation under
international public law with the Government of Peru (dated 25th February 1998), which provide for certain privileges
and immunities to be applied in projects and programmes of technical cooperation, including exemptions for taxes,
customs, duties and fees. GIZ will endeavour to reach arrangements to have these privileges and immunities also
applied to the Project, including GCF proceeds. However, formal agreements will only be entered into after the
project has been approved.
Approvals, permits, licenses and land
198. At the time of submitting this Funding Proposal, GIZ is not aware of the project requiring specific approvals,
permits, licenses or land to allow for the implementation of planned activities.
78 The distribution of the grants per sub-window could change during project implementation based on the development and lessons
learned from the first and second call cycle.

--- Table 1 on Page 63 ---
Sub-Window | Funding
instrument | Cost per
project in EUR
up to | Estimated # of
Local initiative |  | Estimated |  | Funding
source
 |  |  |  |  | Grants in EUR |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | per Sub-Window |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | up to |  | 
1. Non-
repayable
Grant | Non-
repayable
grants | 100,000 | 75 | 7,500,000 |  |  | GCF and
BMZ
2. Results-based
Repayable
Grant | Results-
based
repayable
grants | 200,000 | 24 | 4,800,000 |  |  | GCF and
BMZ
3. Matchmaking
Agroideas | Results-
based
repayable
grants | 75,000 | 28 | 2,100,000 |  |  | GCF and
BMZ
Total |  |  | 127 | 14,400,000 |  |  | GCF and
BMZ

--- Table 2 on Page 63 ---
Funding
instrument

--- Table 3 on Page 63 ---
Cost per
project in EUR
up to

--- Table 4 on Page 63 ---
Estimated # of
Local initiative

--- Table 5 on Page 63 ---
Funding
source

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60
B
Currency
199. The local currency in Peru is the Peruvian Sol (code: PEN). The project’s local transactions will use PEN. The
AE will manage GCF proceeds in Euro. GIZ will apply its standard rates for the conversion of currency.
Insurance
200. GIZ, as the AE, will ensure that project activities are adequately insured as per GIZ standard operating
procedures and common practices. GIZ standard operating procedures require contractors to ensure required
insurance cover. GIZ policies provide insurance cover for GIZ staff. At the time of submitting the Funding Proposal,
GIZ does not anticipate additional insurance to cover special risks in this project.
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
B.5.1. Grant justification – Concessionality
201. While the government has increased its focus on climate finance, efforts to channel budgetary or other public
resources to climate resilience in the high puna are still limited and scattered. The government’s annual spending
on climate change has been below USD 300 million for the past decade. For comparison, public investment on
infrastructure has averaged USD 5.4 billion over the past five years and total public investment USD10.6 billion.79
The World Bank estimates at USD 5 billion Peru’s investments needs in climate change mitigation and adaptation
to 2030, with the biggest priorities identified in the transport, water and energy sectors. The government has
increased public spending aimed at managing natural resources sustainably, from 1.9% of the total national budget
in 2008 to 5.4% in 2018 (IDB, 2020). However, national resources remain insufficient due to the global
environmental and climate crises, as shown in national environmental performance indicators (ranked from 0 to 1,
where 1 signifies the highest possible score), for example the agriculture sector scores 0.3 with a regional average
in LAC of 0.45, on the other hand the forest sector scores 0.26 with a regional average in LAC of 0.57 (IDB, 2020).
202. The required investment for climate adaptation needs cannot be met with the national budget alone. With the
economy expected to slow down, inflation risk, relatively high unemployment, public debt on the rise and persistent
political instability, it will be difficult for the government to rise to the climate investment challenge. In this context,
the government is making a substantial effort to co-finance the proposed GCF project, matching the GCF
contribution almost dollar for dollar (~1:1 co-finance ratio). GCF resources are crucial to achieve innovative
coordination between private and public actors to scale the impact of interventions at the ecosystem and local
community levels. The resources will also allow overcoming barriers to accelerate the implementation of existing
but underdeveloped financial instruments (i.e., MERESE) and will generate capacities in rural population to access
available financing (public and private). The proposed financial and technical support mechanisms, including
business development, microfinancing and increased participation in specific Climate Resilient Value Chains
(CRVC) will improve production systems and make them more resilient.
203. Available resources from the international community are also limited. Peru received USD 923 million in climate-
focused official development assistance (ODA) in 2021, the majority in mitigation. Of this, only USD 13 million was
ear-marked by the OECD to the agriculture (excluding forestry) and livestock sub-sectors.80 It is possible that other
ODA was channelled to these sectors via financial institutions and ear-marked as ODA to the financial sector. Still,
agriculture and livestock draw a small minority of climate ODA to Peru. In the high puna, ODA directed at the
project’s target beneficiaries has been extremely limited.
204. Private sector financing of CRVC in the puna has been almost absent to date (see section 7.2 in the Feasibility
Study (Annex 2a)). Universal and municipal banks in Peru focus primarily on large enterprises and/or urban
borrowers. MFIs focus on MSME lending but only one (Confianza) has a meaningful presence in the target areas,
as do a few small rural banks. Lending to CRVC is constrained by several barriers: (i) the inherent high risk of
agricultural and livestock activities, exacerbated by climate change; (ii) logistical difficulties in reaching borrowers
in the high puna (long distances and remote locations); (iii) limited financial literacy of prospective borrowers; (iv)
limited understanding – by both borrowers and lenders – of the climate change impact on high puna economic
activities, and how EbA and CRVC can mitigate such impact and improve creditworthiness; and (v) prevalence of
informal businesses with limited collateral. As a result of these barriers, loan supply to the target beneficiaries is
extremely limited and loan terms are inadequate to EbA measures and CRVC (short maturities, very high interest
rates, inflexible repayment schedules). For example, capex loans offered by MFI Confianza have a maximum
maturity of 3 years only and interest rates in the 60-70% range. One state-backed financial institution, Agrobanco,
offers at least on paper concessional loans (with “low” rates of 20-30%) to the project’s target beneficiaries, but in
practice the organization is severely undercapitalized and operationally dysfunctional.
205. A significant portion of the GCF grant (EUR 21.6 million) is for technical assistance and capacity building
activities that do not lead directly to financial reflows for beneficiaries. The use of grants for these activities is
justifiable on a public-good basis. The remaining EUR 19.217 million portion of the GCF grant is to fund the
establishment and operation of the Puna Facility, which will disburse repayable and non-repayable grants to
79 World Bank (November 2022). Peru: Country Climate and Development Report.
80 OECD climate ODA data, 2021.

--- Table 1 on Page 64 ---
Currency
199. The local currency in Peru is the Peruvian Sol (code: PEN). The project’s local transactions will use PEN. The
AE will manage GCF proceeds in Euro. GIZ will apply its standard rates for the conversion of currency.
Insurance
200. GIZ, as the AE, will ensure that project activities are adequately insured as per GIZ standard operating
procedures and common practices. GIZ standard operating procedures require contractors to ensure required
insurance cover. GIZ policies provide insurance cover for GIZ staff. At the time of submitting the Funding Proposal,
GIZ does not anticipate additional insurance to cover special risks in this project.
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
B.5.1. Grant justification – Concessionality
201. While the government has increased its focus on climate finance, efforts to channel budgetary or other public
resources to climate resilience in the high puna are still limited and scattered. The government’s annual spending
on climate change has been below USD 300 million for the past decade. For comparison, public investment on
infrastructure has averaged USD 5.4 billion over the past five years and total public investment USD10.6 billion.79
The World Bank estimates at USD 5 billion Peru’s investments needs in climate change mitigation and adaptation
to 2030, with the biggest priorities identified in the transport, water and energy sectors. The government has
increased public spending aimed at managing natural resources sustainably, from 1.9% of the total national budget
in 2008 to 5.4% in 2018 (IDB, 2020). However, national resources remain insufficient due to the global
environmental and climate crises, as shown in national environmental performance indicators (ranked from 0 to 1,
where 1 signifies the highest possible score), for example the agriculture sector scores 0.3 with a regional average
in LAC of 0.45, on the other hand the forest sector scores 0.26 with a regional average in LAC of 0.57 (IDB, 2020).
202. The required investment for climate adaptation needs cannot be met with the national budget alone. With the
economy expected to slow down, inflation risk, relatively high unemployment, public debt on the rise and persistent
political instability, it will be difficult for the government to rise to the climate investment challenge. In this context,
the government is making a substantial effort to co-finance the proposed GCF project, matching the GCF
contribution almost dollar for dollar (~1:1 co-finance ratio). GCF resources are crucial to achieve innovative
coordination between private and public actors to scale the impact of interventions at the ecosystem and local
community levels. The resources will also allow overcoming barriers to accelerate the implementation of existing
but underdeveloped financial instruments (i.e., MERESE) and will generate capacities in rural population to access
available financing (public and private). The proposed financial and technical support mechanisms, including
business development, microfinancing and increased participation in specific Climate Resilient Value Chains
(CRVC) will improve production systems and make them more resilient.
203. Available resources from the international community are also limited. Peru received USD 923 million in climate-
focused official development assistance (ODA) in 2021, the majority in mitigation. Of this, only USD 13 million was
ear-marked by the OECD to the agriculture (excluding forestry) and livestock sub-sectors.80 It is possible that other
ODA was channelled to these sectors via financial institutions and ear-marked as ODA to the financial sector. Still,
agriculture and livestock draw a small minority of climate ODA to Peru. In the high puna, ODA directed at the
project’s target beneficiaries has been extremely limited.
204. Private sector financing of CRVC in the puna has been almost absent to date (see section 7.2 in the Feasibility
Study (Annex 2a)). Universal and municipal banks in Peru focus primarily on large enterprises and/or urban
borrowers. MFIs focus on MSME lending but only one (Confianza) has a meaningful presence in the target areas,
as do a few small rural banks. Lending to CRVC is constrained by several barriers: (i) the inherent high risk of
agricultural and livestock activities, exacerbated by climate change; (ii) logistical difficulties in reaching borrowers
in the high puna (long distances and remote locations); (iii) limited financial literacy of prospective borrowers; (iv)
limited understanding – by both borrowers and lenders – of the climate change impact on high puna economic
activities, and how EbA and CRVC can mitigate such impact and improve creditworthiness; and (v) prevalence of
informal businesses with limited collateral. As a result of these barriers, loan supply to the target beneficiaries is
extremely limited and loan terms are inadequate to EbA measures and CRVC (short maturities, very high interest
rates, inflexible repayment schedules). For example, capex loans offered by MFI Confianza have a maximum
maturity of 3 years only and interest rates in the 60-70% range. One state-backed financial institution, Agrobanco,
offers at least on paper concessional loans (with “low” rates of 20-30%) to the project’s target beneficiaries, but in
practice the organization is severely undercapitalized and operationally dysfunctional.
205. A significant portion of the GCF grant (EUR 21.6 million) is for technical assistance and capacity building
activities that do not lead directly to financial reflows for beneficiaries. The use of grants for these activities is
justifiable on a public-good basis. The remaining EUR 19.217 million portion of the GCF grant is to fund the
establishment and operation of the Puna Facility, which will disburse repayable and non-repayable grants to

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61
B
revenue generating Local initiatives. A detailed financial analysis has been conducted (see Annex 3) to determine
the financial IRR of Local initiatives in the three windows of the Facility, with and without GCF grants. The analysis
is based on prototype Local initiatives in the alpaca and native potatoes sectors representative of the majority of
Local initiatives to be funded by the Facility. Detailed assumptions were developed both for business-as-usual
scenarios (not incorporating EbA and CRVC practices) and climate-resilient scenarios where beneficiaries invest
in and implement the recommended mix of EbA measures and CRVC practices. The transition from business-as-
usual to EbA/CRVC generates positive FIRRs without grants in all prototype’s Local initiatives, ranging from 8.4%
(for alpaca breeding in the Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window) to 25.8% (native potatoes in the Results-based
Repayable Grant Sub-Window). Still, grants are considered essential for the widespread adoption of EbA/CRVC
among target beneficiaries, for the following reasons:
i) In the Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window, (i) the beneficiaries live in poverty to the extent of often abandoning
the high puna and moving to urban areas in search of jobs (see section D.4.2). (ii) They have virtually no
savings, and certainly not to the tune of the EUR 125,000 and EUR 139,000 per beneficiary group required to
implement the transition to EbA/CRVC (in native potatoes and alpacas, respectively). (iii) Beneficiaries have
limited financial literacy and almost no access to finance; when finance is available, it is offered by micro-
finance institutions at prohibitive rates and for short maturities that are unsuitable to the timeline of CR transition
(the payback period for the EUR 125,000 investment is approximately 8 years). (iv) Beneficiaries do not have
the knowledge to implement EbA measures nor the financial resources to pay for technical services provided
by private experts in order to gain that knowledge. GCF non-repayable grants not only cover a significant portion
(80%) of the EBA/CRVC investment but fund the technical assistance necessary to correctly implement the
measures and put EBA/CRVC-adopting businesses on a sustainable path of cash generation, building their
future bankability.
ii) In the Results-based Repayable Grant Sub-Window, (i) beneficiaries have limited savings, but certainly not
to the tune of the EUR 257,000 and EUR 283,000 per farmer group required to implement the transition to
EbA/CRVC. (ii) They have limited financial literacy and almost no access to finance; when finance is available,
it is offered by micro-finance institutions at prohibitive rates and for short maturities that are unsuitable to the
timeline of transition. (iii) Beneficiaries do not have the knowledge to implement EbA and have limited financial
resources to pay for technical services provided by private experts in order to gain that knowledge. Considering
the attractiveness of the business model over the long term, however, non-repayable grants would be too
concessional. To minimize concessionality, a repayable grant is therefore introduced, with the benefits that (a)
beneficiaries start building a track record in managing repayments that enhances their future bankability with
MFIs and other financial institutions, (b) repayment terms are negotiated at Local initiative approval to suit the
Local initiative’s cashflow profile (unlike MFIs’ rigid repayment schedules), (c) there is no interest charge (unlike
the MFIs’ prohibitive rates) and (d) repaid amounts flow back into the Facility, which will use it to support
additional future Local initiatives. In addition to the repayable grant, beneficiaries also receive technical
assistance. The combination of financial and technical assistance will put them on a path to full commercial
bankability.
iii) In the Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Window, for which only existing formal businesses qualify, a very
significant investment is required, to the tune of EUR 245,000 in our prototype Local initiative. While the
applicants are formalized and may have some access to finance, it is not for this sort of amounts and would
carry the prohibitive conditions imposed by MFIs. To alleviate the funding gap, the government’s Agroideas
program will provide non-repayable grants covering 80% of the value chain portion of the investment (e.g.,
construction of greenhouses, cultivated pastures and alpaca shearing equipment). The GCF grant will be
repayable and therefore less concessional. It will cover 80% of the EbA portion of the investment, will carry no
interest and will have repayment schedules tailored to the individual Local initiatives. Financial and technical
assistance provided by Agroideas and GCF will put these businesses on a solid footing, increase their
creditworthiness and likelihood of sourcing affordable commercial loans in the future.
206. The project strongly contributes to the GCF identified sectoral paradigm shift enablers. The government of Peru
sees GCF financing in the form of grants as essential to achieve changes in the geographical and temporal scale
required to face the challenges of accelerated change in climate and the loss of ecosystems and their climate
services. In this regard, GCF funding is required to contribute to the GCF sectoral paradigm shift enablers.
207. At the project level, in the business-as-usual scenario, MIDAGRI will contribute with EUR 28.67 million that it
has pledged in co-financing, focusing on the short-term productivity aspects, neglecting the value of the ecosystem
services as a long- term solution for the high Andean communities and for other beneficiaries of puna ecosystem
services. It would focus on isolated investments and activities financed from different programs (Agrorural,
Agroideas or Sierra Azul) without looking for synergies and impact programs. Participation of local communities on
the decision-making process would be limited and CSOs that have gained the trust and engagement of communities
from experience working with them would not be involved. The MERESE (payment for ecosystem service) scheme
would continue being innovative on paper but non-functional on the ground and little investment would reach target
communities. Other climate-relevant puna ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration would not be

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62
B
considered nor valued. GCF financing would fill an important gap in climate finance for the most vulnerable
populations in Peru and promote a sector transformation towards conservation of Puna ecosystems and
corresponding services.
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
B.6.1. Replicability
208. The proposed interventions are already replicating successful experiences, such as i) the incorporation
of ancestral EbA practices and experience on local implementation in the high Andes from Nor Yauyos Cochas81;
Agrorural and Sierra Azul, Helvetas and Forest Trends; ii) the strategy developed by IFAD, GEF projects and
Agroideas on business development with focus on specific value chains (South American camelid fiber and Andean
agricultural products) in an economically-linked area (SHAP); and iii) experience by Profonanpe in managing
environmental and climate funds (including GCF funds) and engaging with private stakeholders for PES schemes.
This ensures ownership from the national EEs MIDAGRI, SERNANP and Profonanpe.
209. The model for replication is completed by i) focused intervention on priority landscapes/watersheds where
information, lessons learnt and best practices will be obtained, ii) support via financial windows accompanied by
technical assistance, iii) increased investment from private sources and iv) improved planning and coordination at
landscape level considering communities participation. v) capacity building and experience exchanges among
beneficiaries for increasing the application and replication vi) produce communication materials in native languages
to capture lessons learned and promote replication of successful experiences. This approach can then be
transferred to other high priority areas with similar Puna ecosystems and climate vulnerability conditions (e.g.,
Junin, Huancavelica, Ayacucho) at lower costs.
210. In addition, the project will serve as an example of a successful initiative aimed at promoting and facilitating the
adoption of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains . By enhancing governance mechanisms at multiple
levels within the landscape and fostering stakeholder engagement in the project's focus area, it will foster the ability
to encourage replication and knowledge exchange for comparable endeavours not only within Peru but also across
similar ecosystems in the broader regional context.
B.6.1. Sustainability
211. Improved ecosystem services, climate resilient livelihoods and increased access to public and private finance
will ensure that target populations in the SHAP develop rural Climate Resilient Value Chains (CRVC) and local
economies. The resources that will be requested from the GCF will enable expected results. The results will ensure
the sustainability of the proposed interventions by creating an enabling environment in policy, technical and financial
terms.
212. The exit strategy is embedded into the project design. The project, through its various components, will
support both the financial sustainability (component 2), and behavioural changes (component 1 and 3).
213. Financial sustainability will be ensured at the Local initiative level through the following:
i. Crucially, all Local initiatives financed by the Puna Facility will be profitable in the long-term and generating
positive financial IRRs without grants. In the Local initiatives prototype analysed in Annex 3, these IRRs
range from ranging from 8.4% (for alpaca breeding in the subsistence window) to 25.8% (native potatoes
in the Results-based Repayable Grant Sub-Window). While grants are needed during the Puna Facility
implementation for the reasons described in section B.5, once beneficiaries have implemented EbA
measures and CRVC they will continue to do because it makes financial sense to them and significantly
increases their incomes.
ii. In addition, the initial investments required for EBA measures and CRVC will not need to be repeated in
their entirety in the future. EbA measures, once implemented, only need regular and relatively low
maintenance costs. Equipment for CRVC, on the other hand, has a limited useful life (e.g., 10 years for
greenhouses) and will need to be replaced in the future, but it represents a minority of the overall EbA and
CRVC investment. Enhanced creditworthiness of the beneficiaries and access to finance (see below) will
be such that beneficiaries no longer need grants at the time of capex replacement but will be able to use
commercial sources of finance, as well as accumulated savings resulting from profitable EbA and CRVC
initiatives.
iii. Local initiative applicants will be inherently more creditworthy and therefore bankable after the successful
implementation of EbA measures and CRVC, not only because they are on a sounder financial footing, but
also because their businesses will be formalized (including proper accounting and tax compliance) and the
businesses that benefited from repayable grants under the applicable windows will have a track record of
compliance with financial obligations, which financial institutions will view positively.
iv. The technical assistance provided by the Puna Facility, in addition to the financial incentives, will be critical
in this respect. All selected Local initiatives, including beneficiaries without commercial capacities and
target markets (i.e. eligible under the Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window), will receive comprehensive
81 Implemented by the Instituto de Montaña, IUCN, UNDP and UNEP in partnership with SERNANP.

--- Table 1 on Page 66 ---
considered nor valued. GCF financing would fill an important gap in climate finance for the most vulnerable
populations in Peru and promote a sector transformation towards conservation of Puna ecosystems and
corresponding services.
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
B.6.1. Replicability
208. The proposed interventions are already replicating successful experiences, such as i) the incorporation
of ancestral EbA practices and experience on local implementation in the high Andes from Nor Yauyos Cochas81;
Agrorural and Sierra Azul, Helvetas and Forest Trends; ii) the strategy developed by IFAD, GEF projects and
Agroideas on business development with focus on specific value chains (South American camelid fiber and Andean
agricultural products) in an economically-linked area (SHAP); and iii) experience by Profonanpe in managing
environmental and climate funds (including GCF funds) and engaging with private stakeholders for PES schemes.
This ensures ownership from the national EEs MIDAGRI, SERNANP and Profonanpe.
209. The model for replication is completed by i) focused intervention on priority landscapes/watersheds where
information, lessons learnt and best practices will be obtained, ii) support via financial windows accompanied by
technical assistance, iii) increased investment from private sources and iv) improved planning and coordination at
landscape level considering communities participation. v) capacity building and experience exchanges among
beneficiaries for increasing the application and replication vi) produce communication materials in native languages
to capture lessons learned and promote replication of successful experiences. This approach can then be
transferred to other high priority areas with similar Puna ecosystems and climate vulnerability conditions (e.g.,
Junin, Huancavelica, Ayacucho) at lower costs.
210. In addition, the project will serve as an example of a successful initiative aimed at promoting and facilitating the
adoption of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains . By enhancing governance mechanisms at multiple
levels within the landscape and fostering stakeholder engagement in the project's focus area, it will foster the ability
to encourage replication and knowledge exchange for comparable endeavours not only within Peru but also across
similar ecosystems in the broader regional context.
B.6.1. Sustainability
211. Improved ecosystem services, climate resilient livelihoods and increased access to public and private finance
will ensure that target populations in the SHAP develop rural Climate Resilient Value Chains (CRVC) and local
economies. The resources that will be requested from the GCF will enable expected results. The results will ensure
the sustainability of the proposed interventions by creating an enabling environment in policy, technical and financial
terms.
212. The exit strategy is embedded into the project design. The project, through its various components, will
support both the financial sustainability (component 2), and behavioural changes (component 1 and 3).
213. Financial sustainability will be ensured at the Local initiative level through the following:
i. Crucially, all Local initiatives financed by the Puna Facility will be profitable in the long-term and generating
positive financial IRRs without grants. In the Local initiatives prototype analysed in Annex 3, these IRRs
range from ranging from 8.4% (for alpaca breeding in the subsistence window) to 25.8% (native potatoes
in the Results-based Repayable Grant Sub-Window). While grants are needed during the Puna Facility
implementation for the reasons described in section B.5, once beneficiaries have implemented EbA
measures and CRVC they will continue to do because it makes financial sense to them and significantly
increases their incomes.
ii. In addition, the initial investments required for EBA measures and CRVC will not need to be repeated in
their entirety in the future. EbA measures, once implemented, only need regular and relatively low
maintenance costs. Equipment for CRVC, on the other hand, has a limited useful life (e.g., 10 years for
greenhouses) and will need to be replaced in the future, but it represents a minority of the overall EbA and
CRVC investment. Enhanced creditworthiness of the beneficiaries and access to finance (see below) will
be such that beneficiaries no longer need grants at the time of capex replacement but will be able to use
commercial sources of finance, as well as accumulated savings resulting from profitable EbA and CRVC
initiatives.
iii. Local initiative applicants will be inherently more creditworthy and therefore bankable after the successful
implementation of EbA measures and CRVC, not only because they are on a sounder financial footing, but
also because their businesses will be formalized (including proper accounting and tax compliance) and the
businesses that benefited from repayable grants under the applicable windows will have a track record of
compliance with financial obligations, which financial institutions will view positively.
iv. The technical assistance provided by the Puna Facility, in addition to the financial incentives, will be critical
in this respect. All selected Local initiatives, including beneficiaries without commercial capacities and
target markets (i.e. eligible under the Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window), will receive comprehensive

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63
B
technical assistance on access to finance, in areas including: developing a fund-raising strategy; analysis
of the positive financial implications of EbA and climate resilient business investments to reduce the
perceived risk for prospective lenders; preparation of a pitch deck to present business to prospective
lenders; introduction to MFIs active in the region; explanation of the terms of any loan products offered by
MFIs and support with loan applications; and, basic financial literacy training including the importance of
repayment to create a strong credit track record.
v. The project will also work on the capital supply side to enhance the ability of MFIs (e.g., Caja rural los
Andes, Caja Cuzco, Microfinance BBVA Foundation-Confianza) to increase the supply of microfinance
products and services to finance integrated EbA and CRVC initiatives and among others better serve the
beneficiaries of the Puna Facility, through technical assistance in the following areas: (i) introduction to
concrete and tailor-made business models based on information generated and analysed from Local
initiatives implemented during the project duration; (ii) support the modification or design of existing
microcredits or tailored EbA and CRVC loan products; (iii) modification of management tools (including
digital tools, guidelines and protocols) to integrate EbA approach; (iv) training of credit officers on each EbA
and CRVC measure with particular focus on the costs required and their impact on beneficiary communities’
cashflows over a 10-year period or longer; (v) training of credit officers on marketing and explaining the
terms of the greener microcredits to prospective borrowers; (vi) training of credit officers on how the
adoption of EbA and sustainable business practices alters the credit profile of individuals or associations,
by generating an additional and more climate-resilient income stream, and interactive credit assessment
exercises. The MFIs have expressed their interest in leveraging private finance by either adapting existing
microcredits or developing new microcredits for the financing of EbA measures and/or CRVC. Options on
how this interest will be formalized (e.g., signing of MoUs) will be assessed individually with the respective
MFI.
214. Financial sustainability will be ensured at the Puna Facility level through the following:
vi. Grants repaid from the Results-based Repayable Grant and Matchmaking Agroideas Sub-Windows will
flow back into the Puna Facility most likely towards the end of the GCF project implementation and/or after
project completion and will support further cycles of calls for proposals for the Non-repayable Grant Sub-
Window82, after the completion of the Resilient Puna project. Each Results-based Repayable Grant Local
initiative Agreement will require full 100% repayment and beneficiaries will be expected to comply with that
full repayment. Conservatively, for the purpose of estimating reflows into the Facility, it is assumed that
50% of the overall repayable grant amount disbursed under the two sub-windows (i.e., Agroideas
Matchmaking Sub-Window and Results-based Repayable Grant Sub-Window) will be actually repaid. Such
repayment ratio could be the result of some Local Initiatives repaying the whole amount, some not repaying
at all and some repaying in part – the exact combination is impossible to forecast at this stage. With the
prototype Local initiative portfolio assumed in Annex 3, this would lead to a total of EUR 3.4 million being
repaid. Considering the call-for-proposal and Local initiative implementation timing, most repayments are
likely to occur towards the end of the GCF project period or later. In Annex 3, it is assumed that the Facility
would “recycle” the repaid amount once these are paid back to support another 24 Local Initiatives
substantially increasing its reach after the GCF project period.
vii. Profonanpe has also expressed their commitment in contributing to the Puna Facility after project ends with
EUR 1 million which are foreseen to cover operative staff costs.
viii. In addition, Profonanpe intends to attract additional resources from donors and the private sector to
capitalize the Puna Facility after and in addition to the GCF grant, through sub-activity 2.1.1.2. Profonanpe,
as a national institution deeply involved in the project's design phase and accredited as a Direct Access
Entity to the GCF, will oversee the operations of the Puna Facility, drawing upon its extensive experience
in managing environmental funds. Evidence of success in attracting applicants through calls for proposals
and supporting the implementation of EbA and CRVC Local initiatives under the GCF project will facilitate
Profonanpe’s raising of additional donor funds for the Puna Facility.
Figure 17. Sustainability approach of the Puna Facility
82 The feasibility of including results-based repayable grants in the subsequent cycles will be evaluated by Profonanpe taking into
consideration the performance during the project implementation.

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64
B
215. Behavioural changes (component 1 and 3) will facilitate the medium- and long-term sustainability. Project
beneficiaries will be trained on implementation and maintenance of EbA interventions so they can continue
providing benefits long after the project has ended. They will also be trained on improved production practices and
Climate Resilient Value Chains (CRVC) to increase self-dependence and overall climate resilience. This will in turn
conserve puna ecosystem services in the long term. Related to planning processes and institutions, the project
aims at mainstreaming EbA and strengthening coordination capacity within MIDAGRI and between other sector
and stakeholders in governance platforms that will continue operating and will then integrate climate change and
enhanced coordination without additional cost.
Locali nitiatives
eneficiaries ommunities, producer associations, cooperatives, etc
(in optional partnership with Os)

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65
C
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested
Total amount Currency
GCF funding
(i + ii + iii + iv +
40.79 million euro (€)
v + vi + vii)
GCF financial
Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
instrument
(i) Senior loans
(ii) Subordinated
loans
(iii) Equity
(iv) Guarantees
(v)
Reimbursable
grants
(vi) Grants 40.79
(vii) Results-
based payments
(b) Co- Total amount Currency
financing
37.53 million euro (€)
information
Name of Financial Tenor &
Amount Currency Pricing Seniority
institution instrument grace
BMZ
million euro
(implemented Grant 7.91
(€)
through GIZ)
Grant/In
million euro
MIDAGRI kind and 28.67
(€)
loans83
million euro
SERNANP In kind 0.95
(€)
(c) Total Amount Currency
financing
(c) = (a)+(b) 78.32 million euro (€)
Project Co-finance84:
The following provides an overview of the co-financiers for the proposed project:
(d) Other MIDAGRI will contribute with EUR 28.67 million through grants (EUR 2,411,938), in kind
financing (EUR 16,877,658) and loans (EUR 9,385,386) and SERNANP through in-kind
arrangements contributions with EUR 0.95 million to the implementation of the project.
and
contributions Key government inputs from MIDAGRI will be through a) Public investments projects85
(max. 250 (implemented by AGRORURAL, Sierra Azul, PSI, INIA and SERFOR), b) operational
words, activities (implemented by programmes such as Agroideas) and c) other budget provisions,
approximately comprising individual credit lines to producer organisations (such as Directorate of
0.5 page) Insurance and Promotion of Agricultural Financing (DSFFA)).
Key inputs from SERNANP will be in-kind in the form of staff time contributions in order to
coordinate project interventions in National Protected Areas.
83 Please note that this refers to the DSFAA of MIDAGRI.
84 Co-financing commitment letters are provided in Annex 13, which includes Annex 13a Co-financing letter from MIDAGRI, Annex 13b Co-
financing letter from BMZ and Annex 13c Co-financing letter from SERNANP (Carta N°30-2023-MIDAGRI-DVDAFIR and Letter N°091-
2023-SERNANP-J).
85 Please note that Sierra Azul, INIA and SERFOR contribu8tions are investments and activities.

--- Table 1 on Page 69 ---
FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) Requested |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF funding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (i + ii + iii + iv + |  | 40.79 |  |  |  |  |  |  | million euro (€) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | v + vi + vii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF financial |  | Amount |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  | Pricing |  | 
 | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(i) Senior loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (ii) Subordinated |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(iii) Equity |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(iv) Guarantees |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (v) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Reimbursable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vi) Grants |  | 40.79 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vii) Results- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | based payments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (b) Co- |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  | 
 | financing |  | 37.53 |  |  |  |  |  |  | million euro (€) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | information |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Name of |  |  | Financial |  | Amount |  | Currency |  |  | Tenor & |  | Pricing |  | Seniority | 
 | institution |  |  | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  | grace |  |  |  |  | 
 | BMZ |  | Grant |  |  | 7.91 |  | million euro
(€) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (implemented |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | through GIZ) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
MIDAGRI |  |  | Grant/In
kind and
loans83 |  |  | 28.67 |  | million euro
(€) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
SERNANP |  |  | In kind |  |  | 0.95 |  | million euro
(€) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (c) Total |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 78.32 |  |  |  |  |  |  | million euro (€) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (c) = (a)+(b) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(d) Other
financing
arrangements
and
contributions
(max. 250
words,
approximately
0.5 page) |  |  | Project Co-finance84:
The following provides an overview of the co-financiers for the proposed project:
MIDAGRI will contribute with EUR 28.67 million through grants (EUR 2,411,938), in kind
(EUR 16,877,658) and loans (EUR 9,385,386) and SERNANP through in-kind
contributions with EUR 0.95 million to the implementation of the project.
Key government inputs from MIDAGRI will be through a) Public investments projects85
(implemented by AGRORURAL, Sierra Azul, PSI, INIA and SERFOR), b) operational
activities (implemented by programmes such as Agroideas) and c) other budget provisions,
comprising individual credit lines to producer organisations (such as Directorate of
Insurance and Promotion of Agricultural Financing (DSFFA)).
Key inputs from SERNANP will be in-kind in the form of staff time contributions in order to
coordinate project interventions in National Protected Areas. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 69 ---
(d) Other
financing
arrangements
and
contributions
(max. 250
words,
approximately
0.5 page)

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66
C
BMZ financing: The total BMZ financing for the project amounts in grant to EUR 7.91
million. EUR 6.26 million will be implemented through GIZ as an Executing Entity in Peru.
GIZ (Executing Entity) will finance the implementation of activity 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3, 1.2.1,
1.2.2, 2.1.1, 3.1.1, 3.1.2; EUR 1.5 million will be forwarded to Profonanpe for the Puna
Facility and EUR 150.000 to Instituto de Montaña.
Other financing (e.g., leveraged private finance):
The project will mobilize approx. EUR 6 million from international donors.
Through sub-activity 2.1.1.2 the project will support in developing and implementing of an
innovative strategy to mobilize resources from the private sector and different donors to
support Profonanpe in ensuring the sustainability of the Puna Facility. In this regard, the
Government of Canada has already expressed their interest in contributing to the project
with approx. EUR 6 million. Of particular relevance, they expressed their interest in
financing gender and monitoring related activities and in contributing to the Puna Facility in
order to continue financing Local initiatives.
C.2. Financing by component
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount86 Financial Name of
million euro Options Instrument Options Instrument Institutions
(€)
1.1
Investments
for EbA
measures and
Climate
Grants/In
Resilient BMZ
52.68 21.65 Grants 31.03 kind and
Value Chains MIDAGRI
loans87
are
implemented
at the local
1. Resilient landscape
ecosystems level
and 1.2 The use of
communities EbA
knowledge is
recovered and
disseminated,
and local Grants/In BMZ
6.27 4.77 Grants 1.50
monitoring kind SERNANP
committees
and
observation
systems are
implemented
2.1 Financial
2. Public and mechanisms
private for the
investment for implementatio 7.17 6.05 Grants 1.12 Grants BMZ
EbA aligned n of EbA
and leveraged measures and
improvement
86 Please note that the calculations of the contribution of the Government of Peru (MIDAGRI and SERNANP) where done in Soles and were
converted to Euros using the SBS exchange rate dated April 2023 namely EUR 1= 4.1 Sol.
87 Please note that this refers to the Irrigation Subsector Program of MIDAGRI

--- Table 1 on Page 70 ---
 |  |  | BMZ financing: The total BMZ financing for the project amounts in grant to EUR 7.91
million. EUR 6.26 million will be implemented through GIZ as an Executing Entity in Peru.
GIZ (Executing Entity) will finance the implementation of activity 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3, 1.2.1,
1.2.2, 2.1.1, 3.1.1, 3.1.2; EUR 1.5 million will be forwarded to Profonanpe for the Puna
Facility and EUR 150.000 to Instituto de Montaña.
Other financing (e.g., leveraged private finance):
The project will mobilize approx. EUR 6 million from international donors.
Through sub-activity 2.1.1.2 the project will support in developing and implementing of an
innovative strategy to mobilize resources from the private sector and different donors to
support Profonanpe in ensuring the sustainability of the Puna Facility. In this regard, the
Government of Canada has already expressed their interest in contributing to the project
with approx. EUR 6 million. Of particular relevance, they expressed their interest in
financing gender and monitoring related activities and in contributing to the Puna Facility in
order to continue financing Local initiatives. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
C.2. Financing by component |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component | Output |  |  | Indicative |  |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | cost |  | Amount
Options | Amount | Financial
Instrument | Financial |  | Amount86
Options | Amount86 | Financial
Instrument | Name of
Institutions | Name of |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | million euro |  |  | Options |  | Instrument |  |  | Options |  |  | Institutions |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (€) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1. Resilient
ecosystems
and
communities | 1.1
Investments
for EbA
measures and
Climate
Resilient
Value Chains
are
implemented
at the local
landscape
level |  | 52.68 |  |  | 21.65 |  | Grants |  |  | 31.03 |  | Grants/In
kind and
loans87 | BMZ
MIDAGRI |  |  | 
 |  | 1.2 The use of
EbA
knowledge is
recovered and
disseminated,
and local
monitoring
committees
and
observation
systems are
implemented |  | 6.27 |  |  | 4.77 |  | Grants |  |  | 1.50 |  | Grants/In
kind | BMZ
SERNANP |  |  | 
 | 2. Public and
private
investment for
EbA aligned
and leveraged | 2.1 Financial
mechanisms
for the
implementatio
n of EbA
measures and
improvement |  | 7.17 |  |  | 6.05 |  | Grants |  |  | 1.12 |  | Grants | BMZ |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 70 ---
Financial
Instrument

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67
C
of climate
resilient
livelihoods in
the Puna
ecosystem are
established
3.1 Multilevel
landscape
governance is
3. Institutional improved
capacity through
strengthened to strengthening BMZ
5.57 3.93 Grants 1.64 Grants
integrate EbA of national SERNANP
into territorial capacity,
planning regulatory
frameworks
and M&E
systems
(b) M&E 2.00 1.64 0.36
(c) Contingencies 800,000 800,000 0
(d) PMC 3.81 1.93 1. 88
Indicative total cost (USD)88
85.26 44.40 40.86
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building
Yes ☒ No ☐
activities?
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology
Yes ☒ No ☐
development/transfer?
216. In collaboration with the local communities, MSEs, community enterprises, cooperatives, producers’
associations, producers’ organizations and local CSOs implementing Local initiatives, Instituto the
Montaña89, will enhance the capabilities of stakeholders, promote the alignment of approaches, and
facilitate the formation of community monitoring committees. The project will empower these committees
by providing training, facilitating dialogue, and employing other capacity-building methods. This will enable
the exchange of knowledge and collaborative efforts to better comprehend the connections between
traditional practices, Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA), and climate resilience.
217. Income-generating alternatives will result from Climate Resilient Value Chains, where technological
packages for climate resilience, increased productivity and market development (e.g., qochas, grassland
conservation and restoration, infiltration ditches, organic fertilizer production, livestock management,
alpaca fiber production, and agroecological products) will also be financed.
88 Please note that the used exchange rate is based on the European Commission’s official monthly accounting rates for the euro
(Exchange rate (InforEuro) (europa.eu)) for the month of September 2023 namely 1 EUR = 1.0886 USD.
89 See role in section B 2.4 below

--- Table 1 on Page 71 ---
 |  | of climate
resilient
livelihoods in
the Puna
ecosystem are
established |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 3. Institutional
capacity
strengthened to
integrate EbA
into territorial
planning | 3.1 Multilevel
landscape
governance is
improved
through
strengthening
of national
capacity,
regulatory
frameworks
and M&E
systems | 5.57 | 3.93 | Grants |  |  | 1.64 | Grants | BMZ
SERNANP | 
 | (b) M&E |  | 2.00 | 1.64 |  |  |  | 0.36 |  |  | 
 | (c) Contingencies |  | 800,000 | 800,000 |  |  |  | 0 |  |  | 
 | (d) PMC |  | 3.81 | 1.93 |  |  |  | 1. 88 |  |  | 
 | Indicative total cost (USD)88 |  | 85.26 | 44.40 |  |  |  | 40.86 |  |  | 
 | C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building |  |  |  |  |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ |  |  |  | 
 | activities? |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology |  |  |  |  |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ |  |  |  | 
 | development/transfer? |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
216. In collaboration with the local communities, MSEs, community enterprises, cooperatives, producers’
associations, producers’ organizations and local CSOs implementing Local initiatives, Instituto the
Montaña89, will enhance the capabilities of stakeholders, promote the alignment of approaches, and
facilitate the formation of community monitoring committees. The project will empower these committees
by providing training, facilitating dialogue, and employing other capacity-building methods. This will enable
the exchange of knowledge and collaborative efforts to better comprehend the connections between
traditional practices, Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA), and climate resilience.
217. Income-generating alternatives will result from Climate Resilient Value Chains, where technological
packages for climate resilience, increased productivity and market development (e.g., qochas, grassland
conservation and restoration, infiltration ditches, organic fertilizer production, livestock management,
alpaca fiber production, and agroecological products) will also be financed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68
D
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
D.1.1 Impact Potential - Adaptation
218. Contribution to increased climate-resilient sustainable development: The project has an
integrated vision of promoting EbA at landscape level through: i) On-the-ground activities in Component
1 that will ensure the long-term provision of essential puna ecosystem services, such as water provision
and regulation for upstream, middle stream, and downstream communities, fodder production for South
American camelid husbandry and soil formation and retention for agricultural practices despite increased
risks of drought and reduced water availability due to climate change; ii) the establishment of a financial
facility with technical assistance in Component 2 complementing the funding from and increase the access
to existing public MIDAGRI programs executed under Component 1, while providing a framework for
scaling up the deployment of EbA interventions also after the project has ended (exit strategy); and iii)
Integration of EbA into territorial planning and consensus-building processes through participatory dialogue
platforms adjusted to local customs and gender needs that will promote the coordination of on-the-ground
activities of the different stakeholders intervening in various ecological floors of the watershed and
benefiting a range of interest groups (regional governments, municipalities, local communities, producers’
associations, cooperatives, MSEs, community enterprises and producers’ organizations).
219. In addition, the hydrological modelling carried out for this proposal (see Annex 2g) allowed estimating
the potential impacts of this project resulting from the implementation of EbA interventions. In general, the
analysis concludes that the EbA interventions results in improving the water availability in the district areas,
for agriculture and livestock as well as for the ecosystems that extract water from the surface layers of the
soil (more details on the results can be found in Annex 2g).
D.1.2 Ecosystems improved
220. The project is estimated to conserve and restore 23,914 hectares of Puna ecosystems that High Andean
livelihoods depend upon. The project will promote direct interventions to maximize the landscape and
ecosystem connectivity within and between watersheds to ensure the highest impact in terms of recovery of
ecosystem services as an adaptation and mitigation strategy. The local impact will be monitored by
community committees and at the national scale via a long-term monitoring and evaluation framework, as
part of the support provided to strengthen intra- and intersectoral collaboration among MIDAGRI and MINAM
programs and their contribution to the NDCs and other climate-related strategies. Both local and national
results will be integrated into existing monitoring systems in the ministries which are being hosted by
MIDAGRI’s programs and SERNANP.
D.1.3 Direct and Indirect Beneficiaries
221. The total estimated number of project direct beneficiaries are 60,715 people (of which 30,088 are
women) from 91 districts, 69% of the total beneficiaries have Quechua as their mother tongue and 31% have
Spanish. Considering the numbers, the proposed GCF project is targeting Quechua Indigenous Peoples and
Local communities, which are a significant part of the most vulnerable population within the SHAP region,
which face significant climate-related challenges. In addition, this population are part of the most
economically disadvantaged in the country with 73 percent of SHAP having a low or very low Human
Development Index (HDI), aligning with the broader trend in Peru where higher altitudes correlate with lower
HDI levels (PNUD, 2019)
222. Following the GCF IRMF the number of direct beneficiaries were calculated including individuals who
will receive i) targeted support from the GCF-funded interventions and ii) a measurable adaptation benefit
from a GCF-funded intervention. The estimation of these direct beneficiaries’ accounts therefore for:
a) Individuals that implement Local initiatives that will be financed and supported by the Puna Facility,
multiplied by the average number of members of the groups/legal entities supported and the average
members per household in the region., representing 31,750 people.
b) Individuals that will be supported by MIDAGRIs co-finance programs, multiplied by the average members
number per household in the region., representing 26,315 people.
c) Individuals that will receive technical assistance from the GCF- funded intervention (e.g., trainings,
support to develop site-specific climate diagnostics and preparation of participatory intervention plans)
including.
223. The project will also indirectly benefit 2,011,856 people (of which 1,005,928 are women) this includes
those that do not receive targeted support from the GCF-funded intervention but will benefit from water

--- Table 1 on Page 72 ---
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA |  | 
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 |  | 
 | D.1.1 Impact Potential - Adaptation | 
 | 218. Contribution to increased climate-resilient sustainable development: The project has an | 
 | integrated vision of promoting EbA at landscape level through: i) On-the-ground activities in Component | 
 | 1 that will ensure the long-term provision of essential puna ecosystem services, such as water provision | 
 | and regulation for upstream, middle stream, and downstream communities, fodder production for South | 
 | American camelid husbandry and soil formation and retention for agricultural practices despite increased | 
 | risks of drought and reduced water availability due to climate change; ii) the establishment of a financial | 
 | facility with technical assistance in Component 2 complementing the funding from and increase the access | 
 | to existing public MIDAGRI programs executed under Component 1, while providing a framework for | 
 | scaling up the deployment of EbA interventions also after the project has ended (exit strategy); and iii) | 
 | Integration of EbA into territorial planning and consensus-building processes through participatory dialogue | 
 | platforms adjusted to local customs and gender needs that will promote the coordination of on-the-ground | 
 | activities of the different stakeholders intervening in various ecological floors of the watershed and | 
 | benefiting a range of interest groups (regional governments, municipalities, local communities, producers’ | 
 | associations, cooperatives, MSEs, community enterprises and producers’ organizations). | 
 | 219. In addition, the hydrological modelling carried out for this proposal (see Annex 2g) allowed estimating | 
 | the potential impacts of this project resulting from the implementation of EbA interventions. In general, the | 
 | analysis concludes that the EbA interventions results in improving the water availability in the district areas, | 
 | for agriculture and livestock as well as for the ecosystems that extract water from the surface layers of the | 
 | soil (more details on the results can be found in Annex 2g). | 
 |  | 
 | D.1.2 Ecosystems improved | 
 | 220. The project is estimated to conserve and restore 23,914 hectares of Puna ecosystems that High Andean | 
 | livelihoods depend upon. The project will promote direct interventions to maximize the landscape and | 
 | ecosystem connectivity within and between watersheds to ensure the highest impact in terms of recovery of | 
 | ecosystem services as an adaptation and mitigation strategy. The local impact will be monitored by | 
 | community committees and at the national scale via a long-term monitoring and evaluation framework, as | 
 | part of the support provided to strengthen intra- and intersectoral collaboration among MIDAGRI and MINAM | 
 | programs and their contribution to the NDCs and other climate-related strategies. Both local and national | 
 | results will be integrated into existing monitoring systems in the ministries which are being hosted by | 
 | MIDAGRI’s programs and SERNANP. | 
 |  | 
 | D.1.3 Direct and Indirect Beneficiaries | 
 | 221. The total estimated number of project direct beneficiaries are 60,715 people (of which 30,088 are | 
 | women) from 91 districts, 69% of the total beneficiaries have Quechua as their mother tongue and 31% have | 
 | Spanish. Considering the numbers, the proposed GCF project is targeting Quechua Indigenous Peoples and | 
 | Local communities, which are a significant part of the most vulnerable population within the SHAP region, | 
 | which face significant climate-related challenges. In addition, this population are part of the most | 
 | economically disadvantaged in the country with 73 percent of SHAP having a low or very low Human | 
 | Development Index (HDI), aligning with the broader trend in Peru where higher altitudes correlate with lower | 
 | HDI levels (PNUD, 2019) | 
 | 222. Following the GCF IRMF the number of direct beneficiaries were calculated including individuals who | 
 | will receive i) targeted support from the GCF-funded interventions and ii) a measurable adaptation benefit | 
 | from a GCF-funded intervention. The estimation of these direct beneficiaries’ accounts therefore for: | 
 | a) Individuals that implement Local initiatives that will be financed and supported by the Puna Facility, | 
 | multiplied by the average number of members of the groups/legal entities supported and the average | 
 | members per household in the region., representing 31,750 people. | 
 | b) Individuals that will be supported by MIDAGRIs co-finance programs, multiplied by the average members | 
 | number per household in the region., representing 26,315 people. | 
 | c) Individuals that will receive technical assistance from the GCF- funded intervention (e.g., trainings, | 
 | support to develop site-specific climate diagnostics and preparation of participatory intervention plans) | 
 | including. | 
 | 223. The project will also indirectly benefit 2,011,856 people (of which 1,005,928 are women) this includes | 
 | those that do not receive targeted support from the GCF-funded intervention but will benefit from water | 

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69
D
generated by the improvement of ecosystems that contribute to water regulation in the upper and lower parts
of watersheds which involve main cities such as Cusco, Arequipa, Abancay and Cañete.
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
224. Changing the paradigm of highly threatened Puna ecosystems requires a transformation of behaviours
and practices in the agriculture and husbandry sector. The project aims at shifting the reality of farming
communities in the SHAP from a state characterized by climate vulnerability, lack of opportunities, and
ecosystem degradation to a state characterized by conservation of the natural capital, climate resilience and
improved economic productivity. This proposal incorporates the transformational pathway of promoting
resilient agriculture and husbandry practices in High Andean communities through the implementation of
EbA solutions with an mitigation co-benefit in priority landscapes to conserve essential ecosystem services
sustaining the livelihoods of neighbouring farming communities and benefiting thousands of people who
rely on the water generated by the improvement of ecosystems that contribute to water regulation in the
basins. The combined results of improved farming and husbandry practices - by promoting and incorporating
EbA measures and climate-resilient approaches in their productive activities, technical assistance, business
development, access to finance and improved planning and coordination - will increase the overall resilience
of High Andean communities while improving water regulation and maintaining important stocks for global
carbon regulation.
D.2.1 Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national
climate change adaptation strategies and plans
225. Climate innovation will be catalysed through improved ecosystem management and target Climate
Resilient Value Chains (e.g., South American camelid fiber and Andean grains, among others
complementary) supported by public and private finance. An inter-sectorial transformational change is
supported. So far, conservation and production activities are carried out in isolation by SERNANP and
MIDAGRI although many times they are in the same landscape. The project, hence, seeks to enhance
coordination of public sector natural resources management in the territory. Moreover, the project aims to
transform vulnerable communities’ businesses and their usual production system into more sustainable and
climate-resilient production systems. Locally generated and targeted innovation for market transformation
through MIDAGRI’s funds from Agroideas to strengthen producers’ organizations and their business ideas,
will be complemented by the Puna Facility in providing funding for EbA measures on a repayable basis and
technical support to develop complementary interventions to the program in order to create climate-resilient
livelihoods. It is important to highlight the strengthening of government institutions, will also support MIDAGRI
in meeting its productivity and competitiveness commitments while complying with Peru's NDC targets.
D.2.2 Potential for upscaling and replication
226. The main approach to achieve upscaling and replication is using mobilization of investments at scale.
The project aims at aligning and upscaling public and private investment for EbA and Climate Resilient Value
Chains under Components 1 and 2. Specially, the Puna Facility will mobilize EbA finance at scale, aiming at
putting in place the enabling conditions for additional long-term financing under Component 2 and 3.
Sustained investment in the future will be enabled by laying the groundwork for valuing ecosystem services
of the Puna ecosystems that will add to the conducive transformational environment. The technical support
provided by the project will increase the access to Agroideas and Sierra Azul public programs that promote
nature-based solutions’ investment projects, business development, product transformation, and value
addition in target value chains (i.e., alpaca and vicuña fibers, potato, Andean grains). The project will also
offer the option of leveraging public funds from MERESE schemes and subnational governments to the areas
where investments are needed to conserve ecosystem services. The capacity building provided to relevant
stakeholders (Profonanpe, MIDAGRI, microfinance institutions) will enhance the potential for upscaling and
replication.
D.2.3 Potential of knowledge and learning
227. Knowledge and learning will be promoted, enhanced and scaled through several alliance at different
levels of intervention. These alliance will support the experiences replication of the project approach in other
High Andean communities. Therefore, at local level, transfer of knowledge between target areas, integration
of local experiences into larger planning processes, and the improved coordination between actors on the
ground will set the stage to expand the EbA approach to communities with similar environmental and
development characteristics. The project will focus on strengthening multisectoral institutional capacities and

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
generated by the improvement of ecosystems that contribute to water regulation in the upper and lower parts
of watersheds which involve main cities such as Cusco, Arequipa, Abancay and Cañete. |  | 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 224. Changing the paradigm of highly threatened Puna ecosystems requires a transformation of behaviours | 
 | and practices in the agriculture and husbandry sector. The project aims at shifting the reality of farming | 
 | communities in the SHAP from a state characterized by climate vulnerability, lack of opportunities, and | 
 | ecosystem degradation to a state characterized by conservation of the natural capital, climate resilience and | 
 | improved economic productivity. This proposal incorporates the transformational pathway of promoting | 
 | resilient agriculture and husbandry practices in High Andean communities through the implementation of | 
 | EbA solutions with an mitigation co-benefit in priority landscapes to conserve essential ecosystem services | 
 | sustaining the livelihoods of neighbouring farming communities and benefiting thousands of people who | 
 | rely on the water generated by the improvement of ecosystems that contribute to water regulation in the | 
 | basins. The combined results of improved farming and husbandry practices - by promoting and incorporating | 
 | EbA measures and climate-resilient approaches in their productive activities, technical assistance, business | 
 | development, access to finance and improved planning and coordination - will increase the overall resilience | 
 | of High Andean communities while improving water regulation and maintaining important stocks for global | 
 | carbon regulation. | 
 | D.2.1 Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national | 
 | climate change adaptation strategies and plans | 
 | 225. Climate innovation will be catalysed through improved ecosystem management and target Climate | 
 | Resilient Value Chains (e.g., South American camelid fiber and Andean grains, among others | 
 | complementary) supported by public and private finance. An inter-sectorial transformational change is | 
 | supported. So far, conservation and production activities are carried out in isolation by SERNANP and | 
 | MIDAGRI although many times they are in the same landscape. The project, hence, seeks to enhance | 
 | coordination of public sector natural resources management in the territory. Moreover, the project aims to | 
 | transform vulnerable communities’ businesses and their usual production system into more sustainable and | 
 | climate-resilient production systems. Locally generated and targeted innovation for market transformation | 
 | through MIDAGRI’s funds from Agroideas to strengthen producers’ organizations and their business ideas, | 
 | will be complemented by the Puna Facility in providing funding for EbA measures on a repayable basis and | 
 | technical support to develop complementary interventions to the program in order to create climate-resilient | 
 | livelihoods. It is important to highlight the strengthening of government institutions, will also support MIDAGRI | 
 | in meeting its productivity and competitiveness commitments while complying with Peru's NDC targets. | 
 | D.2.2 Potential for upscaling and replication | 
 | 226. The main approach to achieve upscaling and replication is using mobilization of investments at scale. | 
 | The project aims at aligning and upscaling public and private investment for EbA and Climate Resilient Value | 
 | Chains under Components 1 and 2. Specially, the Puna Facility will mobilize EbA finance at scale, aiming at | 
 | putting in place the enabling conditions for additional long-term financing under Component 2 and 3. | 
 | Sustained investment in the future will be enabled by laying the groundwork for valuing ecosystem services | 
 | of the Puna ecosystems that will add to the conducive transformational environment. The technical support | 
 | provided by the project will increase the access to Agroideas and Sierra Azul public programs that promote | 
 | nature-based solutions’ investment projects, business development, product transformation, and value | 
 | addition in target value chains (i.e., alpaca and vicuña fibers, potato, Andean grains). The project will also | 
 | offer the option of leveraging public funds from MERESE schemes and subnational governments to the areas | 
 | where investments are needed to conserve ecosystem services. The capacity building provided to relevant | 
 | stakeholders (Profonanpe, MIDAGRI, microfinance institutions) will enhance the potential for upscaling and | 
 | replication. | 
 |  | 
 | D.2.3 Potential of knowledge and learning | 
 | 227. Knowledge and learning will be promoted, enhanced and scaled through several alliance at different | 
 | levels of intervention. These alliance will support the experiences replication of the project approach in other | 
 | High Andean communities. Therefore, at local level, transfer of knowledge between target areas, integration | 
 | of local experiences into larger planning processes, and the improved coordination between actors on the | 
 | ground will set the stage to expand the EbA approach to communities with similar environmental and | 
 | development characteristics. The project will focus on strengthening multisectoral institutional capacities and | 

--- Table 2 on Page 73 ---
generated by the improvement of ecosystems that contribute to water regulation in the upper and lower parts
of watersheds which involve main cities such as Cusco, Arequipa, Abancay and Cañete.

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70
D
regulatory frameworks. MIDAGRI and MINAM personnel, in charge of national programs and rural extension
services, will be trained to include sustainable management and to promote traditional practices.
D.2.2 Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment
228. The main approach towards the creation of an enabling environment relies on transformational planning
and programming to scale up EbA. This will be achieved by integrating community-responsive technologies,
ancestral practices, and landscape interventions (EbA) into local, regional and national planning processes
to enhance the provision of key ecosystem services for the local population and communities downstream.
Communities and local leadership, including women and youth, will be strengthened. An increased
collaboration between public and private sectors will contribute to transformational planning and
programming and support the construction of the desired enabling environment. The project will support
MINAM in its efforts to establish a methodology for calculating carbon on the Puna ecosystem and to lay the
groundwork for carbon accounting and credit systems for future trading.
D.2.4 Contribution of the regulatory framework and policies
229. The project will facilitate the coordination within MIDAGRI and with other key sectors and actors in the
territory. In this context, the project activities will support the mainstreaming of EbA and gender
considerations within MIDAGRI’S and MINAM’s daily operations. Improved interinstitutional coordination and
collaboration will be sought within MIDAGRI and SERNANP, to ensure synergies in the same landscape.
The project will contribute to the improvement of regulatory instruments to enhance EbA and climate resilient
approach in the agricultural sector and the territory, and will strengthening of the national long-term
monitoring and evaluation systems of the different government entities in the high Andean ecosystems and
populations, in order to have monitoring protocols and measurement methodologies consistent with the
impacts of EbA interventions (including carbon sequestration, climate information and its impacts on water
and agriculture). It will also support monitoring systems that provide information on EbA interventions on
water and agriculture for decision-making on adaptation responses, such as those developed by MIDAGRI,
SENAMHI, ANA, INAIGEM and SUNASS.
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
D.3.1 Environmental co-benefits
230. The project will have two environmental co-benefits. First co-benefit is the maintenance of ecosystem
services in the area benefited through the conservation, restauration or sustainable management of
ecosystems. The main ecosystems in the high Andes are peatlands, wetlands and grasslands, which provide
a range of ecosystem services that benefit populations throughout the watershed (see Annex 2a, section
13.3 Environmental co-benefits for more details). The Puna ecosystems services include: i) Provisioning
services which consist of fiber, fuel, food and fresh water; ii) Regulation services that include climate
regulation, water regulation, water purification and erosion protection, resulting in the regulation of
greenhouse gases, climatic processes, water storage, groundwater recharge and discharge, retention,
recovery and removal of excess nutrients and pollutants and peat blanket protecting the underlying soils from
erosion; iii) Supporting services provided by these ecosystems include biodiversity, soil formation, nutrient
recycling and carbon storage; iv) Cultural services present in the SHAP are educational, recreational/,
landscape beauty, spiritual and inspirational. The project will seek to ensure the long-term provision of these
services through the three project components: i) implementation of EbA alternatives and training on
sustainable business options and monitoring of ecosystem conditions; ii) increased access to technical
assistance and finance, to invest in EbA measures, and iii) mainstreaming of the EbA approach into extension
programs and improved participatory planning at the local and basin level. It is expected that 23,914 ha of
Puna ecosystems will be conserved, restored or sustainably managed.
231. As second co-benefit, the project recognizes the reduction of GHG emissions, in this context, GHG
emissions will be avoided through the conservation, restoration and sustainable management of ecosystems.
The proposed intervention measures aim to prevent emissions from existing carbon sources, inappropriate
management practices in livestock and crops, and contribute to carbon sequestration in soil and vegetation,
through grassland management, forest restoration, Integrated soil fertility management, agroforestry, and
wetland restauration and conservation. GHG reductions are calculated using the methodology presented in
the IPCC Good Practice Guidance for LULUCF, applied though the tool EX-ACT (version 9.4) developed by
FAO. The overall mitigation impact as a co-benefit from the project is a reduction of 407,657 tCO2e in the
15 years analysed, which include five years of implementation phase and ten years of capitalization phase.

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
 | regulatory frameworks. MIDAGRI and MINAM personnel, in charge of national programs and rural extension | 
 | services, will be trained to include sustainable management and to promote traditional practices. | 
 | D.2.2 Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment | 
 | 228. The main approach towards the creation of an enabling environment relies on transformational planning | 
 | and programming to scale up EbA. This will be achieved by integrating community-responsive technologies, | 
 | ancestral practices, and landscape interventions (EbA) into local, regional and national planning processes | 
 | to enhance the provision of key ecosystem services for the local population and communities downstream. | 
 | Communities and local leadership, including women and youth, will be strengthened. An increased | 
 | collaboration between public and private sectors will contribute to transformational planning and | 
 | programming and support the construction of the desired enabling environment. The project will support | 
 | MINAM in its efforts to establish a methodology for calculating carbon on the Puna ecosystem and to lay the | 
 | groundwork for carbon accounting and credit systems for future trading. | 
 |  | 
 | D.2.4 Contribution of the regulatory framework and policies | 
 | 229. The project will facilitate the coordination within MIDAGRI and with other key sectors and actors in the | 
 | territory. In this context, the project activities will support the mainstreaming of EbA and gender | 
 | considerations within MIDAGRI’S and MINAM’s daily operations. Improved interinstitutional coordination and | 
 | collaboration will be sought within MIDAGRI and SERNANP, to ensure synergies in the same landscape. | 
 | The project will contribute to the improvement of regulatory instruments to enhance EbA and climate resilient | 
 | approach in the agricultural sector and the territory, and will strengthening of the national long-term | 
 | monitoring and evaluation systems of the different government entities in the high Andean ecosystems and | 
 | populations, in order to have monitoring protocols and measurement methodologies consistent with the | 
 | impacts of EbA interventions (including carbon sequestration, climate information and its impacts on water | 
 | and agriculture). It will also support monitoring systems that provide information on EbA interventions on | 
 | water and agriculture for decision-making on adaptation responses, such as those developed by MIDAGRI, | 
 | SENAMHI, ANA, INAIGEM and SUNASS. | 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | D.3.1 Environmental co-benefits | 
 | 230. The project will have two environmental co-benefits. First co-benefit is the maintenance of ecosystem | 
 | services in the area benefited through the conservation, restauration or sustainable management of | 
 | ecosystems. The main ecosystems in the high Andes are peatlands, wetlands and grasslands, which provide | 
 | a range of ecosystem services that benefit populations throughout the watershed (see Annex 2a, section | 
 | 13.3 Environmental co-benefits for more details). The Puna ecosystems services include: i) Provisioning | 
 | services which consist of fiber, fuel, food and fresh water; ii) Regulation services that include climate | 
 | regulation, water regulation, water purification and erosion protection, resulting in the regulation of | 
 | greenhouse gases, climatic processes, water storage, groundwater recharge and discharge, retention, | 
 | recovery and removal of excess nutrients and pollutants and peat blanket protecting the underlying soils from | 
 | erosion; iii) Supporting services provided by these ecosystems include biodiversity, soil formation, nutrient | 
 | recycling and carbon storage; iv) Cultural services present in the SHAP are educational, recreational/, | 
 | landscape beauty, spiritual and inspirational. The project will seek to ensure the long-term provision of these | 
 | services through the three project components: i) implementation of EbA alternatives and training on | 
 | sustainable business options and monitoring of ecosystem conditions; ii) increased access to technical | 
 | assistance and finance, to invest in EbA measures, and iii) mainstreaming of the EbA approach into extension | 
 | programs and improved participatory planning at the local and basin level. It is expected that 23,914 ha of | 
 | Puna ecosystems will be conserved, restored or sustainably managed. | 
 | 231. As second co-benefit, the project recognizes the reduction of GHG emissions, in this context, GHG | 
 | emissions will be avoided through the conservation, restoration and sustainable management of ecosystems. | 
 | The proposed intervention measures aim to prevent emissions from existing carbon sources, inappropriate | 
 | management practices in livestock and crops, and contribute to carbon sequestration in soil and vegetation, | 
 | through grassland management, forest restoration, Integrated soil fertility management, agroforestry, and | 
 | wetland restauration and conservation. GHG reductions are calculated using the methodology presented in | 
 | the IPCC Good Practice Guidance for LULUCF, applied though the tool EX-ACT (version 9.4) developed by | 
 | FAO. The overall mitigation impact as a co-benefit from the project is a reduction of 407,657 tCO2e in the | 
 | 15 years analysed, which include five years of implementation phase and ten years of capitalization phase. | 

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71
D
It is measured against a scenario without project that would have increased by 93,905 tCO2e the GHG
emissions in the areas of intervention. These numbers correspond to the impact during the 15 years
considered for analysis in a total area of intervention of 23,914 ha. The details on the calculations can be
found in the supplementary document GHG calculation sheet (please see Annex 22b for the calculation of
the GHG emissions reduction as a co-benefit from the project and Annex 2a, chapter 13 for further discussion
on the climate change mitigation co-benefits).
232. The environmental co-benefits will contribute to the fulfilment of the following Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG): SDG 6 Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all (Target
6.6); SDG 13 Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts (Target 13.1 and 13.2) and SDG
15 Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests,
combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss (Target 15.1 and
15.4).
D.3.2 Social co-benefits including health co-benefits
233. The project will have as a social co-benefit the awareness raising and capacity building of local
stakeholders. Awareness raising and capacity building in EbA and gender approach and CRVC are
mainstreamed into all components to strengthen capacities to integrate climate change adaptation into
planning and actions. In component 1, activities focus on the beneficiaries - they will be trained and supported
through the activities 1.1.1 and 1.1.3. Ancient knowledge and local expertise will be integrated through the
activities 1.2.1. Local reflecting capacities, community monitoring and reporting will be trained and supported
in activity 1.2.2. Institutional capacities will be reinforced through Component 3 and Component 2. In activities
2.1.2 EPS officials will receive technical assistance and training and in activity 2.1.3. Microfinance company
officers also will be trained. Within Component 3, activity 3.1.1 public officials will be trained and in activity
3.1.2 support will be provided to strengthen monitoring systems so that lessons learned can be incorporated
into decision-making processes.
234. The social co-benefits will contribute to the fulfilment of the following Sustainable Development Goals
(SDG): SDG 13 Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts (Target 13.3).
D.3.3 Economic co-benefits
235. The activities of the project will support the achievement of the co-benefit 3 “Improvement of local
economy through better economic opportunities and poverty reduction”. The indicator designed to measure
this co-benefit will be “Number of producers, of whom 50% are women have confirmed an improvement in
their income from Climate Resilient Value Chains”. This co-benefit will be done through implementation of
the following activities: 1) Activity 1.1.2 will contribute to reduce climate risks supporting the implementation
of Local initiatives involving EbA and climate-resilient value chains, helping to maximise economic
sustainable opportunities; 2) Activity 1.1.3 will give technical assistance for implementation and promote
market access for Local initiatives and integration of climate change adaptation skills into their livelihoods
and 3) Activity 2.2.3 will contribute to reduce the barriers to finance for EbA and CRVC.
236. The economic co-benefits will contribute to the fulfilment of the following Sustainable Development Goals
(SDG): SDG 1 End poverty in all its forms everywhere (Target 1.5) and SDG 2 End hunger, achieve food
security and improve nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture (Target 2.3), SDG 10 Reduce Inequality
within and among countries (Target 10.1) and SDG 5 Achieve gender equality and empower all women and
girls (Target 5.5).
D.3.4 Gender-sensitive development co-benefit
237. The mainstreaming of gender approach within all the project activities will promote gender equality and
enhance living conditions and economic opportunities of Andean women. This is achieved through
associative means, promoting Local initiatives (including EbA measures and CRVC) with a gender-sensitive
approach, integrating gender issues in platforms of knowledge exchange for ancestral practices and
increasing women participation in watershed dialogue decision-making platforms. For this purpose, the
project includes a gender action plan with specific activities and indicators that will measure the application
of gender approach in a cross-cutting manner. Co-benefit 5 “Gender responsive approaches mainstreamed
in EbA and CRVC measures” will be measured trough the indicator “Number of innovative Local initiatives
(including EbA and CRVC) with a gender-sensitive approach implemented”.
238. The impact of designing local initiatives with a gender-sensitive approach will reflect on the equally
enhancing for men and women of benefits in the local economy. This will be measured in co-benefit 3

--- Table 1 on Page 75 ---
 | It is measured against a scenario without project that would have increased by 93,905 tCO2e the GHG | 
 | emissions in the areas of intervention. These numbers correspond to the impact during the 15 years | 
 | considered for analysis in a total area of intervention of 23,914 ha. The details on the calculations can be | 
 | found in the supplementary document GHG calculation sheet (please see Annex 22b for the calculation of | 
 | the GHG emissions reduction as a co-benefit from the project and Annex 2a, chapter 13 for further discussion | 
 | on the climate change mitigation co-benefits). | 
 | 232. The environmental co-benefits will contribute to the fulfilment of the following Sustainable Development | 
 | Goals (SDG): SDG 6 Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all (Target | 
 | 6.6); SDG 13 Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts (Target 13.1 and 13.2) and SDG | 
 | 15 Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, | 
 | combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss (Target 15.1 and | 
 | 15.4). | 
 |  | 
 | D.3.2 Social co-benefits including health co-benefits | 
 | 233. The project will have as a social co-benefit the awareness raising and capacity building of local | 
 | stakeholders. Awareness raising and capacity building in EbA and gender approach and CRVC are | 
 | mainstreamed into all components to strengthen capacities to integrate climate change adaptation into | 
 | planning and actions. In component 1, activities focus on the beneficiaries - they will be trained and supported | 
 | through the activities 1.1.1 and 1.1.3. Ancient knowledge and local expertise will be integrated through the | 
 | activities 1.2.1. Local reflecting capacities, community monitoring and reporting will be trained and supported | 
 | in activity 1.2.2. Institutional capacities will be reinforced through Component 3 and Component 2. In activities | 
 | 2.1.2 EPS officials will receive technical assistance and training and in activity 2.1.3. Microfinance company | 
 | officers also will be trained. Within Component 3, activity 3.1.1 public officials will be trained and in activity | 
 | 3.1.2 support will be provided to strengthen monitoring systems so that lessons learned can be incorporated | 
 | into decision-making processes. | 
 | 234. The social co-benefits will contribute to the fulfilment of the following Sustainable Development Goals | 
 | (SDG): SDG 13 Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts (Target 13.3). | 
 |  | 
 | D.3.3 Economic co-benefits | 
 | 235. The activities of the project will support the achievement of the co-benefit 3 “Improvement of local | 
 | economy through better economic opportunities and poverty reduction”. The indicator designed to measure | 
 | this co-benefit will be “Number of producers, of whom 50% are women have confirmed an improvement in | 
 | their income from Climate Resilient Value Chains”. This co-benefit will be done through implementation of | 
 | the following activities: 1) Activity 1.1.2 will contribute to reduce climate risks supporting the implementation | 
 | of Local initiatives involving EbA and climate-resilient value chains, helping to maximise economic | 
 | sustainable opportunities; 2) Activity 1.1.3 will give technical assistance for implementation and promote | 
 | market access for Local initiatives and integration of climate change adaptation skills into their livelihoods | 
 | and 3) Activity 2.2.3 will contribute to reduce the barriers to finance for EbA and CRVC. | 
 | 236. The economic co-benefits will contribute to the fulfilment of the following Sustainable Development Goals | 
 | (SDG): SDG 1 End poverty in all its forms everywhere (Target 1.5) and SDG 2 End hunger, achieve food | 
 | security and improve nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture (Target 2.3), SDG 10 Reduce Inequality | 
 | within and among countries (Target 10.1) and SDG 5 Achieve gender equality and empower all women and | 
 | girls (Target 5.5). | 
 | D.3.4 Gender-sensitive development co-benefit | 
 | 237. The mainstreaming of gender approach within all the project activities will promote gender equality and | 
 | enhance living conditions and economic opportunities of Andean women. This is achieved through | 
 | associative means, promoting Local initiatives (including EbA measures and CRVC) with a gender-sensitive | 
 | approach, integrating gender issues in platforms of knowledge exchange for ancestral practices and | 
 | increasing women participation in watershed dialogue decision-making platforms. For this purpose, the | 
 | project includes a gender action plan with specific activities and indicators that will measure the application | 
 | of gender approach in a cross-cutting manner. Co-benefit 5 “Gender responsive approaches mainstreamed | 
 | in EbA and CRVC measures” will be measured trough the indicator “Number of innovative Local initiatives | 
 | (including EbA and CRVC) with a gender-sensitive approach implemented”. | 
 | 238. The impact of designing local initiatives with a gender-sensitive approach will reflect on the equally | 
 | enhancing for men and women of benefits in the local economy. This will be measured in co-benefit 3 | 

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72
D
“Improvement of local economy through better economic opportunities and poverty reduction”, where the
indicator designed to measure this co-benefit will be “Number of producers, of whom 50% are women have
confirmed an improvement in their income from climate resilient value chains”.
239. The gender co-benefits will contribute to the fulfilment of the following Sustainable Development Goals
(SDG): SDG 5 Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls (Target 5.5).
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
D.4.1 Vulnerability of the SHAP region
240. The vulnerability in the SHAP is increased by a high occurrence of drought due to climate change
combined with unsustainable practices. The vulnerability of High Andean communities is enhanced by
their intrinsic characteristics including i) weak organizational structures, ii) geographic dispersion, iii) use of
wood, dung, and peat as energy sources, iv) poor infrastructure and availability of basic health, education
and sanitation services, resulting in high infant morbidity and malnutrition and v) weak technical capacity in
agriculture and husbandry practices, leading to the deterioration of the Puna ecosystems due to overgrazing,
expansion of the agricultural frontier, poor management of grasslands and degradation of peatlands and
wetlands. The degradation of High Andean grasslands is a widespread phenomenon: more than 40 percent
of grazing areas are in poor conditions and acutely deteriorating. Without improved management, an
additional 20 percent of grazing areas will be degraded by 2070. With dryer conditions, high-mountain
peatlands, which have an important role in water regulation and carbon storage, are more susceptible to
fragmentation in the long term (Bury et al., 2010; Polk et al., 2017; Cooper et al., 2019). Although poorly
understood, rough projections using the scenarios of precipitation decrease in Southern Peru (Urrutia &
Vuille, 2009) suggest strong wetland degradation, locally of about 25 to100 percent (Otto & Gibbons, 2017).
Indeed, in the 23 years between 1987 and 2010, wetland ecosystems in the Huascaran National Park
decreased from 12,402 to 6,821 hectares, a 45 percent net loss (Polk et al., 2017).In certain areas, higher
temperatures partly contribute to land degradation and land-use change by allowing the introduction of sheep
and cattle for extensive grazing in natural grasslands, where previously only lower-impact South American
camelids were roaming. In order to address the main factor of local vulnerability, the project will promote
actions to increase (i) water availability, (ii) resilience to climate change impacts on agricultural activities, (iii)
sustainable land management through a landscape approach, (iv) conservation of Puna ecosystems and (v)
overall resilience of the local population.
D.4.2 Economic and social needs of the beneficiaries
241. Target populations are highly vulnerable to climate change. The main direct beneficiaries of project
interventions are local communities in the SHAP, including producers’ associations, MSEs, cooperatives,
community enterprises and producers’ organizations and subnational governments, which are very
vulnerable to climate change (MINAM, 2016). These local communities are among the most impoverished
in the country (73 percent of the SHAP districts have a low or very low Human Development Index (HDI),
confirming the general rule that in Peru the higher the altitude the lower the HDI (PNUD, 2019). This means
that target local communities lack basic services such as health, potable water, sanitation, education and
financing. The overall consequence is a general lack of capacity to sustainably manage the natural resources
that support their livelihoods, which adds to their climate vulnerability. To increase local income, the project
will mobilize public and private funding towards the high Andean population and their associated ecosystems.
In this context, the project will enhance training of local communities, including producers’ associations,
MSEs, cooperatives, community enterprises and producers’ organizations on business development and
access to finance (including financial literacy) to ensure successful alternative and sustainable income-
generating activities.
242. Lack of access to markets. Many communities in the SHAP face difficulties in accessing markets to
sell their products (Fan & Salas Garcia, 2018). Therefore, developing and strengthening market linkages,
facilitating commercial networks, and supporting local communities, cooperatives, MSEs community
enterprises, producers’ associations and organization will support creating opportunities for economic
growth. In order to address the need of better market access, the project will strengthen local value chains
through sustainable ecosystem management practices, enhanced associative processes, Climate Resilient
Value Chains and improved access to finance and business development (including technical assistance in
marketing, branding, customer outreach and certification of products). Technical support to local

--- Table 1 on Page 76 ---
 | “Improvement of local economy through better economic opportunities and poverty reduction”, where the | 
 | indicator designed to measure this co-benefit will be “Number of producers, of whom 50% are women have | 
 | confirmed an improvement in their income from climate resilient value chains”. | 
 | 239. The gender co-benefits will contribute to the fulfilment of the following Sustainable Development Goals | 
 | (SDG): SDG 5 Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls (Target 5.5). | 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | D.4.1 Vulnerability of the SHAP region | 
 | 240. The vulnerability in the SHAP is increased by a high occurrence of drought due to climate change | 
 | combined with unsustainable practices. The vulnerability of High Andean communities is enhanced by | 
 | their intrinsic characteristics including i) weak organizational structures, ii) geographic dispersion, iii) use of | 
 | wood, dung, and peat as energy sources, iv) poor infrastructure and availability of basic health, education | 
 | and sanitation services, resulting in high infant morbidity and malnutrition and v) weak technical capacity in | 
 | agriculture and husbandry practices, leading to the deterioration of the Puna ecosystems due to overgrazing, | 
 | expansion of the agricultural frontier, poor management of grasslands and degradation of peatlands and | 
 | wetlands. The degradation of High Andean grasslands is a widespread phenomenon: more than 40 percent | 
 | of grazing areas are in poor conditions and acutely deteriorating. Without improved management, an | 
 | additional 20 percent of grazing areas will be degraded by 2070. With dryer conditions, high-mountain | 
 | peatlands, which have an important role in water regulation and carbon storage, are more susceptible to | 
 | fragmentation in the long term (Bury et al., 2010; Polk et al., 2017; Cooper et al., 2019). Although poorly | 
 | understood, rough projections using the scenarios of precipitation decrease in Southern Peru (Urrutia & | 
 | Vuille, 2009) suggest strong wetland degradation, locally of about 25 to100 percent (Otto & Gibbons, 2017). | 
 | Indeed, in the 23 years between 1987 and 2010, wetland ecosystems in the Huascaran National Park | 
 | decreased from 12,402 to 6,821 hectares, a 45 percent net loss (Polk et al., 2017).In certain areas, higher | 
 | temperatures partly contribute to land degradation and land-use change by allowing the introduction of sheep | 
 | and cattle for extensive grazing in natural grasslands, where previously only lower-impact South American | 
 | camelids were roaming. In order to address the main factor of local vulnerability, the project will promote | 
 | actions to increase (i) water availability, (ii) resilience to climate change impacts on agricultural activities, (iii) | 
 | sustainable land management through a landscape approach, (iv) conservation of Puna ecosystems and (v) | 
 | overall resilience of the local population. | 
 | D.4.2 Economic and social needs of the beneficiaries | 
 | 241. Target populations are highly vulnerable to climate change. The main direct beneficiaries of project | 
 | interventions are local communities in the SHAP, including producers’ associations, MSEs, cooperatives, | 
 | community enterprises and producers’ organizations and subnational governments, which are very | 
 | vulnerable to climate change (MINAM, 2016). These local communities are among the most impoverished | 
 | in the country (73 percent of the SHAP districts have a low or very low Human Development Index (HDI), | 
 | confirming the general rule that in Peru the higher the altitude the lower the HDI (PNUD, 2019). This means | 
 | that target local communities lack basic services such as health, potable water, sanitation, education and | 
 | financing. The overall consequence is a general lack of capacity to sustainably manage the natural resources | 
 | that support their livelihoods, which adds to their climate vulnerability. To increase local income, the project | 
 | will mobilize public and private funding towards the high Andean population and their associated ecosystems. | 
 | In this context, the project will enhance training of local communities, including producers’ associations, | 
 | MSEs, cooperatives, community enterprises and producers’ organizations on business development and | 
 | access to finance (including financial literacy) to ensure successful alternative and sustainable income- | 
 | generating activities. | 
 | 242. Lack of access to markets. Many communities in the SHAP face difficulties in accessing markets to | 
 | sell their products (Fan & Salas Garcia, 2018). Therefore, developing and strengthening market linkages, | 
 | facilitating commercial networks, and supporting local communities, cooperatives, MSEs community | 
 | enterprises, producers’ associations and organization will support creating opportunities for economic | 
 | growth. In order to address the need of better market access, the project will strengthen local value chains | 
 | through sustainable ecosystem management practices, enhanced associative processes, Climate Resilient | 
 | Value Chains and improved access to finance and business development (including technical assistance in | 
 | marketing, branding, customer outreach and certification of products). Technical support to local | 

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73
D
communities, cooperatives, MSEs community enterprises, producers’ associations and organization will add
value to their products and facilitate access to national and specialized markets.
D.4.3 Financial needs
243. Limited access to finance. Financial institutions perceive the investment risk of the agricultural sector
as too high and rarely develop products and services adapted to the needs of these vulnerable populations.
When available, access to finance is at exorbitant costs via informal lenders named “drop by drop” or
“express loans” with low or no requirements but daily rates of 10 to 0 percent (Prestamype, 2023). Rural
microfinance institutions in Peru only represent 3.44 percent of the financial system in Peru (Asomif, 2020).
In the SHAP there are some of them that give micro loans to rural people and small-famers i.e. Caja Rural
Los Andes and Caja Rural Inka Sur, furthermore, there are is only one cooperative (Fonde Surco) with some
small green loans for agriculture and livestock. Also, access of SHAP communities to matching public-private
finance mechanism, such as Agroideas, for the development of sustainable agri-business plans is limited.
For instance, according to information provided by Agroideas for the 2016-2020 period, only 4.4 percent of
the total budget executed for approved business plans towards technological adoption have been channelled
to the South American camelid fiber value chain. To address the financial needs, the project will directly
support target communities in accessing funds earmarked by MIDAGRI for EbA activities (Agroideas,
Agrorural and Sierra Azul) by i) developing simplified material out of programs guidelines to facilitate rural
population to access the government support and ii) capacitating producers and local governments to
disseminate the information on the different public programs. The project will on the one hand also provide
technical assistance to MFIs in order for them to expand their offers in green products and on the other hand
capacitate on business development and access to finance (including financial literacy) to local communities,
cooperatives, MSEs community enterprises, producers’ associations and organization that will allow target
populations to access microfinance products and services.
D.4.4 Institutional needs
244. Access to MIDAGRI programs requires improved associativity. Producers’ associations and
communities organizations must become legally established associations to be eligible to access public
programs (Perea, 2014). The project will therefore promote and support associativity (through technical
assistance provided by the Puna Facility for beneficiaries eligible for the Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window)
and strengthen business management for the adoption of climate resilient and environmentally sustainable
agricultural technologies, animal husbandry and breeding management practices. Producers’ associations,
cooperatives, communities and other legally established organizations will be sensitized on the importance
of EbA, trained on proper implementation and maintenance practices and supported in the development of
Climate Resilient Value Chains.
245. Public institutional capacity and coordination strengthened to mainstream EbA. In Component 3
the project focuses on building the capacity of different entities, including MIDAGRI and MINAM to carry out
EbA policy implementation in a more coordinated manner, mainstreaming EbA, gender, intercultural and
intergenerational considerations in all its programs and to streamline its interventions to increase efficiency
and impact towards climate resilience and reduced emissions in the SHAP. Improved coordination with other
ministries and government entities at all levels will support the country in meeting its NDC targets.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
D.5.1 Country prioritizing of the project
246. The project has been prioritized by the NDA to be presented to the GCF and it has the full support of the
Peruvian government, through the Ministry of Economy and Finance which is the NDA, the Ministry of
Agricultural Development and Irrigation which is the project leading ministry and the Ministry of Environment
which leads climate change action in Peru. More recently, during the national message on the Celebration
of the Peruvian Independence Day on the 28th of July 2023, the president mentioned the Resilient Puna
project as part of the relevant programmes that the country is boosting to support climate change adaptation
in the High Andes areas of the country.
D.5.2 Coherence with existing National Climate Strategy, policies and commitments
247. The project will be a major contribution to identified in Peru’s first NDC targets. The project will support
the fulfilment of adaptation 4 NDCs measures related to agriculture and water. NDC measures related to
agriculture include: i) AGRI7 Natural grassland management to secure feed for livestock and reduce
vulnerability to climate change, ii) AGRI11 Management of wild South American camelids (vicuñas)

--- Table 1 on Page 77 ---
 | communities, cooperatives, MSEs community enterprises, producers’ associations and organization will add | 
 | value to their products and facilitate access to national and specialized markets. | 
 | D.4.3 Financial needs | 
 | 243. Limited access to finance. Financial institutions perceive the investment risk of the agricultural sector | 
 | as too high and rarely develop products and services adapted to the needs of these vulnerable populations. | 
 | When available, access to finance is at exorbitant costs via informal lenders named “drop by drop” or | 
 | “express loans” with low or no requirements but daily rates of 10 to 0 percent (Prestamype, 2023). Rural | 
 | microfinance institutions in Peru only represent 3.44 percent of the financial system in Peru (Asomif, 2020). | 
 | In the SHAP there are some of them that give micro loans to rural people and small-famers i.e. Caja Rural | 
 | Los Andes and Caja Rural Inka Sur, furthermore, there are is only one cooperative (Fonde Surco) with some | 
 | small green loans for agriculture and livestock. Also, access of SHAP communities to matching public-private | 
 | finance mechanism, such as Agroideas, for the development of sustainable agri-business plans is limited. | 
 | For instance, according to information provided by Agroideas for the 2016-2020 period, only 4.4 percent of | 
 | the total budget executed for approved business plans towards technological adoption have been channelled | 
 | to the South American camelid fiber value chain. To address the financial needs, the project will directly | 
 | support target communities in accessing funds earmarked by MIDAGRI for EbA activities (Agroideas, | 
 | Agrorural and Sierra Azul) by i) developing simplified material out of programs guidelines to facilitate rural | 
 | population to access the government support and ii) capacitating producers and local governments to | 
 | disseminate the information on the different public programs. The project will on the one hand also provide | 
 | technical assistance to MFIs in order for them to expand their offers in green products and on the other hand | 
 | capacitate on business development and access to finance (including financial literacy) to local communities, | 
 | cooperatives, MSEs community enterprises, producers’ associations and organization that will allow target | 
 | populations to access microfinance products and services. | 
 | D.4.4 Institutional needs | 
 | 244. Access to MIDAGRI programs requires improved associativity. Producers’ associations and | 
 | communities organizations must become legally established associations to be eligible to access public | 
 | programs (Perea, 2014). The project will therefore promote and support associativity (through technical | 
 | assistance provided by the Puna Facility for beneficiaries eligible for the Non-repayable Grant Sub-Window) | 
 | and strengthen business management for the adoption of climate resilient and environmentally sustainable | 
 | agricultural technologies, animal husbandry and breeding management practices. Producers’ associations, | 
 | cooperatives, communities and other legally established organizations will be sensitized on the importance | 
 | of EbA, trained on proper implementation and maintenance practices and supported in the development of | 
 | Climate Resilient Value Chains. | 
 | 245. Public institutional capacity and coordination strengthened to mainstream EbA. In Component 3 | 
 | the project focuses on building the capacity of different entities, including MIDAGRI and MINAM to carry out | 
 | EbA policy implementation in a more coordinated manner, mainstreaming EbA, gender, intercultural and | 
 | intergenerational considerations in all its programs and to streamline its interventions to increase efficiency | 
 | and impact towards climate resilience and reduced emissions in the SHAP. Improved coordination with other | 
 | ministries and government entities at all levels will support the country in meeting its NDC targets. | 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | D.5.1 Country prioritizing of the project | 
 | 246. The project has been prioritized by the NDA to be presented to the GCF and it has the full support of the | 
 | Peruvian government, through the Ministry of Economy and Finance which is the NDA, the Ministry of | 
 | Agricultural Development and Irrigation which is the project leading ministry and the Ministry of Environment | 
 | which leads climate change action in Peru. More recently, during the national message on the Celebration | 
 | of the Peruvian Independence Day on the 28th of July 2023, the president mentioned the Resilient Puna | 
 | project as part of the relevant programmes that the country is boosting to support climate change adaptation | 
 | in the High Andes areas of the country. | 
 | D.5.2 Coherence with existing National Climate Strategy, policies and commitments | 
 | 247. The project will be a major contribution to identified in Peru’s first NDC targets. The project will support | 
 | the fulfilment of adaptation 4 NDCs measures related to agriculture and water. NDC measures related to | 
 | agriculture include: i) AGRI7 Natural grassland management to secure feed for livestock and reduce | 
 | vulnerability to climate change, ii) AGRI11 Management of wild South American camelids (vicuñas) | 

=== PAGE 78 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74
D
considering the effects of climate change, iii) AGRI16 Implementation of business strategies that incorporate
risk and opportunity management in the face of climate change. NDC measures related to water include: iv)
AGU2 Implementation of interventions related to planting and harvesting water for agricultural water security
in watersheds vulnerable to climate change. Since this project have a call for proposal mechanism the exact
contributions to the NDCs will be obtained during the implementation phase. However, a contribution
estimation to the four identified NDCs are indicated in Section 5.7 Table 21 of Annex 2a.
248. The project is fully aligned with the National Adaptation Plan (NAP). The proposed adaptation activities
will follow the approach laid out in Peru’s NAP, focusing on ecosystems, hydrographic watersheds,
restoration and conservation of ecosystems, recover traditional knowledge and territorial planning. In
addition, microfinancing for the promotion of EbA practices has been integrated in the NAP as a means to
increase participation of the private sector and to provide very much needed access to financing for
vulnerable populations.
249. The project is fully aligned with the National Agrarian Policy 2021-2030 (Supreme Decree 017-2021
MIDAGRI) which aim is to improve access to markets for small farmers, improve natural resource
management, improve technical and commercial capacities of agricultural producers and their incomes,
promote producers associativity and entrepreneurship.
250. The project contributes to the risk management and climate areas lands at highest risk to drought were
taken from the Plan for Risk Management and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Agricultural Sector Period
2012-2021 (Plan GRACC-A) to select target districts.
251. The project aligns with the Road Map for Green Financing and the general guidelines for the National
Strategy for Green Growth (ENVA). The ENVA aims to promote sustainable economic development while
considering environmental protection and climate change mitigation. In particular, the project aligns with the
following main objectives of the ENVA: (i) Sustainable use of natural resources, (ii) Environmental
mainstreaming in economic sectors, specifically promote environmentally friendly practices, technologies,
and policies that minimize negative environmental impacts, (iii) Conservation and restoration of ecosystems,
(iv) Strengthening environmental governance and institutions and (v) Access of communities to
environmental services and information.
252. According to the NDA requirement, this project is also in line with the objectives of the National
Competitiveness and Productivity Plan 2019-2030 which seeks to a) promote environmental sustainability in
economic activities operations and b) boost local and external financial mechanisms.
253. The project is aligned with the GCF’s 2020-2023 strategic programming and contributes to sectoral
paradigm shift enablers. For Ecosystems and Ecosystem Services, the programme is aligned with Pathway
1: Ecosystem-based management of terrestrial and freshwater systems, to achieve a paradigm shift in the
landscape management of the SHAP region. The programme uses transformational planning and
programming via the fostering of an enabling environment for EbA interventions for improved ecosystem
services. The project also catalyses climate innovation through the support of the development of new
mechanisms to finance EbA and resilient livelihoods. It mobilises finance at scale through securing public
and private financing through the Puna facility, MERESE schemes, and other new financial products.
254. Finally, it is important to highlight, that the project embraced an integrative approach by merging three
initiatives. At the request of the Peruvian Government, through the Ministry of Agricultural Development and
Irrigation (MIDAGRI), GIZ was assigned to integrate three concepts emerging from different sectors with
focus on high Andean communities and ecosystems from slightly different perspectives. This shows the felt
need within Peruvian institutions to address climate change vulnerabilities in the SHAP. The present proposal
is therefore bringing together previous experience on Natural Protected Areas, focus on South American
camelid fiber value chains, and finance at scale to implement ecosystem-based adaptation, thus facilitating
complementarity and coherence according to country needs.
D.5.3 Capacity of AE and EEs to deliver
255. GIZ with its headquarters in Germany serves as AE, and GIZ with its management structure in Peru as
one of the EEs. GIZ is one of the largest international providers of capacity development and technical
assistance on climate change worldwide. GIZ as AE already developed and submitted several funding
proposals to GCF, with 6 approved proposals under implementation (FP117, FP132, FP103, FP059, FP198
and FP200).
256. In addition, MIDAGRI, SERNANP, Profonanpe and Instituto de Montaña will also serve as EEs.
257. MIDAGRI has extensive experience of channelling loan and grant resources for national and sub-
national rural development projects from international financial institutions. It is currently implementing
several projects from IFAD (e.g., Avanzar Rural), World Bank (e.g., Integrated Water Resources
Management in Ten Basins) and IADB (e.g., Agricultural Health and Agrifood Safety Development Program
Phase II).

--- Table 1 on Page 78 ---
 | considering the effects of climate change, iii) AGRI16 Implementation of business strategies that incorporate | 
 | risk and opportunity management in the face of climate change. NDC measures related to water include: iv) | 
 | AGU2 Implementation of interventions related to planting and harvesting water for agricultural water security | 
 | in watersheds vulnerable to climate change. Since this project have a call for proposal mechanism the exact | 
 | contributions to the NDCs will be obtained during the implementation phase. However, a contribution | 
 | estimation to the four identified NDCs are indicated in Section 5.7 Table 21 of Annex 2a. | 
 | 248. The project is fully aligned with the National Adaptation Plan (NAP). The proposed adaptation activities | 
 | will follow the approach laid out in Peru’s NAP, focusing on ecosystems, hydrographic watersheds, | 
 | restoration and conservation of ecosystems, recover traditional knowledge and territorial planning. In | 
 | addition, microfinancing for the promotion of EbA practices has been integrated in the NAP as a means to | 
 | increase participation of the private sector and to provide very much needed access to financing for | 
 | vulnerable populations. | 
 | 249. The project is fully aligned with the National Agrarian Policy 2021-2030 (Supreme Decree 017-2021 | 
 | MIDAGRI) which aim is to improve access to markets for small farmers, improve natural resource | 
 | management, improve technical and commercial capacities of agricultural producers and their incomes, | 
 | promote producers associativity and entrepreneurship. | 
 | 250. The project contributes to the risk management and climate areas lands at highest risk to drought were | 
 | taken from the Plan for Risk Management and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Agricultural Sector Period | 
 | 2012-2021 (Plan GRACC-A) to select target districts. | 
 | 251. The project aligns with the Road Map for Green Financing and the general guidelines for the National | 
 | Strategy for Green Growth (ENVA). The ENVA aims to promote sustainable economic development while | 
 | considering environmental protection and climate change mitigation. In particular, the project aligns with the | 
 | following main objectives of the ENVA: (i) Sustainable use of natural resources, (ii) Environmental | 
 | mainstreaming in economic sectors, specifically promote environmentally friendly practices, technologies, | 
 | and policies that minimize negative environmental impacts, (iii) Conservation and restoration of ecosystems, | 
 | (iv) Strengthening environmental governance and institutions and (v) Access of communities to | 
 | environmental services and information. | 
 | 252. According to the NDA requirement, this project is also in line with the objectives of the National | 
 | Competitiveness and Productivity Plan 2019-2030 which seeks to a) promote environmental sustainability in | 
 | economic activities operations and b) boost local and external financial mechanisms. | 
 | 253. The project is aligned with the GCF’s 2020-2023 strategic programming and contributes to sectoral | 
 | paradigm shift enablers. For Ecosystems and Ecosystem Services, the programme is aligned with Pathway | 
 | 1: Ecosystem-based management of terrestrial and freshwater systems, to achieve a paradigm shift in the | 
 | landscape management of the SHAP region. The programme uses transformational planning and | 
 | programming via the fostering of an enabling environment for EbA interventions for improved ecosystem | 
 | services. The project also catalyses climate innovation through the support of the development of new | 
 | mechanisms to finance EbA and resilient livelihoods. It mobilises finance at scale through securing public | 
 | and private financing through the Puna facility, MERESE schemes, and other new financial products. | 
 | 254. Finally, it is important to highlight, that the project embraced an integrative approach by merging three | 
 | initiatives. At the request of the Peruvian Government, through the Ministry of Agricultural Development and | 
 | Irrigation (MIDAGRI), GIZ was assigned to integrate three concepts emerging from different sectors with | 
 | focus on high Andean communities and ecosystems from slightly different perspectives. This shows the felt | 
 | need within Peruvian institutions to address climate change vulnerabilities in the SHAP. The present proposal | 
 | is therefore bringing together previous experience on Natural Protected Areas, focus on South American | 
 | camelid fiber value chains, and finance at scale to implement ecosystem-based adaptation, thus facilitating | 
 | complementarity and coherence according to country needs. | 
 | D.5.3 Capacity of AE and EEs to deliver | 
 | 255. GIZ with its headquarters in Germany serves as AE, and GIZ with its management structure in Peru as | 
 | one of the EEs. GIZ is one of the largest international providers of capacity development and technical | 
 | assistance on climate change worldwide. GIZ as AE already developed and submitted several funding | 
 | proposals to GCF, with 6 approved proposals under implementation (FP117, FP132, FP103, FP059, FP198 | 
 | and FP200). | 
 | 256. In addition, MIDAGRI, SERNANP, Profonanpe and Instituto de Montaña will also serve as EEs. | 
 | 257. MIDAGRI has extensive experience of channelling loan and grant resources for national and sub- | 
 | national rural development projects from international financial institutions. It is currently implementing | 
 | several projects from IFAD (e.g., Avanzar Rural), World Bank (e.g., Integrated Water Resources | 
 | Management in Ten Basins) and IADB (e.g., Agricultural Health and Agrifood Safety Development Program | 
 | Phase II). | 

=== PAGE 79 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75
D
258. Profonanpe as one of the main EEs has been accredited by the GCF since 2016. For its accreditation
process, Profonanpe received technical support from a GCF Readiness Project with GIZ as delivery partner
to become a Direct Access Entity. Profonanpe is implementing two GCF projects: 1) Building the Resilience
of Wetlands in the Province of Datem del Marañón (FP001) with Profonanpe as the EE managing a total
amount of $6,240,000 of GCF grant; and 2) Peruvian Amazon Eco Bio Business Facility (Amazon EBBF)
(FP193) with Profonanpe as the Direct Access Entity managing a total amount of $8,972,400 of GCF grant.
In addition, Profonanpe has gathered experience in designing and managing several environmental funds
will be key, namely a Regional Water Fund in Piura, a competitive fund aimed at PES in high Andean
ecosystems, and a MERESE fund for Arequipa. This experience will be key for their role in managing the
Puna Facility established for this project and in bringing in their experience in managing PES and MERESE
funds for the exit strategy.
259. SERNANP is the Government entity, attached to the Ministry of Environment (MINAM) in charge of
ensuring the conservation of National Protected Areas (NPAs). As the governing entity of the SINANPE, it
carries out and has experience on project implementation in the NPAs. In the past, it has implemented
projects like the EbA Lomas with the support of UNDP. SERNANP will be in charge of the execution of the
project activities within the NPAs and buffer zones, ensuring its efficient execution and the articulation of
those activities within those areas.
260. Instituto de Montaña is a non-profit organization that works for the conservation of the natural, cultural
and spiritual values of mountain peoples and ecosystems. They have been working in the Andes since 1995
and in Peru they have and are currently implementing programs in the highlands of Ancash, Piura, Junín and
Lima.
261. Additional information on the AE and EEs’ capacities to implement the project are provided in Section
B.4.
D.5.4 Role of the Ministry of Economy and Finance (NDA)
262. The Ministry of Economy and Finance, as Peru’s NDA, has been involved in the process of development
and approval by the Government of Peru of the Concept Note and Funding Proposal. MIDAGRI as project
proponent, along with Profonanpe, MINAM and GIZ as the AE have introduced the project idea to the NDA
before starting the project pre-feasibility and concept note phase. The NDA has been also closely involved
during the Funding Proposal development stage participating for example in a validation workshop held in
June of 2023 in Lima Peru and will be continued to be involved following the national mechanisms for project
selection established by the NDA.
D.5.5 Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders
263. Several consultations in the target areas have been carried out by GIZ in close coordination with project
partners during the different stages of Concept Note and Funding Proposal development. A summary of the
consultations held can be found in Annex 7.
264. During Concept Note stage, engagement have taken place with different stakeholders. At the
national level, meetings were held with national government programs that operate in the territory, such as
MIDAGRI’s Programs, Textile Camelids Innovation Institute, as well as, with the SERNANP, INAIGEM and
the SENAMHI. The project development team engaged for example with cooperatives, with other
international cooperation projects such as Swiss Cooperation (Resilient Andes and Andean Forest Program),
PNUD (Small Grants GEF program) to integrate lessons learned and best practices into the project design.
In addition, consultations were held with NGOs that work in the puna region, such as Water Competence
Centre (CCA), DESCOSUR and CONDESAN (Natural Infrastructure for Water Security Project) to
understand their perception about communities’ necessities in a context of climate change to incorporate it
into the project design.
265. More recently, during the Funding Proposal stage, consultations with national, regional and local
stakeholders were carried out in October 2022, November 2022 and May 2023 by organizing different
workshops and meetings in target project departments in order to present the proposal, identify gender gaps
and potential project risks and mitigation measures. As part of these consultations (May 2023), the project
and relevant activities were presented and validated. Feedback provided by different stakeholders were
further integrated into the project design. In general, the project was welcomed by the stakeholders, at
subnational, district and community level. In total, the project has consulted 783 people (38% women and
62% men) out of which 65% were members of the main potential direct project beneficiaries (e.g. local
communities, producers’ associations and cooperatives) most of them Quechua population (see Annex 7).
Consultations were conducted and closely coordinated and organized by MIDAGRI and SERNANP with local
stakeholders to ensure the participation of communities, producer associations, women, youth, and elderly
people.

--- Table 1 on Page 79 ---
 | 258. Profonanpe as one of the main EEs has been accredited by the GCF since 2016. For its accreditation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | process, Profonanpe received technical support from a GCF Readiness Project with GIZ as delivery partner |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | to become a Direct Access Entity. Profonanpe is implementing two GCF projects: 1) Building the Resilience |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of Wetlands in the Province of Datem del Marañón (FP001) with Profonanpe as the EE managing a total |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | amount of $6,240,000 of GCF grant; and 2) Peruvian Amazon Eco Bio Business Facility (Amazon EBBF) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (FP193) with Profonanpe as the Direct Access Entity managing a total amount of $8,972,400 of GCF grant. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | In addition, Profonanpe has gathered experience in designing and managing several environmental funds |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | will be key, namely a Regional Water Fund in Piura, a competitive fund aimed at PES in high Andean |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ecosystems, and a MERESE fund for Arequipa. This experience will be key for their role in managing the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Puna Facility established for this project and in bringing in their experience in managing PES and MERESE |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | funds for the exit strategy. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 259. SERNANP is the Government entity, attached to the Ministry of Environment (MINAM) in charge of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ensuring the conservation of National Protected Areas (NPAs). As the governing entity of the SINANPE, it |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | carries out and has experience on project implementation in the NPAs. In the past, it has implemented |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | projects like the EbA Lomas with the support of UNDP. SERNANP will be in charge of the execution of the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | project activities within the NPAs and buffer zones, ensuring its efficient execution and the articulation of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | those activities within those areas. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 260. Instituto de Montaña is a non-profit organization that works for the conservation of the natural, cultural |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and spiritual values of mountain peoples and ecosystems. They have been working in the Andes since 1995 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and in Peru they have and are currently implementing programs in the highlands of Ancash, Piura, Junín and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Lima. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 261. Additional information on the AE and EEs’ capacities to implement the project are provided in Section |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | B.4. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | D.5.4 Role of the Ministry of Economy and Finance (NDA) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 262. The Ministry of Economy and Finance, as Peru’s NDA, has been involved in the process of development |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and approval by the Government of Peru of the Concept Note and Funding Proposal. MIDAGRI as project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | proponent, along with Profonanpe, MINAM and GIZ as the AE have introduced the project idea to the NDA |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | before starting the project pre-feasibility and concept note phase. The NDA has been also closely involved |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | during the Funding Proposal development stage participating for example in a validation workshop held in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | June of 2023 in Lima Peru and will be continued to be involved following the national mechanisms for project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | selection established by the NDA. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | D.5.5 Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 263. Several consultations in the target areas have been carried out by GIZ in close coordination with project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | partners during the different stages of Concept Note and Funding Proposal development. A summary of the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | consultations held can be found in Annex 7. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 264. During Concept Note stage, engagement have taken place with different stakeholders. At the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | national level, meetings were held with national government programs that operate in the territory, such as |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | MIDAGRI’s Programs, Textile Camelids Innovation Institute, as well as, with the SERNANP, INAIGEM and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the SENAMHI. The project development team engaged for example with cooperatives, with other |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | international cooperation projects such as Swiss Cooperation (Resilient Andes and Andean Forest Program), |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | PNUD (Small Grants GEF program) to integrate lessons learned and best practices into the project design. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | In addition, consultations were held with NGOs that work in the puna region, such as Water Competence |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Centre (CCA), DESCOSUR and CONDESAN (Natural Infrastructure for Water Security Project) to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | understand their perception about communities’ necessities in a context of climate change to incorporate it |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | into the project design. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 265. More recently, during the Funding Proposal stage, co |  |  |  |  |  | nsultations with national, regional and local |  |  |  | 
 |  | stakeholders were carried out in October 2022 |  |  | , November 2022 |  |  | and May 2023 by organizing different |  |  | 
 |  | workshops and meetings in target project departments in order to present the proposal, identify gender gaps |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | and potential project risks and mitigation measures. |  |  |  | As part of these consultations (May 2023), the |  |  | project |  | 
 | and relevant activities were |  | presented and validated. Feedback provided by different stakeholders |  |  |  |  |  |  | were | 
 | further integrated into the project design |  |  | . In general, the project was welcomed by the stakeholders, at |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | subnational, district and community level. In total, the project has consulted 783 people (38% women and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 62% men) out of which 65% were members of the main potential direct project beneficiaries (e.g. local |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | communities, producers’ associations and cooperatives) most of them Quechua population (see Annex 7). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Consultations were conducted and closely coordinated and organized by MIDAGRI and SERNANP with local |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | stakeholders to ensure the participation of communities, producer associations, women, youth, and elderly |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | people. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 80 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76
D
266. During project inception and implementation, the project will follow a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (see
Annex 7) in order to ensure continuous consultations with the stakeholders. The main actions will include i)
development and implementation of a culturally adequate consultation and communication strategy, ii)
development and implementation of a Grievance Redress Mechanisms and actions during iii) project
implementation and monitoring. In addition, in table 8 a list of main actions to engage with the different
stakeholders is being presented which includes different stakeholder categories (e.g., local communities,
national, local governments, private sector etc.).
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
D.6.1 Efficiency and effectiveness
267. Ecosystem-based Adaptation has been widely viewed as a cost-effective approach to address the
challenges communities face when dealing with climate change. A recent study that valued the ecosystem
services of peatlands in the Yanque district of Arequipa, concluded that their regulation services could be
valued at 450 USD/ha (Mango, 2017). Rolando et al., (2017) analysed the Puna ecosystems’ impact by land
use and climate changes and proposed “a set of technologies, practices and policies to preserve (or restore)
the provision of these key ES: long fallowing, soil amendments, conservation tillage, rotational grazing,
grassland ecological restoration, conservation of agrobiodiversity, modern irrigation and water harvesting,
plant breeding, climate change mitigation schemes and payment for ecosystem services, and adapted
traditional technologies”. Most of these are proposed project interventions as described in Annex 2a, section
9. In the cost-benefit analysis for the management of native grasslands in Chanchayllo and Miraflores, Peru,
realized under the Global Mountain EbA project, the benefit-cost ratio was 2.2 and the breakeven point at
10-15 years (Reid at al., 2017). Gammie and De Bievre (2015) show that a subset of proposed EbA
interventions for the Lima water supply was deemed as a cost-effective option when compared to grey
infrastructure for water provision, with prices below USD 0.25/m3.
268. The GCF investment represents a cost-effective efficient integrated landscape approach to
comprehensive obtain adaptation benefits and mitigation co-benefits. The project will support 60,715 people
directly, (50 % women) in increasing adaptive capacities and improving overall climate resilience and 1.9
million people indirectly (50 % women) through the maintenance of ecosystem services that sustain
economic activities and populations downstream. In addition, through project activities 23,914 ha of Puna
ecosystems will be sustainable managed, equivalent to a co-benefit of 407,675 t CO2eq of avoided
emissions.
D.6.2 Financial viability
269. For the in-depth justification of the GCF grant, please refer to section B.5. As noted there and in Annex
3, the financial IRR of Local initiatives supported by the Puna Facility is positive even without grants; GCF
grants further increase the financial IRR (see table below). However, grants remain essential for the
implementation of the Local initiatives for reasons including: subsistence nature of the beneficiaries in the
Non-repayable Sub-Window and generally low income for other beneficiaries; no or limited savings to self-
fund the initial EbA/CRVC investment; no or limited access to finance to fund EbA measures and CRVC;
prohibitive interest rates and other terms of MFI loans; limited financial literacy; lack of beneficiaries’
resources to hire technical experts in lieu of the Puna Facility’s technical assistance. Importantly, the
concessionality of Puna Facility grants is significantly minimized in the Results-based Repayable and
Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Windows through the repayment feature. All Local initiatives funded by the
Puna Facility will be financially self-sustaining in the long-term, with no need for further concessionality. This
will make them more bankable in the eyes of lenders – bankability will be enhanced also through technical
assistance to both Puna Facility beneficiaries and, on the supply side, MFIs. Repayable grants will also instill
financial discipline in the recipients, making them more attractive future borrowers.
Table 7. FIRR by Local initiative
Local initiative type FIRR without grant FIRR with grant
Non-repayable – Native potatoes 12.6% 121.8%
Non-repayable – Alpacas 8.4% 63.7%
Repayable – Native potatoes 25.8% 84.3%
Repayable – Alpacas 17.1% 48.1%
Agroideas – Alpacas 19.5% 56.8%

--- Table 1 on Page 80 ---
 | 266. During project inception and implementation, the project will follow a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (see | 
 | Annex 7) in order to ensure continuous consultations with the stakeholders. The main actions will include i) | 
 | development and implementation of a culturally adequate consultation and communication strategy, ii) | 
 | development and implementation of a Grievance Redress Mechanisms and actions during iii) project | 
 | implementation and monitoring. In addition, in table 8 a list of main actions to engage with the different | 
 | stakeholders is being presented which includes different stakeholder categories (e.g., local communities, | 
 | national, local governments, private sector etc.). | 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
D.6.1 Efficiency and effectiveness
267. Ecosystem-based Adaptation has been widely viewed as a cost-effective approach to address the
challenges communities face when dealing with climate change. A recent study that valued the ecosystem
services of peatlands in the Yanque district of Arequipa, concluded that their regulation services could be
valued at 450 USD/ha (Mango, 2017). Rolando et al., (2017) analysed the Puna ecosystems’ impact by land
use and climate changes and proposed “a set of technologies, practices and policies to preserve (or restore)
the provision of these key ES: long fallowing, soil amendments, conservation tillage, rotational grazing,
grassland ecological restoration, conservation of agrobiodiversity, modern irrigation and water harvesting,
plant breeding, climate change mitigation schemes and payment for ecosystem services, and adapted
traditional technologies”. Most of these are proposed project interventions as described in Annex 2a, section
9. In the cost-benefit analysis for the management of native grasslands in Chanchayllo and Miraflores, Peru,
realized under the Global Mountain EbA project, the benefit-cost ratio was 2.2 and the breakeven point at
10-15 years (Reid at al., 2017). Gammie and De Bievre (2015) show that a subset of proposed EbA
interventions for the Lima water supply was deemed as a cost-effective option when compared to grey
infrastructure for water provision, with prices below USD 0.25/m3.
268. The GCF investment represents a cost-effective efficient integrated landscape approach to
comprehensive obtain adaptation benefits and mitigation co-benefits. The project will support 60,715 people
directly, (50 % women) in increasing adaptive capacities and improving overall climate resilience and 1.9
million people indirectly (50 % women) through the maintenance of ecosystem services that sustain
economic activities and populations downstream. In addition, through project activities 23,914 ha of Puna
ecosystems will be sustainable managed, equivalent to a co-benefit of 407,675 t CO2eq of avoided
emissions.
D.6.2 Financial viability
269. For the in-depth justification of the GCF grant, please refer to section B.5. As noted there and in Annex
3, the financial IRR of Local initiatives supported by the Puna Facility is positive even without grants; GCF
grants further increase the financial IRR (see table below). However, grants remain essential for the
implementation of the Local initiatives for reasons including: subsistence nature of the beneficiaries in the
Non-repayable Sub-Window and generally low income for other beneficiaries; no or limited savings to self-
fund the initial EbA/CRVC investment; no or limited access to finance to fund EbA measures and CRVC;
prohibitive interest rates and other terms of MFI loans; limited financial literacy; lack of beneficiaries’
resources to hire technical experts in lieu of the Puna Facility’s technical assistance. Importantly, the
concessionality of Puna Facility grants is significantly minimized in the Results-based Repayable and
Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Windows through the repayment feature. All Local initiatives funded by the
Puna Facility will be financially self-sustaining in the long-term, with no need for further concessionality. This
will make them more bankable in the eyes of lenders – bankability will be enhanced also through technical
assistance to both Puna Facility beneficiaries and, on the supply side, MFIs. Repayable grants will also instill
financial discipline in the recipients, making them more attractive future borrowers.
Table 7. FIRR by Local initiative
Local initiative type FIRR without grant FIRR with grant
Non-repayable – Native potatoes 12.6% 121.8%
Non-repayable – Alpacas 8.4% 63.7%
Repayable – Native potatoes 25.8% 84.3%
Repayable – Alpacas 17.1% 48.1%
Agroideas – Alpacas 19.5% 56.8% |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 80 ---
D.6.1 Efficiency and effectiveness
267. Ecosystem-based Adaptation has been widely viewed as a cost-effective approach to address the
challenges communities face when dealing with climate change. A recent study that valued the ecosystem
services of peatlands in the Yanque district of Arequipa, concluded that their regulation services could be
valued at 450 USD/ha (Mango, 2017). Rolando et al., (2017) analysed the Puna ecosystems’ impact by land
use and climate changes and proposed “a set of technologies, practices and policies to preserve (or restore)
the provision of these key ES: long fallowing, soil amendments, conservation tillage, rotational grazing,
grassland ecological restoration, conservation of agrobiodiversity, modern irrigation and water harvesting,
plant breeding, climate change mitigation schemes and payment for ecosystem services, and adapted
traditional technologies”. Most of these are proposed project interventions as described in Annex 2a, section
9. In the cost-benefit analysis for the management of native grasslands in Chanchayllo and Miraflores, Peru,
realized under the Global Mountain EbA project, the benefit-cost ratio was 2.2 and the breakeven point at
10-15 years (Reid at al., 2017). Gammie and De Bievre (2015) show that a subset of proposed EbA
interventions for the Lima water supply was deemed as a cost-effective option when compared to grey
infrastructure for water provision, with prices below USD 0.25/m3.
268. The GCF investment represents a cost-effective efficient integrated landscape approach to
comprehensive obtain adaptation benefits and mitigation co-benefits. The project will support 60,715 people
directly, (50 % women) in increasing adaptive capacities and improving overall climate resilience and 1.9
million people indirectly (50 % women) through the maintenance of ecosystem services that sustain
economic activities and populations downstream. In addition, through project activities 23,914 ha of Puna
ecosystems will be sustainable managed, equivalent to a co-benefit of 407,675 t CO2eq of avoided
emissions.
D.6.2 Financial viability
269. For the in-depth justification of the GCF grant, please refer to section B.5. As noted there and in Annex
3, the financial IRR of Local initiatives supported by the Puna Facility is positive even without grants; GCF
grants further increase the financial IRR (see table below). However, grants remain essential for the
implementation of the Local initiatives for reasons including: subsistence nature of the beneficiaries in the
Non-repayable Sub-Window and generally low income for other beneficiaries; no or limited savings to self-
fund the initial EbA/CRVC investment; no or limited access to finance to fund EbA measures and CRVC;
prohibitive interest rates and other terms of MFI loans; limited financial literacy; lack of beneficiaries’
resources to hire technical experts in lieu of the Puna Facility’s technical assistance. Importantly, the
concessionality of Puna Facility grants is significantly minimized in the Results-based Repayable and
Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Windows through the repayment feature. All Local initiatives funded by the
Puna Facility will be financially self-sustaining in the long-term, with no need for further concessionality. This
will make them more bankable in the eyes of lenders – bankability will be enhanced also through technical
assistance to both Puna Facility beneficiaries and, on the supply side, MFIs. Repayable grants will also instill
financial discipline in the recipients, making them more attractive future borrowers.

Table 7. FIRR by Local initiative

--- Table 3 on Page 80 ---
Local initiative type |  |  |  | FIRR without grant |  | FIRR with grant |  | 
 | Non-repayable – Native potatoes |  |  | 12.6% |  |  | 121.8% | 
 | Non-repayable – Alpacas |  |  | 8.4% |  |  | 63.7% | 
 | Repayable – Native potatoes |  |  | 25.8% |  |  | 84.3% | 
 | Repayable – Alpacas |  |  | 17.1% |  |  | 48.1% | 
 | Agroideas – Alpacas |  |  | 19.5% |  |  | 56.8% | 

=== PAGE 81 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77
D
270. The economic IRR of the project is 8.2%, which is more than 2 percentage points above the 6% Peru
social discount rate estimated by the World Bank and the Ministry of Economy and Finance. The economic
NPV, based on the 6% social discount rate, is a positive EUR 11.9 million. Sensitivities have been run on
two assumptions: (i) downside sensitivity to the already conservative CO shadow prices and (ii) change in
2
GHG reduction volume and economic benefits of Local Initiatives during the initial 3 calls for proposals. The
analysis shows that the EIRR is positive even with extremely low CO2 prices and with a 30% drop in emission
savings volume and income generated by the initial calls for proposals. The EIRR remains above the social
discount rate of 6% and the economic NPV is therefore positive if the emission savings volume and economic
benefits do not drop more than 10%, even at carbon prices substantially lower than the base case assumption
of EUR 60/t.
D.6.3 Application of best available technologies and practices
271. The promotion of sustainable landscape management practices, soil amendments, ancestral and
modern technologies for water and soil conservation, exclusion zones and communal reserves, among
others, will ensure resource conservation for future generations. In this context, the project catalyses climate
innovation through the investment in Climate Resilient Value Chains, which integrate resilient practices and
technologies. For example, the implemented EbA measures will improve water harvesting during the rainy
season for distribution in times of drought by supplementing water from rainfall. This, together with efficient
irrigation technologies, will improve and make sustainable use of water resources as for example for fodder
production.

--- Table 1 on Page 81 ---
 | 270. The economic IRR of the project is 8.2%, which is more than 2 percentage points above the 6% Peru | 
 | social discount rate estimated by the World Bank and the Ministry of Economy and Finance. The economic | 
 | NPV, based on the 6% social discount rate, is a positive EUR 11.9 million. Sensitivities have been run on | 
 | two assumptions: (i) downside sensitivity to the already conservative CO shadow prices and (ii) change in
2 | 
 | GHG reduction volume and economic benefits of Local Initiatives during the initial 3 calls for proposals. The | 
 | analysis shows that the EIRR is positive even with extremely low CO2 prices and with a 30% drop in emission | 
 | savings volume and income generated by the initial calls for proposals. The EIRR remains above the social | 
 | discount rate of 6% and the economic NPV is therefore positive if the emission savings volume and economic | 
 | benefits do not drop more than 10%, even at carbon prices substantially lower than the base case assumption | 
 | of EUR 60/t. | 
 |  | 
 | D.6.3 Application of best available technologies and practices | 
 | 271. The promotion of sustainable landscape management practices, soil amendments, ancestral and | 
 | modern technologies for water and soil conservation, exclusion zones and communal reserves, among | 
 | others, will ensure resource conservation for future generations. In this context, the project catalyses climate | 
 | innovation through the investment in Climate Resilient Value Chains, which integrate resilient practices and | 
 | technologies. For example, the implemented EbA measures will improve water harvesting during the rainy | 
 | season for distribution in times of drought by supplementing water from rainfall. This, together with efficient | 
 | irrigation technologies, will improve and make sustainable use of water resources as for example for fodder | 
 | production. | 

=== PAGE 82 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78
E
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
E.1. Project/Programme Focus
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages)
Assessment Current state (baseline) Potential target scenario How the project/programme will contribute
Dimension (Description) (Description)
Description Rating
Currently, public The target scenario with project Through the establishment of the Puna Facility
and private implementation foresees a paradigm (Outcome 2 / Output 2.1) the project will permit
financing for shift to promote the development and the scaling up of financial incentive for local
investing in EbA maintenance of financial, technical and communities to implement EbA measures and
measures and regulatory support to the Climate Resilient Value Chains. The Puna
Climate Resilient implementation of EbA measures and Facility will work with different sub-windows to
Value Chains in the Climate Resilient Value Chains within provide financial support for the implementation
puna ecosystem are the puna ecosystem, promoting the of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value
limited. Although enhancement and recognition of Chains (CRVC) to support local most
MIDAGRI has ecosystems and their inhabitants. vulnerable communities and improve
promoted support to ecosystem services in the region.
Scale Low
the High Andean During project implementation, 60,715
zones through 60,715 direct beneficiaries within 91 Besides providing financial support, through
different programs, districts and 2,011,856 indirect Outcome 3, the project will work on
they have not been beneficiaries living in the lower parts of strengthening technical, social, political and
sufficient to reach the watersheds of the project area will institutional capacities of local actors, as well as
the most vulnerable be reached, but project activities will instruments and norms for the management of
populations to also work on building the conditions to ecosystems and their services.
climate change in support mainstreaming of EbA and
the region. climate resilience, as well as Likewise, the project will promote better
strengthening institutional capacities in governance in the prioritized areas, seeking
The reasons for the Peru. This will enable the development that communities and local governments plan
insufficient public and scale up of financial options and

--- Table 1 on Page 82 ---
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.1. Project/Programme Focus |  |  |  |  | 
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) |  |  |  |  | 
Assessment
Dimension |  | Current state (baseline) |  | Potential target scenario
(Description) | How the project/programme will contribute
(Description) | 
 |  | Description | Rating |  |  | 
Scale |  | Currently, public
and private
financing for
investing in EbA
measures and
Climate Resilient
Value Chains in the
puna ecosystem are
limited. Although
MIDAGRI has
promoted support to
the High Andean
zones through
different programs,
they have not been
sufficient to reach
the most vulnerable
populations to
climate change in
the region.
The reasons for the
insufficient public | Low | The target scenario with project
implementation foresees a paradigm
shift to promote the development and
maintenance of financial, technical and
regulatory support to the
implementation of EbA measures and
Climate Resilient Value Chains within
the puna ecosystem, promoting the
enhancement and recognition of
ecosystems and their inhabitants.
During project implementation, 60,715
60,715 direct beneficiaries within 91
districts and 2,011,856 indirect
beneficiaries living in the lower parts of
the watersheds of the project area will
be reached, but project activities will
also work on building the conditions to
support mainstreaming of EbA and
climate resilience, as well as
strengthening institutional capacities in
Peru. This will enable the development
and scale up of financial options and | Through the establishment of the Puna Facility
(Outcome 2 / Output 2.1) the project will permit
the scaling up of financial incentive for local
communities to implement EbA measures and
Climate Resilient Value Chains. The Puna
Facility will work with different sub-windows to
provide financial support for the implementation
of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value
Chains (CRVC) to support local most
vulnerable communities and improve
ecosystem services in the region.
Besides providing financial support, through
Outcome 3, the project will work on
strengthening technical, social, political and
institutional capacities of local actors, as well as
instruments and norms for the management of
ecosystems and their services.
Likewise, the project will promote better
governance in the prioritized areas, seeking
that communities and local governments plan | 

--- Table 2 on Page 82 ---
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)

--- Table 3 on Page 82 ---
Assessment
Dimension

--- Table 4 on Page 82 ---
Potential target scenario
(Description)

--- Table 5 on Page 82 ---
How the project/programme will contribute
(Description)

=== PAGE 83 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79
E
and private technical support for local communities and manage their territories in close
financing are to improve its climate resilience and coordination.
related to the promote climate change adaptation in
insufficient valuation the region. Through the dissemination of successful
of the contributions experiences, the installed capacities and
of the territories and The successful experiences, the favourable institutional frameworks, the project
their inhabitants to development of capacities and the will make scaling up possible.
local and national favourable regulatory frameworks
development, this is promoted by the project will allow the
based on and feeds scale up of similar activities in a broader
back on the little scope, as well as in the territory itself.
development of
enabling conditions,
favourable
environments and
institutions for
support local
adaptation to
climate change in
the region,
specifically those
aimed at reaching
the most vulnerable
communities.
The Peruvian High The project will be an example of a Replicability is closely related to the regulatory,
Andean region successful initiative to promote and budgetary, and incentive context that favours
occupies 28% of the facilitate the implementation of EbA the reproduction of successful experiences. In
national territory measures and Climate Resilient Value this sense, the project will contribute to the
Replicability and is home to 32% Low Chains. Through the improvement of replicability of actions through the strengthening
of the country’s multilevel landscape governance of regulatory frameworks, institutional
population. The instruments and stakeholder arrangements, development of instruments and
insufficient and/or engagement in the project target area, procedural mechanisms, as well as the capacity
non-existent the project will be able to promote development that will enable local stakeholders
enabling conditions, replicability and knowledge sharing for

--- Table 1 on Page 83 ---
 | and private
financing are
related to the
insufficient valuation
of the contributions
of the territories and
their inhabitants to
local and national
development, this is
based on and feeds
back on the little
development of
enabling conditions,
favourable
environments and
institutions for
support local
adaptation to
climate change in
the region,
specifically those
aimed at reaching
the most vulnerable
communities. |  | technical support for local communities
to improve its climate resilience and
promote climate change adaptation in
the region.
The successful experiences, the
development of capacities and the
favourable regulatory frameworks
promoted by the project will allow the
scale up of similar activities in a broader
scope, as well as in the territory itself. | and manage their territories in close
coordination.
Through the dissemination of successful
experiences, the installed capacities and
favourable institutional frameworks, the project
will make scaling up possible.
Replicability | The Peruvian High
Andean region
occupies 28% of the
national territory
and is home to 32%
of the country’s
population. The
insufficient and/or
non-existent
enabling conditions, | Low | The project will be an example of a
successful initiative to promote and
facilitate the implementation of EbA
measures and Climate Resilient Value
Chains. Through the improvement of
multilevel landscape governance
instruments and stakeholder
engagement in the project target area,
the project will be able to promote
replicability and knowledge sharing for | Replicability is closely related to the regulatory,
budgetary, and incentive context that favours
the reproduction of successful experiences. In
this sense, the project will contribute to the
replicability of actions through the strengthening
of regulatory frameworks, institutional
arrangements, development of instruments and
procedural mechanisms, as well as the capacity
development that will enable local stakeholders

=== PAGE 84 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80
E
favorable similar initiatives not only in Peru, but in to reproduce and improve EbA investments in
environment and similar ecosystems regionally. As the the territory.
institutions that project will be implemented in a total of
promote and 91 districts, of which 58 will be part of The activities under project’s Outcome 3 (output
guarantee the the target area of the Puna Facility and 3.1) will engage in improving governance and
livelihoods of this 33 will benefit only from the capacity capacity development of relevant stakeholders.
part of the building initiatives, the project will still By implementing activities related to
population limits the have the capacity to expand its strengthening capacities, participatory platforms
development of EbA activities within other districts in the and their mechanisms of action, as well as
measures. region. improving coordination and regulatory
frameworks, the project will be able to link the
Also, limited results achieved on the ground to national
communication and climate change goals, e.g. the country’s NDC.
low knowledge
sharing between
organizations and
stakeholders
working with similar
initiatives currently
hinders the
adoption and
replicability of
similar initiatives.
Ancestral and best
practices about EbA
are not
disseminated and
replicated enough in
the region due to
process of
emigration of those
who know the
practices, lack of
appreciation and
recognition of this

--- Table 1 on Page 84 ---
 | favorable
environment and
institutions that
promote and
guarantee the
livelihoods of this
part of the
population limits the
development of EbA
measures.
Also, limited
communication and
low knowledge
sharing between
organizations and
stakeholders
working with similar
initiatives currently
hinders the
adoption and
replicability of
similar initiatives.
Ancestral and best
practices about EbA
are not
disseminated and
replicated enough in
the region due to
process of
emigration of those
who know the
practices, lack of
appreciation and
recognition of this |  | similar initiatives not only in Peru, but in
similar ecosystems regionally. As the
project will be implemented in a total of
91 districts, of which 58 will be part of
the target area of the Puna Facility and
33 will benefit only from the capacity
building initiatives, the project will still
have the capacity to expand its
activities within other districts in the
region. | to reproduce and improve EbA investments in
the territory.
The activities under project’s Outcome 3 (output
3.1) will engage in improving governance and
capacity development of relevant stakeholders.
By implementing activities related to
strengthening capacities, participatory platforms
and their mechanisms of action, as well as
improving coordination and regulatory
frameworks, the project will be able to link the
results achieved on the ground to national
climate change goals, e.g. the country’s NDC.

=== PAGE 85 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81
E
knowledge and the
adoption of modern
techniques that are
not conforming with
the region and are
not sustainable.
Local financial and The establishment of the Puna Facility, Through the implementation of technical
technical structures with the aim to adopt in a long-term a assistance and capacity building for local
to promote the facilitation role on leverage, mobilization relevant stakeholders (outputs 1.1, 1.2 and 3.1),
implementation of and channelling of different financial the project will be able to support its
EbA measures and resources will enable the continuous sustainability beyond the project’s period. All
Climate Resilient implementation of EbA and Climate the project’s outcomes foresee activities and
Value Chains still Resilient Value Chains in the region elements related to capacity building and
face challenges to after the conclusion of the project. The strengthening of local systems that contribute to
be implemented additional financial instruments that the a sustainable enabling environment for the
and become project will support will provide the implementation of EbA measures and Climate
sustainable, among continued financing needed. By the end Resilient Value Chains.
them: the few of the project’s activities local relevant
financial stakeholders will have the needed Above all, sustainability will be achieved by the
Sustainability Low
mechanisms that technical capacity and ownership of the strengthening of regulatory and institutional
incorporate an project’s results to ensure its continuity frameworks that guarantee the sustainability of
adaptation and self-sustainment. For example, the current and new EbA measures, as well as self-
approach to climate Puna Facility will be run by Profonanpe, financing mechanisms for the maintenance and
change; the limited a national institution that has been implementation of these measures.
regulatory involved since the design phase of the
framework, the project, is accredited as a Direct Access Activity 2.1.1 will ensure that all the elements
absence of planning Entity to the GCF and has ample needed for the self-sustainment of the Puna
tools that experience in the management of Facility are in place before the end of the
incorporate EbA. All environmental funds. project period. This will include the
of which hinders the development of plans for continuous
transfer and improvement of the allocation of resources for
adoption/adaptation the Facility.
of EbA measures by

--- Table 1 on Page 85 ---
 | knowledge and the
adoption of modern
techniques that are
not conforming with
the region and are
not sustainable. |  |  | 
Sustainability | Local financial and
technical structures
to promote the
implementation of
EbA measures and
Climate Resilient
Value Chains still
face challenges to
be implemented
and become
sustainable, among
them: the few
financial
mechanisms that
incorporate an
adaptation
approach to climate
change; the limited
regulatory
framework, the
absence of planning
tools that
incorporate EbA. All
of which hinders the
transfer and
adoption/adaptation
of EbA measures by | Low | The establishment of the Puna Facility,
with the aim to adopt in a long-term a
facilitation role on leverage, mobilization
and channelling of different financial
resources will enable the continuous
implementation of EbA and Climate
Resilient Value Chains in the region
after the conclusion of the project. The
additional financial instruments that the
project will support will provide the
continued financing needed. By the end
of the project’s activities local relevant
stakeholders will have the needed
technical capacity and ownership of the
project’s results to ensure its continuity
and self-sustainment. For example, the
Puna Facility will be run by Profonanpe,
a national institution that has been
involved since the design phase of the
project, is accredited as a Direct Access
Entity to the GCF and has ample
experience in the management of
environmental funds. | Through the implementation of technical
assistance and capacity building for local
relevant stakeholders (outputs 1.1, 1.2 and 3.1),
the project will be able to support its
sustainability beyond the project’s period. All
the project’s outcomes foresee activities and
elements related to capacity building and
strengthening of local systems that contribute to
a sustainable enabling environment for the
implementation of EbA measures and Climate
Resilient Value Chains.
Above all, sustainability will be achieved by the
strengthening of regulatory and institutional
frameworks that guarantee the sustainability of
current and new EbA measures, as well as self-
financing mechanisms for the maintenance and
implementation of these measures.
Activity 2.1.1 will ensure that all the elements
needed for the self-sustainment of the Puna
Facility are in place before the end of the
project period. This will include the
development of plans for continuous
improvement of the allocation of resources for
the Facility.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82
E
the high Andean
Activity 3.1.2 will work to strengthen regulatory
populations.
frameworks at national level to ensure the
sustainability after the project implementation
period.
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)
Target
IRMF Means of
GCF Result Area Baseline Assumptions / Note
Indicator Verification (MoV) Mid-term Final90
Annual reports from Direct beneficiaries of an adaptation intervention
the Puna Facility will include all individuals who will receive i)
and Executing targeted support from the GCF-funded
Entities (GIZ, intervention and ii) a measurable adaptation
SERNANP, Total direct benefit from a GCF-funded intervention, including:
MIDAGRI). Total direct beneficiaries: a) Individuals that implement Local initiatives that
60,715 out of
beneficiaries: will be financed and supported by the Puna
which 30,088
Project monitoring 4,735 out of are women Facility, multiplied by the average number of
and evaluation which 2,367 members of the groups/legal entities supported
ARA1 Most Core 2: Direct and reports quality are women and the average members per household in the
vulnerable people indirect assessed by the AE 0 region.
beneficiaries
and communities and EEs. b) Individuals that will be supported by MIDAGRIs
reached 156,924 2,011,856
indirect
co-finance programs, multiplied by the average
indirect
members number per household in the region.
Independent interim beneficiaries beneficiaries
and final evaluation (of which (of which c) Individuals that will receive technical assistance
carried out on the 78,462 are 1,005,928 are from the GCF- funded intervention (e.g trainings,
project. women) women) support to develop site-specific climate
diagnostics and preparation of participatory
intervention plans)
d) Public officials that will receive capacity
building for adjusting regulations and norms.
90 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end
of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

--- Table 1 on Page 86 ---
 | the high Andean
populations. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Activity 3.1.2 will work to strengthen regulatory
frameworks at national level to ensure the
sustainability after the project implementation
period.
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
GCF Result Area |  | IRMF
Indicator |  | Means of
Verification (MoV) | Baseline |  |  | Target |  |  | Assumptions / Note | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final90 |  |  | 
ARA1 Most
vulnerable people
and communities |  | Core 2: Direct and
indirect
beneficiaries
reached |  | Annual reports from
the Puna Facility
and Executing
Entities (GIZ,
SERNANP,
MIDAGRI).
Project monitoring
and evaluation
reports quality
assessed by the AE
and EEs.
Independent interim
and final evaluation
carried out on the
project. | 0 |  | Total direct
beneficiaries:
4,735 out of
which 2,367
are women
156,924
indirect
beneficiaries
(of which
78,462 are
women) |  | Total direct
beneficiaries:
60,715 out of
which 30,088
are women
2,011,856
indirect
beneficiaries
(of which
1,005,928 are
women) |  | Direct beneficiaries of an adaptation intervention
will include all individuals who will receive i)
targeted support from the GCF-funded
intervention and ii) a measurable adaptation
benefit from a GCF-funded intervention, including:
a) Individuals that implement Local initiatives that
will be financed and supported by the Puna
Facility, multiplied by the average number of
members of the groups/legal entities supported
and the average members per household in the
region.
b) Individuals that will be supported by MIDAGRIs
co-finance programs, multiplied by the average
members number per household in the region.
c) Individuals that will receive technical assistance
from the GCF- funded intervention (e.g trainings,
support to develop site-specific climate
diagnostics and preparation of participatory
intervention plans)
d) Public officials that will receive capacity
building for adjusting regulations and norms. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 86 ---
IRMF
Indicator

--- Table 3 on Page 86 ---
Means of
Verification (MoV)

=== PAGE 87 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83
E
Indirect beneficiaries of the project will be those
that do not receive targeted support from the
GCF-funded intervention but will benefit from
water generated by the improvement of
ecosystems that contribute to water regulation in
the basin in the main cities of Cusco, Arequipa
and Cañete.
Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
target based on the project implementation plan.
Annual reports from Executing Entities (MIDAGRI, Instituto de
the Puna Facility Montaña, GIZ) will collect data on direct
(Profonanpe) and beneficiaries.
Executing Entities.
(GIZ, SERNANP,
Total direct Direct beneficiaries of the Puna Facility were
MIDAGRI).
Supplementary beneficiaries: calculated based on the following:
4,735 out of Total direct
2.1: Beneficiaries a) 127 Local initiatives
ARA1 Most (female/male) Project monitoring w ar h e i c w h o 2 m ,3 e 6 n 7 b 60 e , n 7 e 1 f 5 ic i o a u r t i e o s f : b) Average number per supported organization
vulnerable people adopting improved and evaluation 0
which 30,088 c) 5 members per households in High Andes
and communities and/or new reports quality are women
climate-resilient assessed by the AE
livelihood options and EEs. Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
target based on the project implementation plan.
Independent interim
and final evaluation
carried out on the
project.
ARA1 Most Annual reports from
690 Livestock
vulnerable people Supplementary the Puna Facility 0 8,854 LSU The estimations of alpacas are derived by the
Unit (LSU)91
and communities 4.2: Number of (Profonanpe) and hectares of natural grasslands that are expected
91 An alpaca is estimated as 0.25 LSU/head.

--- Table 1 on Page 87 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | Indirect beneficiaries of the project will be those
that do not receive targeted support from the
GCF-funded intervention but will benefit from
water generated by the improvement of
ecosystems that contribute to water regulation in
the basin in the main cities of Cusco, Arequipa
and Cañete.
Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
target based on the project implementation plan.
ARA1 Most
vulnerable people
and communities | Supplementary
2.1: Beneficiaries
(female/male)
adopting improved
and/or new
climate-resilient
livelihood options | Annual reports from
the Puna Facility
(Profonanpe) and
Executing Entities.
(GIZ, SERNANP,
MIDAGRI).
Project monitoring
and evaluation
reports quality
assessed by the AE
and EEs.
Independent interim
and final evaluation
carried out on the
project. | 0 | Total direct
beneficiaries:
4,735 out of
which 2,367
are women | Total direct
beneficiaries:
60,715 out of
which 30,088
are women | Executing Entities (MIDAGRI, Instituto de
Montaña, GIZ) will collect data on direct
beneficiaries.
Direct beneficiaries of the Puna Facility were
calculated based on the following:
a) 127 Local initiatives
b) Average number per supported organization
c) 5 members per households in High Andes
Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
target based on the project implementation plan.
ARA1 Most
vulnerable people
and communities | Supplementary
4.2: Number of | Annual reports from
the Puna Facility
(Profonanpe) and | 0 | 690 Livestock
Unit (LSU)91 | 8,854 LSU | The estimations of alpacas are derived by the
hectares of natural grasslands that are expected

=== PAGE 88 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84
E
livestock brought Executing Entities to be restored through the Puna Facility,
under sustainable (SERNANP, multiplied by the carrying capacity of the
management MIDAGRI). pastures. Additional alpacas will be supported
practices through cultivated pastures and greenhouses for
the production of fodder.
Project monitoring
and evaluation
Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
reports quality
target based on the project implementation plan.
assessed by the AE
and EE.
Independent interim
and final evaluation
carried out on the
project.
Annual reports from
the Puna Facility 0 For direct beneficiaries, agricultural production of
(Profonanpe) and local family farms will be improved through the
Executing Entities implementation of project activities, contributing to
(SERNANP, Total direct Total direct food security.
MIDAGRI). beneficiaries: beneficiaries:
4,735 out of 60,715 out of For indirect beneficiaries, water security benefits
which 2,367 which 30,088 are expected, derived from the contribution to
Project monitoring are women are women water regulation of the EbA measures
Core 2: Direct and and evaluation
ARA2 Health, well- implemented in the upper part of the basin.
indirect reports quality
being, food and water
beneficiaries assessed by the AE
security 2,011,856 Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
reached and EEs. 156,924
indirect target based on the project implementation plan.
indirect
beneficiaries
beneficiaries
Independent interim (of which (of which
1,005,928 are
and final evaluation 78,462 are
women
carried out on the women)
project.

--- Table 1 on Page 88 ---
 | livestock brought
under sustainable
management
practices | Executing Entities
(SERNANP,
MIDAGRI).
Project monitoring
and evaluation
reports quality
assessed by the AE
and EE.
Independent interim
and final evaluation
carried out on the
project. |  |  |  | to be restored through the Puna Facility,
multiplied by the carrying capacity of the
pastures. Additional alpacas will be supported
through cultivated pastures and greenhouses for
the production of fodder.
Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
target based on the project implementation plan.
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water
security | Core 2: Direct and
indirect
beneficiaries
reached | Annual reports from
the Puna Facility
(Profonanpe) and
Executing Entities
(SERNANP,
MIDAGRI).
Project monitoring
and evaluation
reports quality
assessed by the AE
and EEs.
Independent interim
and final evaluation
carried out on the
project. | 0 | Total direct
beneficiaries:
4,735 out of
which 2,367
are women
156,924
indirect
beneficiaries
(of which
78,462 are
women) | Total direct
beneficiaries:
60,715 out of
which 30,088
are women
2,011,856
indirect
beneficiaries
(of which
1,005,928 are
women | For direct beneficiaries, agricultural production of
local family farms will be improved through the
implementation of project activities, contributing to
food security.
For indirect beneficiaries, water security benefits
are expected, derived from the contribution to
water regulation of the EbA measures
implemented in the upper part of the basin.
Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
target based on the project implementation plan.

=== PAGE 89 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85
E
Annual reports from
the Puna Facility Agricultural production of local family farms will be
and Executing improved through the implementation of project
Entities (GIZ, activities, contributing to food security.
SERNANP,
MIDAGRI). The target under this indicator is expected to be
74.88% (percentage of the population estimated
to be subsistence farmers) of the total direct
Project monitoring
Supplementary beneficiaries supported under sub-activities
45,463 out of
and evaluation
ARA2 Health, well- 2.2: Beneficiaries 3,546 out of which 22,732 1.1.2.1, 1.1.2.2, 1.1.2.3, 1.1.1.2 and 1.2.1.1.
reports quality
being, food and water (female/male) with 0 which 1,773 are women
security improved food assessed by the AE are women
and EEs.
security
Independent interim
and final evaluation
carried out on the
project.
Annual reports from
the Puna Facility Local communities will be interested in being part
(Profonanpe) and of the project and implement EbA measures and
Core 4: Hectares Executing Entities Climate Resilient Value Chains.
of natural (SERNANP,
resources brought MIDAGRI). Calculations will be based on an analysis of the
ARA4 Ecosystems under improved area that will be brought under management
and ecosystem low-emission 0 1,865 ha 23,914 ha practices restoration according to the area that
Project monitoring
services and/or climate- the Local initiatives will cover in the 58 prioritized
and evaluation
resilient districts.
reports.
management
practice Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
target based on the project implementation plan.
Independent
interim and final

--- Table 1 on Page 89 ---
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water
security | Supplementary
2.2: Beneficiaries
(female/male) with
improved food
security | Annual reports from
the Puna Facility
and Executing
Entities (GIZ,
SERNANP,
MIDAGRI).
Project monitoring
and evaluation
reports quality
assessed by the AE
and EEs.
Independent interim
and final evaluation
carried out on the
project. | 0 | 3,546 out of
which 1,773
are women | 45,463 out of
which 22,732
are women | Agricultural production of local family farms will be
improved through the implementation of project
activities, contributing to food security.
The target under this indicator is expected to be
74.88% (percentage of the population estimated
to be subsistence farmers) of the total direct
beneficiaries supported under sub-activities
1.1.2.1, 1.1.2.2, 1.1.2.3, 1.1.1.2 and 1.2.1.1.
ARA4 Ecosystems
and ecosystem
services | Core 4: Hectares
of natural
resources brought
under improved
low-emission
and/or climate-
resilient
management
practice | Annual reports from
the Puna Facility
(Profonanpe) and
Executing Entities
(SERNANP,
MIDAGRI).
Project monitoring
and evaluation
reports.
Independent
interim and final | 0 | 1,865 ha | 23,914 ha | Local communities will be interested in being part
of the project and implement EbA measures and
Climate Resilient Value Chains.
Calculations will be based on an analysis of the
area that will be brought under management
practices restoration according to the area that
the Local initiatives will cover in the 58 prioritized
districts.
Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
target based on the project implementation plan.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86
E
evaluation carried
out on the project.
Annual reports from
the Puna Facility Calculations will be based on an analysis of the
(Profonape) and area that will be brought under restoration
Supplementary Executing Entities according to the area that the Local initiatives will
4.1: Hectares of (SERNANP, cover in the 58 prioritized districts.
terrestrial forest, MIDAGRI).
Local communities will be interested in being part
terrestrial non-
ARA4 Ecosystems of the project and implement EbA measures and
forest, freshwater
and ecosystem Project monitoring 0 1,865 ha 23,914 ha Climate Resilient Value Chains.
and coastal marine
services and evaluation
areas brought
reports.
Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
under resoration
target based on the project implementation plan.
and/or improved Independent
ecosystems interim and final
The area was calculated based on the geospatial
evaluation carried
analysis of EbA and value chains.
out on the project.
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)
Baseline context Rating for current Target scenario How the project will
Core Indicator Coverage
(description) state (baseline) (description) contribute
Core Indicator 5: Degree Currently, EbA In the target scenario
to which GCF measures are not institutional and
The project will actively
investments contribute sufficiently regulatory frameworks in
contribute to the
to strengthening mainstreamed into local Peru will have EbA
strengthening of
institutional and institutional and measures Single sub-national area
medium institutional and
regulatory frameworks regulatory frameworks in mainstreamed, with local within a country
regulatory frameworks
for low emission climate- Peru. There is limited communities’
through the activities
resilient development coordination between participation to ensure
under output 3.1. The
pathways in a country- actors to reinforce the ownership. Local
objective will be to
driven manner positive impacts of EbA stakeholders will have
mainstream EbA

--- Table 1 on Page 90 ---
 |  | evaluation carried
out on the project. |  |  |  | 
ARA4 Ecosystems
and ecosystem
services | Supplementary
4.1: Hectares of
terrestrial forest,
terrestrial non-
forest, freshwater
and coastal marine
areas brought
under resoration
and/or improved
ecosystems | Annual reports from
the Puna Facility
(Profonape) and
Executing Entities
(SERNANP,
MIDAGRI).
Project monitoring
and evaluation
reports.
Independent
interim and final
evaluation carried
out on the project. | 0 | 1,865 ha | 23,914 ha | Calculations will be based on an analysis of the
area that will be brought under restoration
according to the area that the Local initiatives will
cover in the 58 prioritized districts.
Local communities will be interested in being part
of the project and implement EbA measures and
Climate Resilient Value Chains.
Mid-term target is expected to be 7,8% of the final
target based on the project implementation plan.
The area was calculated based on the geospatial
analysis of EbA and value chains.

--- Table 2 on Page 90 ---
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable) |  |  |  |  | 
Core Indicator | Baseline context
(description) | Rating for current
state (baseline) | Target scenario
(description) | How the project will
contribute | Coverage
Core Indicator 5: Degree
to which GCF
investments contribute
to strengthening
institutional and
regulatory frameworks
for low emission climate-
resilient development
pathways in a country-
driven manner | Currently, EbA
measures are not
sufficiently
mainstreamed into local
institutional and
regulatory frameworks in
Peru. There is limited
coordination between
actors to reinforce the
positive impacts of EbA | medium | In the target scenario
institutional and
regulatory frameworks in
Peru will have EbA
measures
mainstreamed, with local
communities’
participation to ensure
ownership. Local
stakeholders will have | The project will actively
contribute to the
strengthening of
institutional and
regulatory frameworks
through the activities
under output 3.1. The
objective will be to
mainstream EbA | Single sub-national area
within a country

--- Table 3 on Page 90 ---
Baseline context
(description)

--- Table 4 on Page 90 ---
Rating for current
state (baseline)

--- Table 5 on Page 90 ---
Target scenario
(description)

--- Table 6 on Page 90 ---
How the project will
contribute

=== PAGE 91 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87
E
measures in the territory improved capacities and approach and
and the regulations do more awareness of the community participation
not consider the benefits of EbA into territorial planning
importance of protecting, measures and Climate instruments at the local
restoring and conserving Resilient Value Chains. and regional levels, and
ecosystems. Moreover, This will enable the strengthen M&E
local communities do not implementation of those systems at the national
participate in the measures at the local level.
decision-making process level, as well as the
at the local and regional replication and scale up
level, which makes the of the initiatives through
institutional and the dissemination of
regulatory frameworks knowledge and stronger
weaker due to the lack regulatory and M&E
of ownership and frameworks.
participation of local
actors.
The knowledge about The project will
The target scenario with
methodologies and good contribute to the
the project
practices related to EbA effective knowledge
implementation will
and Climate Resilient generation and use of
include the support to
Value Chains in the High good practices by
generate, disseminate
Core indicator 8: Degree Andean Region in Peru, recovering and scaling
and deploy the best
to which GCF including ancestral up ancestral knowledge
practices based on
investments contribute knowledge, is not well and practices related to
ancestral knowledge.
to effective knowledge disseminated within EbA measures in the
This will enable other Single sub-national area
generation and learning local stakeholders. low region through output
family farms, within a country
processes, and use of There is a limited overall 1.2. Moreover, under
organizations and
good practices, generation and output 3.1 the project
institutions based in
methodologies and management of will work on the
districts that are not part
standards information that hinders development of training
of the project target area
the implementation of and capacity building to
to access and
good practices. This is local relevant
disseminate the
mostly due to the stakeholders, which will
information,
migration of those who support knowledge
implementing the
know about the transfer to the most

--- Table 1 on Page 91 ---
 | measures in the territory
and the regulations do
not consider the
importance of protecting,
restoring and conserving
ecosystems. Moreover,
local communities do not
participate in the
decision-making process
at the local and regional
level, which makes the
institutional and
regulatory frameworks
weaker due to the lack
of ownership and
participation of local
actors. |  | improved capacities and
more awareness of the
benefits of EbA
measures and Climate
Resilient Value Chains.
This will enable the
implementation of those
measures at the local
level, as well as the
replication and scale up
of the initiatives through
the dissemination of
knowledge and stronger
regulatory and M&E
frameworks. | approach and
community participation
into territorial planning
instruments at the local
and regional levels, and
strengthen M&E
systems at the national
level. | 
Core indicator 8: Degree
to which GCF
investments contribute
to effective knowledge
generation and learning
processes, and use of
good practices,
methodologies and
standards | The knowledge about
methodologies and good
practices related to EbA
and Climate Resilient
Value Chains in the High
Andean Region in Peru,
including ancestral
knowledge, is not well
disseminated within
local stakeholders.
There is a limited overall
generation and
management of
information that hinders
the implementation of
good practices. This is
mostly due to the
migration of those who
know about the | low | The target scenario with
the project
implementation will
include the support to
generate, disseminate
and deploy the best
practices based on
ancestral knowledge.
This will enable other
family farms,
organizations and
institutions based in
districts that are not part
of the project target area
to access and
disseminate the
information,
implementing the | The project will
contribute to the
effective knowledge
generation and use of
good practices by
recovering and scaling
up ancestral knowledge
and practices related to
EbA measures in the
region through output
1.2. Moreover, under
output 3.1 the project
will work on the
development of training
and capacity building to
local relevant
stakeholders, which will
support knowledge
transfer to the most | Single sub-national area
within a country

=== PAGE 92 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88
E
practices, the lack of measures and achieving vulnerable communities
recognition of the similar results. and other regions in the
importance of this country.
knowledge by
institutions and the
adoption of technologies
that are not suitable for
the puna ecosystem and
are not sustainable.
In the project target With the appropriate
area, most of the technical and financial
agricultural units are support, family farmers The financial and
family farmers and most in the puna ecosystem technical support
of them are categorized will be able to implement provided by the project’s
as subsistence and best practices and have activities under output
extreme poverty. These access to financial 1.1, 1.2 and 2.1 will
farmers do not have the instruments that will help enable the family farms
capacity to access them improve their in the region to improve
Core indicator 7: Degree markets and be included production and secure their production and
to which GCF in the value chain due to their livelihoods. The increase their resilience
Investments contribute the lack of financial and target scenario will be to to climate change. The
National level (one
to market technical support in the low have Climate Resilient activities related to the
country)
development/transforma region. Value Chains development of Climate
tion at the sectoral, implemented in the Resilient Value Chains
local, or national level region, which would be under output 1.1 will
supported through more support the inclusion of
demand for the specific this improved production
products coming from from family farmers in
the region, which would the region and will
strengthen and support the market
transform the market at transformation at the
the national level. national level.

--- Table 1 on Page 92 ---
 | practices, the lack of
recognition of the
importance of this
knowledge by
institutions and the
adoption of technologies
that are not suitable for
the puna ecosystem and
are not sustainable. |  | measures and achieving
similar results. | vulnerable communities
and other regions in the
country. | 
Core indicator 7: Degree
to which GCF
Investments contribute
to market
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral,
local, or national level | In the project target
area, most of the
agricultural units are
family farmers and most
of them are categorized
as subsistence and
extreme poverty. These
farmers do not have the
capacity to access
markets and be included
in the value chain due to
the lack of financial and
technical support in the
region. | low | With the appropriate
technical and financial
support, family farmers
in the puna ecosystem
will be able to implement
best practices and have
access to financial
instruments that will help
them improve their
production and secure
their livelihoods. The
target scenario will be to
have Climate Resilient
Value Chains
implemented in the
region, which would be
supported through more
demand for the specific
products coming from
the region, which would
strengthen and
transform the market at
the national level. | The financial and
technical support
provided by the project’s
activities under output
1.1, 1.2 and 2.1 will
enable the family farms
in the region to improve
their production and
increase their resilience
to climate change. The
activities related to the
development of Climate
Resilient Value Chains
under output 1.1 will
support the inclusion of
this improved production
from family farmers in
the region and will
support the market
transformation at the
national level. | National level (one
country)

=== PAGE 93 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89
E
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)
Target
Project/programme
Project/programme Means of Verification
results Baseline Assumptions / Note
specific Indicator (MoV) Mid-term Final
(outcomes/ outputs)
Outcome 1. Puna Hectares of Project monitoring and The area was
ecosystems are ecosystems restored, evaluation reports calculated based on the
restored, conserved conserved and better geospatial analysis of
and better managed managed through the EbA and value chains.
through the implementation of 0 1,865 ha 23,914 ha
implementation of EbA EbA measures
measures
complemented by
CRVC
Output 1.1 Investments Value (EUR) of funds Project monitoring and 58 out of 91 districts
for EbA measures and to support the evaluation reports prioritized will be part of
Climate Resilient Value implementation of the Puna Facility target
Chains are EbA measures and Signed grant agreements area.
implemented at the CRVC at the local with Puna Facility
local landscape level landscape level
Integrated financial
Local communities are
management system
interested in
(SIAF): information about
From the Puna From the Puna implementing EbA
public investment projects
Facility: EUR Facility: EUR 14.4 measures and climate
0 1.12 million million resilient value chains.
EMMA integrated
management system
From MIDAGRI: From MIDAGRI:
EUR 7.8 million EUR 22.7 million
(Profonanpe):
Mid-term target for the
disbursement reports
Puna Facility is
expected to be 7,8% of
MIDAGRI reporting (e.g.,
the final target based
Agroideas, Agrorural, etc)
on the project
implementation plan.

--- Table 1 on Page 93 ---
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project/programme
results
(outcomes/ outputs) |  |  |  |  |  | Means of Verification
(MoV) | Baseline |  | Target |  |  | Assumptions / Note |  | 
 |  |  |  | Project/programme |  |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | specific Indicator |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Outcome 1. Puna |  | Hectares of
ecosystems restored,
conserved and better
managed through the
implementation of
EbA measures | Hectares of |  | Project monitoring and
evaluation reports | 0 | 1,865 ha |  | 23,914 ha |  | The area was
calculated based on the
geospatial analysis of
EbA and value chains. |  | 
 | ecosystems are |  |  | ecosystems restored, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | restored, conserved |  |  | conserved and better |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and better managed |  |  | managed through the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | through the |  |  | implementation of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | implementation of EbA |  |  | EbA measures |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | measures |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | complemented by |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | CRVC |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 1.1 Investments
for EbA measures and
Climate Resilient Value
Chains are
implemented at the
local landscape level | Output 1.1 Investments |  | Value (EUR) of funds
to support the
implementation of
EbA measures and
CRVC at the local
landscape level |  |  | Project monitoring and
evaluation reports
Signed grant agreements
with Puna Facility
Integrated financial
management system
(SIAF): information about
public investment projects
EMMA integrated
management system
(Profonanpe):
disbursement reports
MIDAGRI reporting (e.g.,
Agroideas, Agrorural, etc) | 0 | From the Puna
Facility: EUR
1.12 million
From MIDAGRI:
EUR 7.8 million |  | From the Puna
Facility: EUR 14.4
million
From MIDAGRI:
EUR 22.7 million |  |  | 58 out of 91 districts | 
 | for EbA measures and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | prioritized will be part of | 
 | Climate Resilient Value |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the Puna Facility target | 
 | Chains are |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | area. | 
 | implemented at the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | local landscape level |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Local communities are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | interested in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementing EbA | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | measures and climate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | resilient value chains. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term target for the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Puna Facility is | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | expected to be 7,8% of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the final target based | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | on the project | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation plan. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 93 ---
Project/programme
results
(outcomes/ outputs)

--- Table 3 on Page 93 ---
Means of Verification
(MoV)

--- Table 4 on Page 93 ---
Project monitoring and
evaluation reports

--- Table 5 on Page 93 ---
The area was
calculated based on the
geospatial analysis of
EbA and value chains.

--- Table 6 on Page 93 ---
Value (EUR) of funds
to support the
implementation of
EbA measures and
CRVC at the local
landscape level

--- Table 7 on Page 93 ---
Project monitoring and
evaluation reports

Signed grant agreements
with Puna Facility

Integrated financial
management system
(SIAF): information about
public investment projects

EMMA integrated
management system
(Profonanpe):
disbursement reports

MIDAGRI reporting (e.g.,
Agroideas, Agrorural, etc)




--- Table 8 on Page 93 ---
From the Puna
Facility: EUR
1.12 million
From MIDAGRI:
EUR 7.8 million

--- Table 9 on Page 93 ---
From the Puna
Facility: EUR 14.4
million
From MIDAGRI:
EUR 22.7 million

=== PAGE 94 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90
E
For MIDAGRI
programmes include
Agrorural, Sierra Azul,
Directorate for
Insurance and
Promotion of
Agricultural Financing
Agroideas, INIA,
SERFOR and PSI.
Mid-term target for
MIDAGRI is expected
to be 16,6% of the final
target based on the
project implementation
plan
58 out of 91 districts
prioritized will be part of
Number of Local Project monitoring and the Puna Facility target
evaluation reports area.
initiatives that
Output 1.2 The use of
EbA knowledge is
implement EbA
0 10 100
measures based on
recovered and
ancestral knowledge Field surveys results Local communities are
disseminated, and local
interested in
monitoring committees
implementing EbA
and observation
measures and climate
systems are
resilient value chains.
implemented
Minutes of traditional
Number of local
assemblies/organizational
monitoring
assemblies that formalize
committees and 0 10 100
the monitoring
observation systems
committees
established

--- Table 1 on Page 94 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | For MIDAGRI | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | programmes include | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Agrorural, Sierra Azul, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Directorate for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Insurance and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Promotion of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Agricultural Financing | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Agroideas, INIA, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | SERFOR and PSI. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term target for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | MIDAGRI is expected | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | to be 16,6% of the final | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | target based on the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | project implementation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | plan | 
Output 1.2 The use of
EbA knowledge is
recovered and
disseminated, and local
monitoring committees
and observation
systems are
implemented | Number of Local
initiatives that
implement EbA
measures based on
ancestral knowledge | Project monitoring and
evaluation reports
Field surveys results |  |  | 0 | 10 | 100 |  | 58 out of 91 districts | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | prioritized will be part of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the Puna Facility target | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | area. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Local communities are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | interested in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementing EbA | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | measures and climate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | resilient value chains. | 
 | Number of local
monitoring
committees and
observation systems
established |  | Minutes of traditional |  | 0 | 10 | 100 |  |  | 
 |  |  | assemblies/organizational |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | assemblies that formalize |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | the monitoring |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | committees |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 94 ---
Project monitoring and
evaluation reports

Field surveys results


--- Table 3 on Page 94 ---
nitiatives that
mplement EbA
measures based on
ancestral knowledge


--- Table 4 on Page 94 ---
Output 1.2 The use of
EbA knowledge is
ecovered and
disseminated, and local
monitoring committees
and observation
systems are
mplemented


--- Table 5 on Page 94 ---
Number of local
monitoring
committees and
observation systems
established

=== PAGE 95 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91
E
58 out of 91 districts
prioritized will be part of
Project monitoring and
the Puna Facility target
evaluation reports
area.
MIDAGRI reporting (e.g.,
Stakeholders (e.g.,
DSFFA)
rural banks, private
microfinance
Integrated financial
institutions) are
management system
interested in developing
(SIAF): information about
and/or adjusting
public investment projects
financing options for
Implemented by EPS with
EbA measures and
MERESE
Number of public and CRVC.
Outcome 2. Public and private financing
Agreements (e.g., MoU)
private financing for modalities to promote Financial institutions
EbA measures and EbA and CRVC signed between EPS and such as rural credit
climate established and being implementing institutions banks are interested in
resilient livelihoods are actively used by to implement EbA 0 1 3 developing and/or
accessible and being measures.
vulnerable adjusting credit lines to
actively used by
communities in the support EbA and
vulnerable communities Agreements (e.g., MoU)
in the Puna Ecosystem Puna ecosystem CRVC.
signed between financial
institutions and the
Fondo Agroperú
project
supports 14 programs
and is interested in
Proof of disbursement of
partnering with the
financial resources from
proposed project.
the new financial
modalities to the local
The project will
communities in the Puna
consider as “actively
ecosystems or invested in
used” the financial
EbA and CRVA
mechanisms that have
(contracts, agreement,
been established and
etc.).
have disbursed
financial resources to

--- Table 1 on Page 95 ---
Outcome 2. Public and
private financing for
EbA measures and
climate
resilient livelihoods are
accessible and being
actively used by
vulnerable communities
in the Puna Ecosystem | Number of public and
private financing
modalities to promote
EbA and CRVC
established and being
actively used by
vulnerable
communities in the
Puna ecosystem | Project monitoring and
evaluation reports
MIDAGRI reporting (e.g.,
DSFFA)
Integrated financial
management system
(SIAF): information about
public investment projects
Implemented by EPS with
MERESE
Agreements (e.g., MoU)
signed between EPS and
implementing institutions
to implement EbA
measures.
Agreements (e.g., MoU)
signed between financial
institutions and the
project
Proof of disbursement of
financial resources from
the new financial
modalities to the local
communities in the Puna
ecosystems or invested in
EbA and CRVA
(contracts, agreement,
etc.). | 0 | 1 | 3 |  | 58 out of 91 districts | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | prioritized will be part of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | the Puna Facility target | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | area. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Stakeholders (e.g., | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | rural banks, private | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | microfinance | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | institutions) are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | interested in developing | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | and/or adjusting | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | financing options for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | EbA measures and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | CRVC. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Financial institutions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | such as rural credit | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | banks are interested in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | developing and/or | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | adjusting credit lines to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | support EbA and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | CRVC. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Fondo Agroperú | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | supports 14 programs | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | and is interested in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | partnering with the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | proposed project. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | The project will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | consider as “actively | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | used” the financial | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | mechanisms that have | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | been established and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | have disbursed | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | financial resources to | 

--- Table 2 on Page 95 ---
Project monitoring and
evaluation reports

MIDAGRI reporting (e.g.,
DSFFA)

Integrated financial
management system
(SIAF): information about
public investment projects
Implemented by EPS with
MERESE

Agreements (e.g., MoU)
signed between EPS and
implementing institutions
to implement EbA
measures.

Agreements (e.g., MoU)
signed between financial
institutions and the
project

Proof of disbursement of
financial resources from
the new financial
modalities to the local
communities in the Puna
ecosystems or invested in
EbA and CRVA
(contracts, agreement,
etc.).

--- Table 3 on Page 95 ---
Number of public and
private financing
modalities to promote
EbA and CRVC
established and being
actively used by
vulnerable
communities in the
Puna ecosystem


--- Table 4 on Page 95 ---
Outcome 2. Public and
private financing for
EbA measures and
climate
resilient livelihoods are
accessible and being
actively used by
vulnerable communities
in the Puna Ecosystem

=== PAGE 96 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92
E
the local communities
in the Puna ecosystem
or invested in EbA and
CRVC.
58 out of 91 districts
prioritized will be part of
the Puna Facility target
Project monitoring and
area.
evaluation reports
Stakeholders (e.g.,
MIDAGRI reporting (e.g.,
rural banks, private
DSFFA)
microfinance
institutions) are
Integrated financial
interested in developing
Number of public and management system
and/or adjusting
Output 2.1 Financial private financing (SIAF): information about
mechanisms for the modalities to promote public investment projects financing options for
implementation of EbA EbA and CRVC Implemented by EPS with EbA measures and
measures and available for MERESE 0 2 6 CRVC.
improvement of climate
vulnerable
resilient livelihoods in Financial institutions
communities in the Agreements (e.g., MoU)
the Puna ecosystem such as rural credit
region signed between EPS and
are established banks are interested in
implementing institutions
developing and/or
to implement EbA
adjusting credit lines to
measures.
support EbA and
CRVC.
Agreements (e.g., MoU)
signed between financial
Fondo Agroperú
institutions and the
supports 14 programs
project
and is interested in
partnering with the
proposed project.
Outcome 3. EbA and Number of regulatory Project monitoring and Willingness of the
climate resilience are frameworks or public evaluation reports government in
0 2 5
mainstreamed into instruments improving their
multilevel landscape redesigned or regulatory frameworks

--- Table 1 on Page 96 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the local communities | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | in the Puna ecosystem | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | or invested in EbA and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | CRVC. | 
Output 2.1 Financial
mechanisms for the
implementation of EbA
measures and
improvement of climate
resilient livelihoods in
the Puna ecosystem
are established | Number of public and
private financing
modalities to promote
EbA and CRVC
available for
vulnerable
communities in the
region |  |  | Project monitoring and
evaluation reports
MIDAGRI reporting (e.g.,
DSFFA)
Integrated financial
management system
(SIAF): information about
public investment projects
Implemented by EPS with
MERESE
Agreements (e.g., MoU)
signed between EPS and
implementing institutions
to implement EbA
measures.
Agreements (e.g., MoU)
signed between financial
institutions and the
project |  |  | 0 | 2 | 6 |  | 58 out of 91 districts | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | prioritized will be part of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the Puna Facility target | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | area. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Stakeholders (e.g., | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | rural banks, private | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | microfinance | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | institutions) are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | interested in developing | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and/or adjusting | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | financing options for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | EbA measures and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | CRVC. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Financial institutions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | such as rural credit | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | banks are interested in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | developing and/or | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | adjusting credit lines to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | support EbA and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | CRVC. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Fondo Agroperú | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | supports 14 programs | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and is interested in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | partnering with the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | proposed project. | 
Outcome 3. EbA and
climate resilience are
mainstreamed into
multilevel landscape | f
i
r | Number of regulatory |  |  | Project monitoring and |  | 0 | 2 | 5 |  | Willingness of the | 
 |  | rameworks or public |  |  | evaluation reports |  |  |  |  |  | government in | 
 |  | nstruments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | improving their | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | edesigned or |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | regulatory frameworks | 

--- Table 2 on Page 96 ---
Project monitoring and
evaluation reports

MIDAGRI reporting (e.g.,
DSFFA)

Integrated financial
management system
(SIAF): information about
public investment projects
Implemented by EPS with
MERESE

Agreements (e.g., MoU)
signed between EPS and
implementing institutions
to implement EbA
measures.

Agreements (e.g., MoU)
signed between financial
institutions and the
project

--- Table 3 on Page 96 ---
Number of public and
private financing
modalities to promote
EbA and CRVC
available for
vulnerable
communities in the
egion


--- Table 4 on Page 96 ---
Output 2.1 Financial
mechanisms for the
implementation of EbA
measures and
improvement of climate
resilient livelihoods in
the Puna ecosystem
are established

--- Table 5 on Page 96 ---
climate resilience are
mainstreamed into

=== PAGE 97 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93
E
governance strengthened to Public body decisions
instruments include EbA and related to relevant
climate resilience regulatory frameworks
Ministerial/directorial
resolutions
50% increase in
50% increase
Output 3.1 Multilevel self-reported
landscape governance Number of Reports from pre and in self-reported Engagement of
awareness levels
is improved through government officials post capacity building awareness government officials to
in population of
strengthening of demonstrating training surveys 0 levels in participate in the online
605 (182 women
national capacity, improved capacity in population of and presential training
and 423 men)92
regulatory frameworks EbA and climate 300 people provided by the project
people
and M&E systems resilience including capacitated
capacitated
gender aspects
Project/programme co-benefit indicators
Area within the project
Co-benefit 1 target districts that are
Maintenance of important for
Project reports 0 1,865 ha 23,914 ha
ecosystem services in ecosystem services
the project area where EbA measures
are implemented
The overall mitigation
impact as a co-benefit
Co-benefit 2 GHG from the projects is a
emissions are avoided reduction of 407,657
through the Avoided GHG tCO2e in the 15 years
ExACT tool 0 31,797 tCO2e 407,657 tCO2e
conservation and emissions in tCO2eq analysed, which include
restoration of degraded five years of
ecosystems implementation phase
and ten years of
capitalisation phase. It
92 Based on the ratio of the participation of women and men during the public official engagement events as part of the consultations a 30% women’s participation can be expected.

--- Table 1 on Page 97 ---
governance
instruments | strengthened to
include EbA and
climate resilience |  |  |  | Public body decisions |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | related to relevant |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | regulatory frameworks |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Ministerial/directorial |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | resolutions |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 3.1 Multilevel
landscape governance
is improved through
strengthening of
national capacity,
regulatory frameworks
and M&E systems | i
r |  |  | Reports from pre and
post capacity building
training surveys |  |  | 0 | 50% increase
in self-reported
awareness
levels in
population of
300 people
capacitated | 50% increase in
self-reported
awareness levels
in population of
605 (182 women
and 423 men)92
people
capacitated | Engagement of
government officials to
participate in the online
and presential training
provided by the project |  | 
 |  | Number of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | government officials |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | demonstrating |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | mproved capacity in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | EbA and climate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | esilience including |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | gender aspects |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 1
Maintenance of
ecosystem services in
the project area | t
i | Area within the project |  | Project reports |  |  | 0 | 1,865 ha | 23,914 ha |  |  | 
 |  | arget districts that are |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | mportant for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | ecosystem services |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | where EbA measures |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | are implemented |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 2 GHG
emissions are avoided
through the
conservation and
restoration of degraded
ecosystems | Avoided GHG
emissions in tCO2eq |  |  | ExACT tool |  |  | 0 | 31,797 tCO2e | 407,657 tCO2e |  | The overall mitigation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | impact as a co-benefit | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | from the projects is a | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reduction of 407,657 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | tCO2e in the 15 years | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | analysed, which include | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | five years of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation phase | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and ten years of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capitalisation phase. It | 

--- Table 2 on Page 97 ---
governance
instruments

--- Table 3 on Page 97 ---
strengthened to
nclude EbA and
climate resilience

--- Table 4 on Page 97 ---
50% increase in
self-reported
awareness levels
in population of
605 (182 women
and 423 men)92
people
capacitated

--- Table 5 on Page 97 ---
50% increase
in self-reported
awareness
levels in
population of
300 people
capacitated

--- Table 6 on Page 97 ---
Output 3.1 Multilevel
landscape governance
is improved through
strengthening of
national capacity,
regulatory frameworks
and M&E systems

--- Table 7 on Page 97 ---
Reports from pre and
post capacity building
training surveys


--- Table 8 on Page 97 ---
Engagement of
government officials to
participate in the online
and presential training
provided by the project

--- Table 9 on Page 97 ---
Co-benefit 1
Maintenance of
ecosystem services in
he project area

--- Table 10 on Page 97 ---
Co-benefit 2 GHG
emissions are avoided
hrough the
conservation and
estoration of degraded
ecosystems

--- Table 11 on Page 97 ---
Avoided GHG
emissions in tCO2eq

=== PAGE 98 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94
E
is measured against a
scenario without project
that would have
increased by 93,905
tCO2e the GHG
emissions in the areas
of intervention.
Mid-term target is
expected to be 7,8% of
the final target based
on the project
implementation plan
Number of producers,
of whom 50% are Reports from MIDAGRI
Co-benefit 3 women have
Improvement of local confirmed an 70% of the local
Implementation of 127
economy through better improvement in their 0 0 initiative
Pre and post workshop Local initiatives
economic opportunities income from climate beneficiaries
survey
and poverty reduction resilient value chains
or climate-resilient
practices.
Under capacitated
people the project
Percentage of counts following:
50% increase in 50% increase in
Co-benefit 4 Awareness increase in self- Pre and post workshop self-reported self-reported
• 9647 producers
raising and capacity reported awareness survey awareness levels awareness levels
0 trained through
building of local levels in population of in population of in population of
MIDAGRI (activity
stakeholders 10,577 people 825 people 10,577 people 1.1.3)
capacitated capacitated capacitated • 910 local experts
(273 women and
637 men)93
93 Based on reported information from Agrorural a 30% women’s participation is expected.

--- Table 1 on Page 98 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | is measured against a | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | scenario without project | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | that would have | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | increased by 93,905 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | tCO2e the GHG | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | emissions in the areas | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | of intervention. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term target is | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | expected to be 7,8% of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the final target based | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | on the project | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation plan | 
Co-benefit 3
Improvement of local
economy through better
economic opportunities
and poverty reduction | i
i
r | Number of producers, |  | Reports from MIDAGRI
Pre and post workshop
survey | 0 | 0 | 70% of the local
initiative
beneficiaries | Implementation of 127
Local initiatives |  | 
 |  | of whom 50% are |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | women have |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | confirmed an |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | mprovement in their |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | ncome from climate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | esilient value chains |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | or climate-resilient |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | practices. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 4 Awareness
raising and capacity
building of local
stakeholders | Percentage of
increase in self-
reported awareness
levels in population of
10,577 people
capacitated |  |  | Pre and post workshop
survey | 0 | 50% increase in
self-reported
awareness levels
in population of
825 people
capacitated | 50% increase in
self-reported
awareness levels
in population of
10,577 people
capacitated |  | Under capacitated | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | people the project | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | counts following: | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • 9647 producers | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | trained through | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | MIDAGRI (activity | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.1.3) | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • 910 local experts | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (273 women and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 637 men)93 | 

--- Table 2 on Page 98 ---
Reports from MIDAGRI

Pre and post workshop
survey


--- Table 3 on Page 98 ---
Co-benefit 3
mprovement of local
economy through better
economic opportunities
and poverty reduction

--- Table 4 on Page 98 ---
70% of the local
initiative
beneficiaries

--- Table 5 on Page 98 ---
Implementation of 127
Local initiatives

--- Table 6 on Page 98 ---
Percentage of
ncrease in self-
eported awareness
evels in population of
10,577 people
capacitated

--- Table 7 on Page 98 ---
50% increase in
self-reported
awareness levels
in population of
825 people
capacitated

--- Table 8 on Page 98 ---
50% increase in
self-reported
awareness levels
in population of
10,577 people
capacitated

--- Table 9 on Page 98 ---
Co-benefit 4 Awareness
aising and capacity
building of local
stakeholders

--- Table 10 on Page 98 ---
Pre and post workshop
survey


=== PAGE 99 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95
E
capacitated
(activity 1.2.1)
• 20 Local actors
capacitated (activity
2.1.2).
Mid-term target is
expected to be 7,8% of
the final target based
on the project
implementation plan
considering that the
project implementation
Number of innovative
Local initiatives 127 innovative
(including EbA and Local initiatives Mid-term target is
Co-benefit 5 Gender
CRVC) with a (with EbA and expected to be 7,8% of
responsive approaches Reports from Profonanpe
gender-sensitive 0 10 CRVC) with a the final target based
mainstreamed in EbA
approach gender-sensitive on the project
and CRVC measures
implemented approach implementation plan.
implemented
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables
Activities Description Sub-activities Deliverables

--- Table 1 on Page 99 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capacitated | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (activity 1.2.1) | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • 20 Local actors | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capacitated (activity | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2.1.2). | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term target is | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | expected to be 7,8% of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the final target based | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | on the project | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation plan | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | considering that the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | project implementation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 5 Gender
responsive approaches
mainstreamed in EbA
and CRVC measures |  | (
i | Number of innovative |  | Reports from Profonanpe | 0 |  | 10 | 127 innovative
Local initiatives
(with EbA and
CRVC) with a
gender-sensitive
approach
implemented | Mid-term target is
expected to be 7,8% of
the final target based
on the project
implementation plan. |  | 
 |  |  | Local initiatives |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | including EbA and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | CRVC) with a |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | gender-sensitive |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | approach |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | mplemented |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities | Description |  |  |  |  |  | Sub-activities |  |  | Deliverables |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 99 ---
127 innovative
Local initiatives
(with EbA and
CRVC) with a
gender-sensitive
approach
implemented

--- Table 3 on Page 99 ---
Mid-term target is
expected to be 7,8% of
the final target based
on the project
implementation plan.

--- Table 4 on Page 99 ---
Co-benefit 5 Gender
esponsive approaches
mainstreamed in EbA
and CRVC measures

=== PAGE 100 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96
E
Activity 1.1.1. A communication strategy will be created to develop awareness Sub-activity 1.1.1.1 Inform and identify • 1 Communication and
Setting up the about the project and create the basis for the implementation of communities, associations, cooperatives and engagement strategy
basis for EbA measures and CRVC through the Puna Facility. Technical Civil Society Organisations interested in developed
financing and support for local stakeholders (associations, CSOs, cooperatives) participating in the project • At least 100
implementing will be provided in order to participate in the call for proposals. Communities,
EbA measures Sub-activity 1.1.1.2 Development of site- associations,
and Climate specific climate diagnostics and preparation of cooperatives and/or
Resilient Value participatory intervention plans micro and small
Chains enterprises to be
supported in 1.1.1.2
selected
• 1 Training for project
staff on concept
standardization
implemented
• 1 Guideline (including
participatory
methodology)
developed for site
specific climate
diagnostics and
project intervention
plans
• At least 100 Local
initiative intervention
plans prepared
• 3 Trainings for project
staff on site-specific
climate diagnostics
implemented
Activity 1.1.2. This activity will focus on promoting climate resilient Puna Sub-activity 1.1.2.1 Implementation of Local
Financing and ecosystems and CRVC through of the implementation of climate- initiatives financed by the Puna Facility • 127 Local initiative
implementing of focused Local initiatives at local landscape level. The activity will Grant Agreements
EbA measures provide financial support for Local initiatives through the Puna Sub-activity 1.1.2.2 Financial support through signed
Facility (established under Activity 2.1.1) and through public
and Climate MIDAGRI

--- Table 1 on Page 100 ---
Activity 1.1.1.
Setting up the
basis for
financing and
implementing
EbA measures
and Climate
Resilient Value
Chains | A communication strategy will be created to develop awareness
about the project and create the basis for the implementation of
EbA measures and CRVC through the Puna Facility. Technical
support for local stakeholders (associations, CSOs, cooperatives)
will be provided in order to participate in the call for proposals. | Sub-activity 1.1.1.1 Inform and identify
communities, associations, cooperatives and
Civil Society Organisations interested in
participating in the project
Sub-activity 1.1.1.2 Development of site-
specific climate diagnostics and preparation of
participatory intervention plans | • 1 Communication and
engagement strategy
developed
• At least 100
Communities,
associations,
cooperatives and/or
micro and small
enterprises to be
supported in 1.1.1.2
selected
• 1 Training for project
staff on concept
standardization
implemented
• 1 Guideline (including
participatory
methodology)
developed for site
specific climate
diagnostics and
project intervention
plans
• At least 100 Local
initiative intervention
plans prepared
• 3 Trainings for project
staff on site-specific
climate diagnostics
implemented
Activity 1.1.2.
Financing and
implementing of
EbA measures
and Climate | This activity will focus on promoting climate resilient Puna
ecosystems and CRVC through of the implementation of climate-
focused Local initiatives at local landscape level. The activity will
provide financial support for Local initiatives through the Puna
Facility (established under Activity 2.1.1) and through public | Sub-activity 1.1.2.1 Implementation of Local
initiatives financed by the Puna Facility
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2 Financial support through
MIDAGRI | • 127 Local initiative
Grant Agreements
signed

=== PAGE 101 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97
E
Resilient Value resources (MIDAGRI’s programmes). The two types of financial • At least 8 public
Chains support are complementary and contribute to a general objective investment projects
of improving the climate resilience of the local communities in the implemented
target territories.
Sub-activity 1.1.3.1 Technical assistance for
the refinement of proposals and Local initiative
Activity 1.1.3. implementation (including EbA implementation, • 127 tailored TA
Technical business development and access to finance) packages offered
Assistance for This activity will focus on providing technical assistance for through the Puna Facility • 9,647 producers
implementing implementing EbA measures and CRVC through MIDAGRI and trained
Sub-activity 1.1.3.2 Technical assistance
EbA measures the Puna Facility and enhance the market access and economic • 1 Digital platform for
through MIDAGRI
and Climate opportunities for the Climate Resilient and Sustainable Value
sale of Puna products
Resilient Value Chains.
Sub-activity 1.1.3.3 Promote market access operating
Chains at local
and economic opportunities for Climate
landscape level
Resilient and Sustainable Value Chains
This activity seeks to develop and strengthen the capacities of • At least 910 local
communities, local experts (called yachachiqs or kamayocs), and experts (273
Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 Capacity building of local
technical experts from national and regional institutions to women and 637
increase the implementation of ancestral water and land experts for the transfer of ancestral and men)94 capacitated
management practices and technologies. The dialogue on ancient innovative knowledge linked to EbA and • 2 sets of
Activity 1.2.1 practices, knowledge and innovation will build intergenerational Climate Resilient Value Chains (CRVC) communication
memory (children, youth and adults) at the community level on measures materials in native
Recover,
ancestral practices and innovation in a context of change (climate languages on
innovate and
and markets, among others) and support the recognition and lessons learned
scale up
appreciation of people’s own values, knowledge and practices, from ancestral
ancestral Sub-activity 1.2.1.2 Production and
improving their self-esteem and strengthening their identity with practices and
knowledge and dissemination of information materials on
the territory. It will also expand on gender roles to reflect on their innovation are
practices lessons learned from ancestral practices and
place in and relationship with ecosystems. For this to be effective, published
studies and communication materials in native languages will be innovation in a context of change • At least 5
produced to capture lessons learned and promote replication of dissemination
success stories. Exchange between communities will be financed events about
by the project to encourage peer-to-peer learning and ownership lessons learned
of implemented solutions. Of particular importance is the transfer from ancestral
94 Based on reported information from Agrorural a 30% women’s participation is expected.

--- Table 1 on Page 101 ---
Resilient Value
Chains | resources (MIDAGRI’s programmes). The two types of financial
support are complementary and contribute to a general objective
of improving the climate resilience of the local communities in the
target territories. |  | • At least 8 public
investment projects
implemented
Activity 1.1.3.
Technical
Assistance for
implementing
EbA measures
and Climate
Resilient Value
Chains at local
landscape level | This activity will focus on providing technical assistance for
implementing EbA measures and CRVC through MIDAGRI and
the Puna Facility and enhance the market access and economic
opportunities for the Climate Resilient and Sustainable Value
Chains. | Sub-activity 1.1.3.1 Technical assistance for
the refinement of proposals and Local initiative
implementation (including EbA implementation,
business development and access to finance)
through the Puna Facility
Sub-activity 1.1.3.2 Technical assistance
through MIDAGRI
Sub-activity 1.1.3.3 Promote market access
and economic opportunities for Climate
Resilient and Sustainable Value Chains | • 127 tailored TA
packages offered
• 9,647 producers
trained
• 1 Digital platform for
sale of Puna products
operating
Activity 1.2.1
Recover,
innovate and
scale up
ancestral
knowledge and
practices | This activity seeks to develop and strengthen the capacities of
communities, local experts (called yachachiqs or kamayocs), and
technical experts from national and regional institutions to
increase the implementation of ancestral water and land
management practices and technologies. The dialogue on ancient
practices, knowledge and innovation will build intergenerational
memory (children, youth and adults) at the community level on
ancestral practices and innovation in a context of change (climate
and markets, among others) and support the recognition and
appreciation of people’s own values, knowledge and practices,
improving their self-esteem and strengthening their identity with
the territory. It will also expand on gender roles to reflect on their
place in and relationship with ecosystems. For this to be effective,
studies and communication materials in native languages will be
produced to capture lessons learned and promote replication of
success stories. Exchange between communities will be financed
by the project to encourage peer-to-peer learning and ownership
of implemented solutions. Of particular importance is the transfer | Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 Capacity building of local
experts for the transfer of ancestral and
innovative knowledge linked to EbA and
Climate Resilient Value Chains (CRVC)
measures
Sub-activity 1.2.1.2 Production and
dissemination of information materials on
lessons learned from ancestral practices and
innovation in a context of change | • At least 910 local
experts (273
women and 637
men)94 capacitated
• 2 sets of
communication
materials in native
languages on
lessons learned
from ancestral
practices and
innovation are
published
• At least 5
dissemination
events about
lessons learned
from ancestral

=== PAGE 102 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98
E
of experience already gathered from recuperating ancient Sub-activity 1.2.1.3 Knowledge sharing among practices and
practices and promoting participatory agreements in the Nor beneficiary communities with a gender innovation are
Yauyos Cochas landscape reserve. perspective carried out
• 1 Knowledge
exchange plan with
gender perspective
Sub-activity 1.2.1.4 Facilitating
developed
intergenerational dialogue on ancestral
• 1 Report on
practices and innovation in a changing context
community
exchanges with
gender perspective
developed
• 1 Intergenerational
Dialogue Plan
developed
• 1 Systematization
report on conducted
intergenerational
dialogues
developed
Instituto de Montaña, partnering with CSOs and local Sub-activity 1.2.2.1 Training and • 1 Community
Activity 1.2.2 stakeholders, will reinforce stakeholders’ capacities to support the implementation of Community Monitoring monitoring
Implement establishment of community monitoring committees (based on the Committees to develop local monitoring guideline
community participatory action research approach, and previously identified in systems developed
monitoring and sub-activity 1.1.1.2). These committees will be responsible for • 1 Baseline report
observation community impact monitoring activities based on local knowledge developed
systems to and for liaising with the community for different project activities. Sub-activity 1.2.2.2 Development and • 1 Final report of
measure the The community monitoring committees’ capacities will be implementation of a local data-driven community
impact of EbA strengthened, enabling knowledge weaving and coproduction on information management system using digital monitoring
measures and EbA, traditional practices and climate resilience. technologies innovation measures progress developed
provide • 1 Protocol to feed
feedback on existing
regional and Target populations will establish climate vulnerability social and governmental
Sub-activity 1.2.2.3 Analyse collected
national policies biophysical indicators based on local knowledge, complementing Information
information on the impact of EbA measures
the local climate diagnostics. They will prepare participatory Local Management

--- Table 1 on Page 102 ---
 | of experience already gathered from recuperating ancient
practices and promoting participatory agreements in the Nor
Yauyos Cochas landscape reserve. | Sub-activity 1.2.1.3 Knowledge sharing among
beneficiary communities with a gender
perspective
Sub-activity 1.2.1.4 Facilitating
intergenerational dialogue on ancestral
practices and innovation in a changing context | practices and
innovation are
carried out
• 1 Knowledge
exchange plan with
gender perspective
developed
• 1 Report on
community
exchanges with
gender perspective
developed
• 1 Intergenerational
Dialogue Plan
developed
• 1 Systematization
report on conducted
intergenerational
dialogues
developed
Activity 1.2.2
Implement
community
monitoring and
observation
systems to
measure the
impact of EbA
measures and
provide
feedback on
regional and
national policies | Instituto de Montaña, partnering with CSOs and local
stakeholders, will reinforce stakeholders’ capacities to support the
establishment of community monitoring committees (based on the
participatory action research approach, and previously identified in
sub-activity 1.1.1.2). These committees will be responsible for
community impact monitoring activities based on local knowledge
and for liaising with the community for different project activities.
The community monitoring committees’ capacities will be
strengthened, enabling knowledge weaving and coproduction on
EbA, traditional practices and climate resilience.
Target populations will establish climate vulnerability social and
biophysical indicators based on local knowledge, complementing
the local climate diagnostics. They will prepare participatory Local | Sub-activity 1.2.2.1 Training and
implementation of Community Monitoring
Committees to develop local monitoring
systems
Sub-activity 1.2.2.2 Development and
implementation of a local data-driven
information management system using digital
technologies innovation measures
Sub-activity 1.2.2.3 Analyse collected
information on the impact of EbA measures | • 1 Community
monitoring
guideline
developed
• 1 Baseline report
developed
• 1 Final report of
community
monitoring
progress developed
• 1 Protocol to feed
existing
governmental
Information
Management

=== PAGE 103 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99
E
initiative intervention plans under sub-activity 1.1.1.2, and a Systems from a
baseline in their own communities, including conditions and trends Cloud Database
of ecosystem services in the surrounding landscapes. Committees with local data
will develop local indicators and technical protocols to assess developed
changes in ecosystem service provision over time as the EbA • 1 Existing
measures are implemented and mature. The data produced by governmental
the local monitoring system will feed regional and national Information
institutions studies and research on impacts and effectiveness of Management
EbA interventions, thus contribute to policy decision making Systems fed with
processes. local data
• At least 1 study on
Technical assistance will be provided for the establishment of a
the impact of EbA
methodology to calculate carbon in the Puna ecosystems and
measures
provide capacity building for local actors (e.g. communities, local
completed
government, academia) aligned with national legal and
• Methodology for
institutional arrangements for carbon markets.
the quantification of
the carbon stock
change cause by
the EbA measures
developed
• At least 20 local
actors capacitated
This activity will establish the Puna Facility (linked to the
operationalisation of the Facility in sub-activity 1.1.2.1.), managed Sub-activity 2.1.1.1 Preparation and • Puna Facility
Activity 2.1.1 by Profonanpe, to unlock investment for EbA measures in Puna continuous improvement of the allocation of Management Unit
Establish the ecosystems and climate resilient agrobusiness. The Puna Facility resources of the Puna Facility established
will be composed of one financial window (linked to sub-activity • 1 Report on
Puna Facility for
1.1.2.1.) to receive funds from private sources and finance systematized
the long-term
implementation of EbA and CRVC Local initiatives. This window lessons learned
financing of EbA Sub-activity 2.1.1.2 Development and
will be supported by technical assistance (linked to sub-activity developed
measures and implementation of an innovative strategy to
1.1.3.1). • At least two MoUs
Climate mobilize resources from the private sector and
Resilient Value different donors
to secure new
funding sources for
Chains The project will develop and implement other innovative financial
the Puna Facility
mechanisms to mobilise resources from the private sector and
are signed
different donors. This will be achieved through the design of a

--- Table 1 on Page 103 ---
 | initiative intervention plans under sub-activity 1.1.1.2, and a
baseline in their own communities, including conditions and trends
of ecosystem services in the surrounding landscapes. Committees
will develop local indicators and technical protocols to assess
changes in ecosystem service provision over time as the EbA
measures are implemented and mature. The data produced by
the local monitoring system will feed regional and national
institutions studies and research on impacts and effectiveness of
EbA interventions, thus contribute to policy decision making
processes.
Technical assistance will be provided for the establishment of a
methodology to calculate carbon in the Puna ecosystems and
provide capacity building for local actors (e.g. communities, local
government, academia) aligned with national legal and
institutional arrangements for carbon markets. |  | Systems from a
Cloud Database
with local data
developed
• 1 Existing
governmental
Information
Management
Systems fed with
local data
• At least 1 study on
the impact of EbA
measures
completed
• Methodology for
the quantification of
the carbon stock
change cause by
the EbA measures
developed
• At least 20 local
actors capacitated
Activity 2.1.1
Establish the
Puna Facility for
the long-term
financing of EbA
measures and
Climate
Resilient Value
Chains | This activity will establish the Puna Facility (linked to the
operationalisation of the Facility in sub-activity 1.1.2.1.), managed
by Profonanpe, to unlock investment for EbA measures in Puna
ecosystems and climate resilient agrobusiness. The Puna Facility
will be composed of one financial window (linked to sub-activity
1.1.2.1.) to receive funds from private sources and finance
implementation of EbA and CRVC Local initiatives. This window
will be supported by technical assistance (linked to sub-activity
1.1.3.1).
The project will develop and implement other innovative financial
mechanisms to mobilise resources from the private sector and
different donors. This will be achieved through the design of a | Sub-activity 2.1.1.1 Preparation and
continuous improvement of the allocation of
resources of the Puna Facility
Sub-activity 2.1.1.2 Development and
implementation of an innovative strategy to
mobilize resources from the private sector and
different donors | • Puna Facility
Management Unit
established
• 1 Report on
systematized
lessons learned
developed
• At least two MoUs
to secure new
funding sources for
the Puna Facility
are signed

=== PAGE 104 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100
E
Private Sector Engagement Strategy, including criteria for Sub-activity 2.1.1.3 Promote access and • Sustainable
selecting the companies in which advocacy actions will be alignment of public investments and other financing strategy
deployed (for example, companies committed to social and government programmes for EbA and Climate for Profonanpe to
environmental responsibility, without potential conflicts, linked to Resilient Value Chains (CRVC) measures access private and
CRVC), criteria for selecting demonstration sites, and an effective
international
communication and marketing strategy to engage the private
financing
sector. Finally, in order to increase the use of state funds for
developed
actions related to climate change adaptation, the activity will seek
• Dissemination
to mobilise resources from public programmes for the High
Andean population and their associated ecosystems. To this end, material (e.g.,
access to and alignment of investments from MIDAGRI and Flyers) developed
MINAM and other government programmes will be promoted for • 1 Final report about
EbA and CRVC measures through the development of improved the increased
instructions for access to public financing. execution of public
funds for
actions/measures
related to climate
change adaptation
developed
The activity will seek to overcome the barriers faced by public • 1 Capacity Building
Activity 2.1.2 water utilities that have established or are willing to establish a Program for water
Strengthen mechanism for retribution for ecosystem services (MERESE) utilities personal
capacities to schemes. Therefore, activities will be focused on strengthening Sub-activity 2.1.2.1 Technical assistance to developed
develop and stakeholders' capacities to identify and overcome bottlenecks and improve existing hydrological MERESE • Technical
implement gaps in the implementation of MERESE. These activities will be processes in the project areas assistance (e.g.,
developed in close coordination with the Ministry of Environment
innovative EbA approach and
and the National Superintendence of Water Supply and Sanitation
mechanisms for public investment)
of Peru (SUNASS).
EbA in high implemented in at
Andean least three
ecosystems MERESE
Activity 2.1.3 This activity will focus on two main topics: (1) Supporting the Sub-activity 2.1.3.1 Support to financial • At least 2 business
Support the greening of microcredit lines and business models and (2) institutions in greening microcredits model EbA and
greening of supporting the dissemination of green financial products and CVCR by specific
microcredits to services. chain (according to
promote EbA the Project

--- Table 1 on Page 104 ---
 | Private Sector Engagement Strategy, including criteria for
selecting the companies in which advocacy actions will be
deployed (for example, companies committed to social and
environmental responsibility, without potential conflicts, linked to
CRVC), criteria for selecting demonstration sites, and an effective
communication and marketing strategy to engage the private
sector. Finally, in order to increase the use of state funds for
actions related to climate change adaptation, the activity will seek
to mobilise resources from public programmes for the High
Andean population and their associated ecosystems. To this end,
access to and alignment of investments from MIDAGRI and
MINAM and other government programmes will be promoted for
EbA and CRVC measures through the development of improved
instructions for access to public financing. | Sub-activity 2.1.1.3 Promote access and
alignment of public investments and other
government programmes for EbA and Climate
Resilient Value Chains (CRVC) measures | • Sustainable
financing strategy
for Profonanpe to
access private and
international
financing
developed
• Dissemination
material (e.g.,
Flyers) developed
• 1 Final report about
the increased
execution of public
funds for
actions/measures
related to climate
change adaptation
developed
Activity 2.1.2
Strengthen
capacities to
develop and
implement
innovative
mechanisms for
EbA in high
Andean
ecosystems | The activity will seek to overcome the barriers faced by public
water utilities that have established or are willing to establish a
mechanism for retribution for ecosystem services (MERESE)
schemes. Therefore, activities will be focused on strengthening
stakeholders' capacities to identify and overcome bottlenecks and
gaps in the implementation of MERESE. These activities will be
developed in close coordination with the Ministry of Environment
and the National Superintendence of Water Supply and Sanitation
of Peru (SUNASS). | Sub-activity 2.1.2.1 Technical assistance to
improve existing hydrological MERESE
processes in the project areas | • 1 Capacity Building
Program for water
utilities personal
developed
• Technical
assistance (e.g.,
EbA approach and
public investment)
implemented in at
least three
MERESE
Activity 2.1.3
Support the
greening of
microcredits to
promote EbA | This activity will focus on two main topics: (1) Supporting the
greening of microcredit lines and business models and (2)
supporting the dissemination of green financial products and
services. | Sub-activity 2.1.3.1 Support to financial
institutions in greening microcredits | • At least 2 business
model EbA and
CVCR by specific
chain (according to
the Project

=== PAGE 105 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101
E
and Climate In order to increase the supply of microfinance products and Sub-activity 2.1.3.2 Raise awareness of catalogue)
Resilient Value services to finance integrated EbA and CRVC initiatives, the greener microcredits to promote EbA and elaborated
Chains project will support either the development of specific financial Climate Resilient Value Chains • At least 2 adapted
products or the greening of existing financial products for EbA
microcredits for
measures and CRVC (aligned with the lists of EbA measures and
EbA and CVCR
CRVC developed in sub-activity 1.2.1.1) in Puna ecosystems.
business models
This will include strengthening the capacities of the officials who
developed and
will offer the financial products. In addition, a strategy to
disseminated with
disseminate the green financial products will be implemented,
microfinance
focusing on the beneficiaries of the project.
institutions
• 1 Communication
strategy for
microfinance
institutions
developed
• Al least 2 specific
financial products
for EbA and CVCR
business models
disseminated with
microfinance
institutions
Sub-activity 3.1.1.1 Strengthen the capacities • Online and/or
The new approaches that will be promoted by Resilient Puna
Activity 3.1.1 of relevant national, regional and local presential training
require progressive development of capacities of implementers,
Strengthen the government stakeholders for the incorporation modules on how to
local actors, and subnational governments to promote the
capacities for
replicability and sustainability of the changes introduced by the of EbA and Climate Resilient Value Chains mainstream
territorial
project. measures, integrating the gender perspective Gender and
planning and
Therefore, in order to mainstream EbA and climate resilience in their processes and interventions in the EbA/CRVC
governance
approaches into planning processes (i.e. local and regional territory approaches are
processes
development plans, including budgets and investment project developed
integrating EbA
and climate planning), official capacities at different levels (national, regional Sub-activity 3.1.1.2 Strengthen participatory • At least 605 (182
and local) will be strengthened and gender perspectives will be
resilience sectoral and territorial platforms for the women and 423
considered.
articulation and scaling up of EbA measures men)95 relevant
95 Based on the ratio of the participation of women and men during the public official engagement events as part of the consultations a 30% women’s participation can be expected.

--- Table 1 on Page 105 ---
and Climate
Resilient Value
Chains | In order to increase the supply of microfinance products and
services to finance integrated EbA and CRVC initiatives, the
project will support either the development of specific financial
products or the greening of existing financial products for EbA
measures and CRVC (aligned with the lists of EbA measures and
CRVC developed in sub-activity 1.2.1.1) in Puna ecosystems.
This will include strengthening the capacities of the officials who
will offer the financial products. In addition, a strategy to
disseminate the green financial products will be implemented,
focusing on the beneficiaries of the project. | Sub-activity 2.1.3.2 Raise awareness of
greener microcredits to promote EbA and
Climate Resilient Value Chains | catalogue)
elaborated
• At least 2 adapted
microcredits for
EbA and CVCR
business models
developed and
disseminated with
microfinance
institutions
• 1 Communication
strategy for
microfinance
institutions
developed
• Al least 2 specific
financial products
for EbA and CVCR
business models
disseminated with
microfinance
institutions
Activity 3.1.1
Strengthen the
capacities for
territorial
planning and
governance
processes
integrating EbA
and climate
resilience | The new approaches that will be promoted by Resilient Puna
require progressive development of capacities of implementers,
local actors, and subnational governments to promote the
replicability and sustainability of the changes introduced by the
project.
Therefore, in order to mainstream EbA and climate resilience
approaches into planning processes (i.e. local and regional
development plans, including budgets and investment project
planning), official capacities at different levels (national, regional
and local) will be strengthened and gender perspectives will be
considered. | Sub-activity 3.1.1.1 Strengthen the capacities
of relevant national, regional and local
government stakeholders for the incorporation
of EbA and Climate Resilient Value Chains
measures, integrating the gender perspective
in their processes and interventions in the
territory
Sub-activity 3.1.1.2 Strengthen participatory
sectoral and territorial platforms for the
articulation and scaling up of EbA measures | • Online and/or
presential training
modules on how to
mainstream
Gender and
EbA/CRVC
approaches are
developed
• At least 605 (182
women and 423
men)95 relevant

=== PAGE 106 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102
E
The activity aims to strengthen participatory sectoral and territorial and Climate Resilient Value Chains within the officials from the
platforms so that the project EbA measures and CRVC developed scope of the project national
by project beneficiaries can be replicated and scaled up. Lessons (SERNANP and
learned from the community´s experiences in EbA and CRVC Sub-activity 3.1.1.3 Integration of EbA MIDAGRI officials),
planning, and implementation will be integrated.
measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains regional (5 regional
in territorial planning and management government
instruments officials) and local
(at least 50 local
governments)
government trained
• Participatory
mechanisms to
involve
communities/associ
ations/cooperatives
in the sectoral or
territorial platform
decision making
processes are
developed
• Framework
planning and
projects documents
at the regional and
local levels with an
EbA/CRVC and
gender approach
are developed
The activity aims to provide technical support to MIDAGRI and Sub-activity 3.1.2.1 Improving national • Regulatory
Activity 3.1.2 MINAM to improve the regulatory framework for the promotion regulatory frameworks linked to EbA measures framework which
Strengthen and implementation of EbA measures and CRVC in the High and Climate Resilient Value Chains includes the
regulatory Andean areas of the country. In addition, it will provide technical
promotion EbA and
frameworks and support for the national long-term M&E systems of the different
CVCR interventions
M&E systems at government entities to measure impact of EbA interventions.
national level Partnerships will be established with local universities and Sub-activity 3.1.2.2 Improve coordination of in the high Andean
research institutes to support the monitoring of progress resulting EbA monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems areas of the

--- Table 1 on Page 106 ---
 | The activity aims to strengthen participatory sectoral and territorial
platforms so that the project EbA measures and CRVC developed
by project beneficiaries can be replicated and scaled up. Lessons
learned from the community´s experiences in EbA and CRVC
planning, and implementation will be integrated. | and Climate Resilient Value Chains within the
scope of the project
Sub-activity 3.1.1.3 Integration of EbA
measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains
in territorial planning and management
instruments | officials from the
national
(SERNANP and
MIDAGRI officials),
regional (5 regional
government
officials) and local
(at least 50 local
governments)
government trained
• Participatory
mechanisms to
involve
communities/associ
ations/cooperatives
in the sectoral or
territorial platform
decision making
processes are
developed
• Framework
planning and
projects documents
at the regional and
local levels with an
EbA/CRVC and
gender approach
are developed
Activity 3.1.2
Strengthen
regulatory
frameworks and
M&E systems at
national level | The activity aims to provide technical support to MIDAGRI and
MINAM to improve the regulatory framework for the promotion
and implementation of EbA measures and CRVC in the High
Andean areas of the country. In addition, it will provide technical
support for the national long-term M&E systems of the different
government entities to measure impact of EbA interventions.
Partnerships will be established with local universities and
research institutes to support the monitoring of progress resulting | Sub-activity 3.1.2.1 Improving national
regulatory frameworks linked to EbA measures
and Climate Resilient Value Chains
Sub-activity 3.1.2.2 Improve coordination of
EbA monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems | • Regulatory
framework which
includes the
promotion EbA and
CVCR interventions
in the high Andean
areas of the

=== PAGE 107 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103
E
from the interventions implemented by the different actors in the at the national level linked to project and NDC country are
territory. This output will also support MIDAGRI in meeting its purposes developed
productivity and competitiveness commitments while complying • NDC Monitoring
with Peru's NDC targets.
system in the
national scope with
adequate protocols
and methodologies
to measure the
impacts of EbA
interventions on
water and
agriculture is
implemented
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
E.7.1. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements
272. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (in addition to the ESMP, IPLCEP and GAP) will comply with the relevant GCF policies, as stipulated in
the AMA, FAA and project-related Financing Agreements and Implementation Agreements with Executing Entities and final beneficiaries, which EEs forward
funds.
273. The project will apply a customized results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. The M&E system will track project inputs, activities and sub-
activities. Outputs and impacts, as well as associated financial flows across all outputs in all project interventions areas.
274. This system will be based on:
• GIZ Standard Operating Procedures (“GIZ’s evaluation policy – principles, guidelines and requirements”)
• Monitoring and evaluation plan (Annex 11)
• Integrated results management framework and logical framework
• Implementation timetable (Annex 5)
• Requirements of GCF’s Annual Performance Report
• Local and national monitoring systems
• Procedures and requirements of project partners and stakeholders in Puna and at national level
275. The oversight for M&E and reporting lies within the GIZ GCF AE. On the other hand, GIZ Peru as EE will ensure that appropriate monitoring and evaluation
procedures are implemented. A digital tool (e.g., dashboard) for the project M&E system that will follow-up the progress of all results, indicators Logframe,
activities and deliverables will be developed. This dashboard will also include different modules to monitor ESMP, GAP and Stakeholder Consultation Plan.
Access to all EEs will be provided to collect data generated by the implementation of their activities and sub-activities. Additionally, Profonanpe as EE will
supervise implementation and prepare periodic reports on the technical and financial achievements of the Local initiatives to be financed through the Puna
Facility, as input to feed the project M&E system; Instituto de Montaña will support this work through the implementation and strengthening of community- based
monitoring systems. The information collected at the local level will be integrated into the project monitoring system. Community monitoring committees will
collect data in the field using an app that will be connected to a data-driven information management system which will also be a module of the project M&E

--- Table 1 on Page 107 ---
 |  | from the interventions implemented by the different actors in the
territory. This output will also support MIDAGRI in meeting its
productivity and competitiveness commitments while complying
with Peru's NDC targets. | at the national level linked to project and NDC
purposes | country are
developed
• NDC Monitoring
system in the
national scope with
adequate protocols
and methodologies
to measure the
impacts of EbA
interventions on
water and
agriculture is
implemented | 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.7.1. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements |  |  |  | ,
l
l
 | 272. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (in addition to the ESMP, IPLCEP and GAP) will comply with the relevant GCF policies, as stipulated in |  |  |  | 
 | the AMA, FAA and project-related Financing Agreements and Implementation Agreements with Executing Entities and final beneficiaries, which EEs forward |  |  |  | 
 | funds. |  |  |  | 
 | 273. The project will apply a customized results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. The M&E system will track project inputs, activities and sub- |  |  |  | 
 | activities. Outputs and impacts, as well as associated financial flows across all outputs in all project interventions areas. |  |  |  | 
 | 274. This system will be based on: |  |  |  | 
 | • GIZ Standard Operating Procedures (“GIZ’s evaluation policy – principles, guidelines and requirements”) |  |  |  | 
 | • Monitoring and evaluation plan (Annex 11) |  |  |  | 
 | • Integrated results management framework and logical framework |  |  |  | 
 | • Implementation timetable (Annex 5) |  |  |  | 
 | • Requirements of GCF’s Annual Performance Report |  |  |  | 
 | • Local and national monitoring systems |  |  |  | 
 | • Procedures and requirements of project partners and stakeholders in Puna and at national level |  |  |  | 
 | 275. The oversight for M&E and reporting lies within the GIZ GCF AE. On the other hand, GIZ Peru as EE will ensure that appropriate monitoring and evaluation |  |  |  | 
 | procedures are implemented. A digital tool (e.g., dashboard) for the project M&E system that will follow-up the progress of all results, indicators Logframe |  |  |  | 
 | activities and deliverables will be developed. This dashboard will also include different modules to monitor ESMP, GAP and Stakeholder Consultation Plan. |  |  |  | 
 | Access to all EEs will be provided to collect data generated by the implementation of their activities and sub-activities. Additionally, Profonanpe as EE wil |  |  |  | 
 | supervise implementation and prepare periodic reports on the technical and financial achievements of the Local initiatives to be financed through the Puna |  |  |  | 
 | Facility, as input to feed the project M&E system; Instituto de Montaña will support this work through the implementation and strengthening of community- based |  |  |  | 
 | monitoring systems. The information collected at the local level will be integrated into the project monitoring system. Community monitoring committees wil |  |  |  | 
 | collect data in the field using an app that will be connected to a data-driven information management system which will also be a module of the project M&E |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 108 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104
E
system. Finally, since the indicators set in the Logframe coincide with the national sectoral indicators, the information produced by the M&E project system will
be used to report MIDAGRI and SERNANP national monitoring systems that contributes to the NDCs.
Figure 18. Project M&E system
276. The Project Management Committee (PMC) will be the body responsible for leading the preparation, monitoring and coordination of the Annual Operational
Plans and the annual project budget. and discussing monitoring processes and results. Its work will be supported by Project Implementation Unit (PIU) that will
coordinate and integrate the Territorial Annual Operating Plan into the overall Annual Operating Planning of the project. It will also oversee the M&E system,
monitoring both the technical and budgetary advancements of the project in alignment with the approved Annual Operating Plan and budget. This includes
ensuring the timely execution of activities within the territory and providing regular updates to the PMC on the progress in this regard.
E.7.2. Recruitment of M&E staff
277. Immediately when the project commences, GIZ’s GCF AE will make available one expert (with gender expertise) to oversee and coordinate the project M&E
and reporting routines. As soon as GCF project proceeds become available in Puna, the project will recruit a M&E specialist. The specialist will work closely
together and support the management of the M&E system and provide on-the-job training for dedicated M&E experts from PMC and PIU and other stakeholder
of the system where requested. In addition, the experts will maintain the Cloud Database, and additional specialist inputs may be required for certain technical
areas (e.g., agriculture, ecosystems or livestock).
E.7.3. Independent monitoring and evaluation studies
278. Mid-term and final evaluation: GIZ AE will initiate a mid-term evaluation and a final evaluation of the project. GIZ evaluations are carried out by GIZs’
independent evaluation unit. This unit is steered by a corporate unit that is separate from operational business and reports directly to the Management Board.

--- Table 1 on Page 108 ---
 | system. Finally, since the indicators set in the Logframe coincide with the national sectoral indicators, the information produced by the M&E project system wil | l
l
l
l
’
 | be used to report MIDAGRI and SERNANP national monitoring systems that contributes to the NDCs. | 
 |  | 
 | Figure 18. Project M&E system | 
 |  | 
 |  | 
 | 276. The Project Management Committee (PMC) will be the body responsible for leading the preparation, monitoring and coordination of the Annual Operationa | 
 | Plans and the annual project budget. and discussing monitoring processes and results. Its work will be supported by Project Implementation Unit (PIU) that wil | 
 | coordinate and integrate the Territorial Annual Operating Plan into the overall Annual Operating Planning of the project. It will also oversee the M&E system, | 
 | monitoring both the technical and budgetary advancements of the project in alignment with the approved Annual Operating Plan and budget. This includes | 
 | ensuring the timely execution of activities within the territory and providing regular updates to the PMC on the progress in this regard. | 
 |  | 
 | E.7.2. Recruitment of M&E staff | 
 | 277. Immediately when the project commences, GIZ’s GCF AE will make available one expert (with gender expertise) to oversee and coordinate the project M&E | 
 | and reporting routines. As soon as GCF project proceeds become available in Puna, the project will recruit a M&E specialist. The specialist will work closely | 
 | together and support the management of the M&E system and provide on-the-job training for dedicated M&E experts from PMC and PIU and other stakeholder | 
 | of the system where requested. In addition, the experts will maintain the Cloud Database, and additional specialist inputs may be required for certain technica | 
 | areas (e.g., agriculture, ecosystems or livestock). | 
 | E.7.3. Independent monitoring and evaluation studies | 
 | 278. Mid-term and final evaluation: GIZ AE will initiate a mid-term evaluation and a final evaluation of the project. GIZ evaluations are carried out by GIZs | 
 | independent evaluation unit. This unit is steered by a corporate unit that is separate from operational business and reports directly to the Management Board. | 

=== PAGE 109 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105
E
Moreover, evaluations are conducted with the support of external evaluators. GIZ applies the ‘Evaluation criteria for German bilateral development cooperation’
(2006, revised 2020) on a standard basis in project evaluations. These are based on the six evaluation criteria agreed by the Development Assistance Committee
(DAC) of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD): relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, overarching development results (impact),
coherence and sustainability. Additionally, to the six OECD DAC evaluation criteria, the following five GCF criteria will be evaluated: Gender equity, country
ownership, innovativeness in results areas, replication and scalability as well as unexpected results.
279. s’ valuation Principle of Impartial, objective and unbiased and relevance, use and participation: All provisions for upholding the GCF evaluation
principles described in Chapter V (a-d) of the Evaluation Policy are followed (see DAC standards and DeGEval evaluation standards). In line with the UNEG
norms, evaluation team members selected by GIZ must not be directly responsible for the policy setting, design or management of an evaluation project. An
Interim Independent Evaluation Report and a Final Independent Evaluation Report will be submitted to the GCF as per timeline agreed in the funded activity
agreement (FAA).
280. s’ valuation Principle of Credibility and Robustness: As a matter of principle, GIZ takes care to use an appropriate combination of quantitative
and qualitative methods of empirical social research in evaluations. The mix of methods is adapted to the object of the evaluation and the evaluation questions.
To ensure robust evidence, GIZ uses a theory-based approach as a minimum standard for its central project evaluations. The contribution analysis has proven
to be a suitable design. The aim of contribution analyses is to collect empirical evidence on whether and to what extent contributions to observed changes can
be associated with a project. Furthermore, the analyses should increase the understanding and knowledge of what works, what does not work and why.
281. Projects will be rated based on the six OECD/DAC and on the GCF evaluation criteria. Each of the OECD/DAC and GCF criteria is rated on a scale of 1 to
100. Using a points system serve to increase the transparency of ratings, whilst enabling better comparability between individual projects.
282. Results from the mid-term evaluation should be reflected within the project design, to influence upscaling, and improve overall project implementation
(adaptive management).
E.7.4. Data collection and frequency
283. The RTGs will coordinate data collection for implemented activities through responsible executing partner GIZ, MIDAGRI, SERNNAP Profananpe and
Instituto de Montaña in charge of leading the monitoring activities at local level. The PMC will supervise and guide the monitoring and evaluation. The PIU will
aggregate monitoring reports based on RTG inputs at least every six months and make a summary report available to GIZ’s AE unit at head office, again at
least every six months.
E.7.5. Measurement and Evaluation (M&E) of implemented Local initiatives through Puna Facility to evaluate increase of resilience of local
communities.
284. The M&E of implemented Local initiatives is an essential activity for monitoring the project’s efficiency and effectiveness as well as for continued learning
across the project. Instituto de Montaña will support in the implementation of the community level M&E (for more information please see activity 1.2.2.).

--- Table 1 on Page 109 ---
 | Moreover, evaluations are conducted with the support of external evaluators. GIZ applies the ‘Evaluation criteria for German bilateral development cooperation’ | l
 | (2006, revised 2020) on a standard basis in project evaluations. These are based on the six evaluation criteria agreed by the Development Assistance Committee | 
 | (DAC) of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD): relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, overarching development results (impact), | 
 | coherence and sustainability. Additionally, to the six OECD DAC evaluation criteria, the following five GCF criteria will be evaluated: Gender equity, country | 
 | ownership, innovativeness in results areas, replication and scalability as well as unexpected results. | 
 | 279. s’ valuation Principle of Impartial, objective and unbiased and relevance, use and participation: All provisions for upholding the GCF evaluation | 
 | principles described in Chapter V (a-d) of the Evaluation Policy are followed (see DAC standards and DeGEval evaluation standards). In line with the UNEG | 
 | norms, evaluation team members selected by GIZ must not be directly responsible for the policy setting, design or management of an evaluation project. An | 
 | Interim Independent Evaluation Report and a Final Independent Evaluation Report will be submitted to the GCF as per timeline agreed in the funded activity | 
 | agreement (FAA). | 
 | 280. s’ valuation Principle of Credibility and Robustness: As a matter of principle, GIZ takes care to use an appropriate combination of quantitative | 
 | and qualitative methods of empirical social research in evaluations. The mix of methods is adapted to the object of the evaluation and the evaluation questions. | 
 | To ensure robust evidence, GIZ uses a theory-based approach as a minimum standard for its central project evaluations. The contribution analysis has proven | 
 | to be a suitable design. The aim of contribution analyses is to collect empirical evidence on whether and to what extent contributions to observed changes can | 
 | be associated with a project. Furthermore, the analyses should increase the understanding and knowledge of what works, what does not work and why. | 
 | 281. Projects will be rated based on the six OECD/DAC and on the GCF evaluation criteria. Each of the OECD/DAC and GCF criteria is rated on a scale of 1 to | 
 | 100. Using a points system serve to increase the transparency of ratings, whilst enabling better comparability between individual projects. | 
 | 282. Results from the mid-term evaluation should be reflected within the project design, to influence upscaling, and improve overall project implementation | 
 | (adaptive management). | 
 |  | 
 | E.7.4. Data collection and frequency | 
 | 283. The RTGs will coordinate data collection for implemented activities through responsible executing partner GIZ, MIDAGRI, SERNNAP Profananpe and | 
 | Instituto de Montaña in charge of leading the monitoring activities at local level. The PMC will supervise and guide the monitoring and evaluation. The PIU wil | 
 | aggregate monitoring reports based on RTG inputs at least every six months and make a summary report available to GIZ’s AE unit at head office, again at | 
 | least every six months. | 
 |  | 
 | E.7.5. Measurement and Evaluation (M&E) of implemented Local initiatives through Puna Facility to evaluate increase of resilience of local | 
 | communities. | 
 | 284. The M&E of implemented Local initiatives is an essential activity for monitoring the project’s efficiency and effectiveness as well as for continued learning | 
 | across the project. Instituto de Montaña will support in the implementation of the community level M&E (for more information please see activity 1.2.2.). | 

=== PAGE 110 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106
F
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
A detailed analysis of the project risks is provided in Chapter 10 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). Environmental and
social risks are considered in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA, Annex 6a), Indigenous Peoples
and Local Communities Engagement Plan (IPLCEP, Annex 6c) and Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP, Annex 6b). Gender-specific risks are considered in the Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan (Annexes
8a and 8b, respectively).
Selected Risk Factor 1: Insufficient financing may put at risk the long-term sustainability of the public or
private investment
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Insufficient public or private financial flows may put at risk the long-term sustainability of the project. Market intake for EbA measures
and Climate Resilient Value Chains, especially those promoted via microfinancing may be insufficient. Fluctuations in the market
value of cash products (e.g., South American camelid fiber, quinoa) may limit economic activity and entrepreneurship.
Mitigation Measure(s)
From project onset, activities will focus on increasing engagement of private entities (hydroelectric generation enterprises,
agribusiness, cement, beverage, fiber and other industry) to leverage and mobilize resources for EbA and CRVC. A communication
strategy will be developed to make the case for potential expected losses in these industries if Puna ecosystems are not conserved.
Public funding will be increased by building official capacities in MIDAGRI and SERNANP and triggering operation and improving
functionality of the hydrological MERESE scheme. The promotion of microfinancing for EbA will be done at both the offer and the
demand side. Once microfinance institutions are trained in adjusting existing and/or developing microcredits to support EbA
measures and/or Climate Resilient Value Chains they will continue promoting through their own channels. Local communities,
producers’ associations, cooperatives, MSEs, community enterprises and producers’ organizations will be strengthened on business
development and access to finance (including financial literacy) to ensure successful income-generating activities. Income
diversification will be promoted through technical and financial support to avoid over indebtedness and stimulate investment.
Selected Risk Factor 2: Local stakeholders are not sufficiently organized, engaged and interested in
participating in the project
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Low
Description
Participation from local stakeholders in the project activities may not be as high as expected due to the lack of interest due to the
lack of interest This could happen due to various factors, e.g., not seeing the value of EbA measures or the perception that the
Puna Facility does not have an added value to the region. Moreover, there is a risk of ‘consultation fatigue’ in the districts where
other initiatives may have taken place
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project has been designed in close coordination with key local stakeholders, and local consultations with potential project
beneficiaries have been caried out to ensure that their interests and views are being addressed in the project. Continuous
engagement with relevant stakeholders at all levels will help promote dialogue and ongoing capacity building to facilitate the
engagement. The project will develop adequate communication and engagement strategies to ensure reaching out and continuously
communicating to stakeholders and potential project beneficiaries about the project interventions throughout the planed project
implementation. In addition, the project will emphasize documentation and dissemination of information to facilitate capacity building
and knowledge exchange among local stakeholders, which will foster interest in participating in the project activities.
Selected Risk Factor 3: Coordination among regional government stakeholders is insufficient to sustain
project results
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Low
Description
Coordination among government stakeholders is insufficient and the lack of interest and ownership of the project may limit the
sustainability of project results.

--- Table 1 on Page 110 ---
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  |  |  | 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  |  |  | 
A detailed analysis of the project risks is provided in Chapter 10 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). Environmental and
social risks are considered in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA, Annex 6a), Indigenous Peoples
and Local Communities Engagement Plan (IPLCEP, Annex 6c) and Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP, Annex 6b). Gender-specific risks are considered in the Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan (Annexes
8a and 8b, respectively). |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 1: Insufficient financing may put at risk the long-term sustainability of the public or |  |  | 
 | private investment |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Low | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Insufficient public or private financial flows may put at risk the long-term sustainability of the project. Market intake for EbA measures
and Climate Resilient Value Chains, especially those promoted via microfinancing may be insufficient. Fluctuations in the market
value of cash products (e.g., South American camelid fiber, quinoa) may limit economic activity and entrepreneurship. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
From project onset, activities will focus on increasing engagement of private entities (hydroelectric generation enterprises,
agribusiness, cement, beverage, fiber and other industry) to leverage and mobilize resources for EbA and CRVC. A communication
strategy will be developed to make the case for potential expected losses in these industries if Puna ecosystems are not conserved.
Public funding will be increased by building official capacities in MIDAGRI and SERNANP and triggering operation and improving
functionality of the hydrological MERESE scheme. The promotion of microfinancing for EbA will be done at both the offer and the
demand side. Once microfinance institutions are trained in adjusting existing and/or developing microcredits to support EbA
measures and/or Climate Resilient Value Chains they will continue promoting through their own channels. Local communities,
producers’ associations, cooperatives, MSEs, community enterprises and producers’ organizations will be strengthened on business
development and access to finance (including financial literacy) to ensure successful income-generating activities. Income
diversification will be promoted through technical and financial support to avoid over indebtedness and stimulate investment. |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 2: Local stakeholders are not sufficiently organized, engaged and interested in |  |  | 
 | participating in the project |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Low | Low | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Participation from local stakeholders in the project activities may not be as high as expected due to the lack of interest due to the
lack of interest This could happen due to various factors, e.g., not seeing the value of EbA measures or the perception that the
Puna Facility does not have an added value to the region. Moreover, there is a risk of ‘consultation fatigue’ in the districts where
other initiatives may have taken place |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
The project has been designed in close coordination with key local stakeholders, and local consultations with potential project
beneficiaries have been caried out to ensure that their interests and views are being addressed in the project. Continuous
engagement with relevant stakeholders at all levels will help promote dialogue and ongoing capacity building to facilitate the
engagement. The project will develop adequate communication and engagement strategies to ensure reaching out and continuously
communicating to stakeholders and potential project beneficiaries about the project interventions throughout the planed project
implementation. In addition, the project will emphasize documentation and dissemination of information to facilitate capacity building
and knowledge exchange among local stakeholders, which will foster interest in participating in the project activities. |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 3: Coordination among regional government stakeholders is insufficient to sustain |  |  | 
 | project results |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Low | Low | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Coordination among government stakeholders is insufficient and the lack of interest and ownership of the project may limit the
sustainability of project results. |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 110 ---
A detailed analysis of the project risks is provided in Chapter 10 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). Environmental and
social risks are

--- Table 3 on Page 110 ---
 | and Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP, Annex 6b). Gender-specific risks are considered in the Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan (Annexes | 
8a and 8b, respectively). | 

=== PAGE 111 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107
F
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project is aligned with the priorities of the Government of Peru, and it has been developed in close coordination with
Government institutions that will have a key role in its implementation, e.g., MIDAGRI and Profonanpe. Extensive consultations
and meetings with government actors and key stakeholders have been carried out during the project design phase. Component 3
of the project will be focusing on strengthening multilevel governance to ensure that the national institutions will have the technical
capacity needed to carry out the activities after project completion.
Selected Risk Factor 4: Risk of continuity due to political instability
Category Probability Impact
Governance Low Medium
Description
The project is constructed on the assumption of sustained commitment from the Government of Peru to fulfil its NDC goals and from
MIDAGRI to continue its open and proactive engagement. Political instability in Peru may affect project continuity.
Mitigation Measure(s)
GIZ has carried out a consistent engagement process since it was requested to support the Peruvian government to access GCF
financing for this project and will continue to do so throughout project inception and implementation. This approach provides a
great strength that allows the project to persist despite the changes in government administration and ensures continuity, as it can
be evidenced from the recent change in administration without affecting the project construction process.
Selected Risk Factor 5: Maladaptation and degradation of ecosystems and social structures
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Improved economic opportunities in the SHAP may lead to increased pressure on ecosystems (e. g., number of cattle heads
increases as a result of business-oriented approaches). Moreover, the support to certain Value chains such as crops may result
in maladaptation if they contributed to ecosystems degradation (e.g., use of pesticides). Social structures may continue to deteriorate
because of increased ecosystem degradation.
Mitigation Measure(s)
All proposed agricultural interventions are intended to increase productivity while ensuring that the carrying capacity of Puna
ecosystems is not exceeded. The promotion of sustainable landscape management practices, soil amendments, ancestral and
modern technologies for water and soil conservation, exclusion zones and communal reserves, among others, will ensure resource
conservation for future generations. Business activities will focus on increasing economic output while decreasing environmental
impact. The diagnostic for planning will start from local social characteristics and cultural values that could have an influence on risks
and environmental dynamics. Social structures will be strengthened through Outputs 1.2 and 3.1., bringing local successful
experiences into planning and decision-making at macro scales. Project beneficiaries will be trained on community-based monitoring
processes and indicators. Ecosystem-monitoring capacities of the communities and government partners will be reinforced,
integrating the best available science to determine limits in carrying capacity or intensity of agricultural activities.
Selected Risk Factor 6: Difficulties and delays in unlocking technical and financial support
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Low
Description
Access to MIDAGRI programs as well as technical and financial support from the Puna Facility will be on a voluntary basis. This
may limit the ability of the project to meet its targets or have sufficient concentration of interventions to show tangible results.
Unlocking of public financing via MERESE schemes may require lengthy negotiations beyond the life of the project.
Mitigation Measure(s)
MIDAGRI has committed about 35 percent of project funds. Through the improved coordination obtained from component 3, a more
streamlined approach for execution of MIDAGRI’s funds will be operational. The project will provide support for project beneficiaries
and MIDAGRI officers to facilitate the communication materials for the application process. Complementarity will be ensured with

--- Table 1 on Page 111 ---
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The project is aligned with the priorities of the Government of Peru, and it has been developed in close coordination with
Government institutions that will have a key role in its implementation, e.g., MIDAGRI and Profonanpe. Extensive consultations
and meetings with government actors and key stakeholders have been carried out during the project design phase. Component 3
of the project will be focusing on strengthening multilevel governance to ensure that the national institutions will have the technical
capacity needed to carry out the activities after project completion. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 4: Risk of continuity due to political instability |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  |  |  | Impact |  |  |  | 
Governance |  |  | Low |  |  |  |  | Medium |  |  |  |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The project is constructed on the assumption of sustained commitment from the Government of Peru to fulfil its NDC goals and from
MIDAGRI to continue its open and proactive engagement. Political instability in Peru may affect project continuity. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
GIZ has carried out a consistent engagement process since it was requested to support the Peruvian government to access GCF
financing for this project and will continue to do so throughout project inception and implementation. This approach provides a
great strength that allows the project to persist despite the changes in government administration and ensures continuity, as it can
be evidenced from the recent change in administration without affecting the project construction process. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 5: Maladaptation and degradation of ecosystems and social structures |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  |  |  | Impact |  |  |  | 
Technical and operational |  |  | Medium |  |  |  |  | Medium |  |  |  |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Improved economic opportunities in the SHAP may lead to increased pressure on ecosystems (e. g., number of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | heads | 
 | increases as a result of business-oriented approaches). Moreover, the |  |  |  | support to | certain |  |  | Value chains su | ch as | may result |  | 
 | in maladaptation if they contributed to ecosystems degradation (e.g., use of pesticides). Social structures may continue to deteriorate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | because of increased ecosystem degradation. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
All proposed agricultural interventions are intended to increase productivity while ensuring that the carrying capacity of Puna
ecosystems is not exceeded. The promotion of sustainable landscape management practices, soil amendments, ancestral and
modern technologies for water and soil conservation, exclusion zones and communal reserves, among others, will ensure resource
conservation for future generations. Business activities will focus on increasing economic output while decreasing environmental
impact. The diagnostic for planning will start from local social characteristics and cultural values that could have an influence on risks
and environmental dynamics. Social structures will be strengthened through Outputs 1.2 and 3.1., bringing local successful
experiences into planning and decision-making at macro scales. Project beneficiaries will be trained on community-based monitoring
processes and indicators. Ecosystem-monitoring capacities of the communities and government partners will be reinforced,
integrating the best available science to determine limits in carrying capacity or intensity of agricultural activities. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 6: Difficulties and delays in unlocking technical and financial support |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  |  |  | Impact |  |  |  | 
Technical and operational |  |  | Medium |  |  |  |  | Low |  |  |  |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Access to MIDAGRI programs as well as technical and financial support from the Puna Facility will be on a voluntary basis. This |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | may limit the ability of the project to meet its targets or have sufficient concentration of interventions to show tangible results. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Unlocking of public financing via MERESE schemes may require lengthy negotiations beyond the life of the project. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
MIDAGRI has committed about 35 percent of project funds. Through the improved coordination obtained from component 3, a more
streamlined approach for execution of MIDAGRI’s funds will be operational. The project will provide support for project beneficiaries
and MIDAGRI officers to facilitate the communication materials for the application process. Complementarity will be ensured with |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 112 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108
F
the Puna Facility through the project’s Governance Structure as the Project Steering Committee and Project Management
Committees will have an active role within the governance structure of the Facility. Participation of all relevant stakeholders (GIZ,
Profonanpe, MIDAGRI, MINAM) since project conceptualization is ensuring alignment throughout preparation, planning and
execution of activities to meet targets. Lessons learned from project execution will be integrated into the procedures of the
coordination unit. Local initiatives implementation will be supported by Technical Assistance and in some cases by the support of
qualified CSOs and financed by the Puna Facility will be planned as to maximize concentration of positive impacts on ecosystem
services. Concerning the MERESE mechanisms, the project will work in watersheds with potential of MERESE at different stages
of evolution. Through a systematic and modular approach, the project will build capacities in EPS according to their needs. Those
who are already collecting tariffs but do not know how to plan, design, develop, and implement interventions, will be invited to
contribute to the Puna facility. For those MERESE where agreements between parties have not been reached, support will be
provided to negotiate and finalize such agreements. All this effort will unlock funds for implementation of MERESE. EPS in earlier
stages will take longer to fund activities but through the gained experience in the modular approach a speedier process will result.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109
G
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
G.1.1 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social Management Plan
285. The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental (ESIA) of the project is provided in Annex
6a. According to the ESIA the overall risk of the project has been rated with a category B (medium risk). In general,
the project will have a positive environmental and social impact on the beneficiaries in the South High Andes of
Peru. Nevertheless, potential adverse environmental and social impacts of the project will mostly site-specific, but
due to the nature of the interventions these impacts will not be irreversible or complex in nature and will be easily
remediable through preventive and mitigation measures. Therefore, respective plans including an Environmental
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (Annex 6b) and the Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities
Engagement Plan (Annex 6c were developed).
286. The ESIA primarily relies on primary data obtained through stakeholder consultations and secondary
information researched. The Puna area has been subject to comprehensive study, resulting in a wide range of
available literature concerning its ecosystems and social aspects. In parallel to the ESIA, stakeholder consultations
have been conducted which are summarized in Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement
plan. This document provides next to an extensive mapping of stakeholders a summary of three missions which
were carried out in the field. These three missions allowed the recollection of qualitative data that were used to
better understand the potential risk from social and environmental point of view and the sensibility of the
stakeholders, which were used amongst others for the development of the ESIA.
287. In general, stakeholders interviewed during fieldwork approved the project and its main components.
Stakeholders met during fieldwork recognized perceiving the effects of climate change in their livelihoods. In
addition, producers expressed their concern about a collective approach versus individual support, as most of the
production is individual. They recognize that some actions must be carried out at larger scale when interventions
such as building of qochas and/or irrigation investments are being considered. In particular, women are interested
in transformation and commercialization of locally product raw material.
288. Furthermore, based on the analysis in general, the impacts of the project can be assessed as low to medium,
these are mostly to the activities within component 1 (regarding activity 1.1.2 Implementation of EbA measures and
Climate Resilient Value Chains) and component 2 (regarding activity 2.1.1. establish the Puna Facility for the long-
term financing of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains), since the competition for funds could be a
conflict driver, therefore and based on the results an ESMP and IPLCEP has been designed for the management
of the identified risks (an overview of environmental and social (E&S) risks and impacts, and mitigation measure
can be found in Error! Reference source not found. below, for ESS 7 Indigenous Peoples Table 9 details the
respective mitigations actions). The implementation of the ESMP will be monitoring. This will involve tracking
compliance with the Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) and assessing the advancement of ESMP
implementation through bi-annual Results-Based Monitoring (RbM) workshops and the Environmental and Social
Safeguards Management and Monitoring System (ESS MS system). The ESS MS system encompasses specific
procedures, plans, organizational structures, planning activities, and resources geared toward establishing,
executing, attaining, reviewing, and sustaining the Environmental and Social Requirements. Its development will
take place during the inception phase, led by GIZ and in close collaboration with all EE ESS focal points.
289. In addition, ESS1 requires the establishment of an external communication and grievance redress mechanism
(GRM) for the project to address grievances from affected communities and individuals, as well as external
communications from stakeholders. At the GCF level, the independent Redress Mechanism handles complaints
related to adverse impacts resulting from the GCF-financed activities' failure to adhere to GCF operational policies
and procedures, including ESS standards. If a complaint is filed with the Independent Redress Mechanism, GIZ, as
the Accredited Entity, will cooperate with both the Independent Redress Mechanism and the GCF. The GRM will
be finalized during the project's inception phase and will be aligned with existing systems of Profonanpe and
MIDAGRI. It will also incorporate cultural sensitivity aspects such as being available in the Quechua and will be
presented in different forms to ensure that it is accessible to all stakeholders (e.g., online, physical in form of a
complain box, etc.). The GRM will also include aspects related to Gender-based Violence (GbV) and Sexual
Exploitation Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) in line with the Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan, ensuring
gender and cultural sensitivity and protecting the anonymity of complainants.
290. The table below shows the proposed mitigation measures E&S risks and impacts as shown in Annex 6b).

--- Table 1 on Page 113 ---
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
G.1.1 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social Management Plan
285. The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental (ESIA) of the project is provided in Annex
6a. According to the ESIA the overall risk of the project has been rated with a category B (medium risk). In general,
the project will have a positive environmental and social impact on the beneficiaries in the South High Andes of
Peru. Nevertheless, potential adverse environmental and social impacts of the project will mostly site-specific, but
due to the nature of the interventions these impacts will not be irreversible or complex in nature and will be easily
remediable through preventive and mitigation measures. Therefore, respective plans including an Environmental
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (Annex 6b) and the Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities
Engagement Plan (Annex 6c were developed).
286. The ESIA primarily relies on primary data obtained through stakeholder consultations and secondary
information researched. The Puna area has been subject to comprehensive study, resulting in a wide range of
available literature concerning its ecosystems and social aspects. In parallel to the ESIA, stakeholder consultations
have been conducted which are summarized in Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement
plan. This document provides next to an extensive mapping of stakeholders a summary of three missions which
were carried out in the field. These three missions allowed the recollection of qualitative data that were used to
better understand the potential risk from social and environmental point of view and the sensibility of the
stakeholders, which were used amongst others for the development of the ESIA.
287. In general, stakeholders interviewed during fieldwork approved the project and its main components.
Stakeholders met during fieldwork recognized perceiving the effects of climate change in their livelihoods. In
addition, producers expressed their concern about a collective approach versus individual support, as most of the
production is individual. They recognize that some actions must be carried out at larger scale when interventions
such as building of qochas and/or irrigation investments are being considered. In particular, women are interested
in transformation and commercialization of locally product raw material.
288. Furthermore, based on the analysis in general, the impacts of the project can be assessed as low to medium,
these are mostly to the activities within component 1 (regarding activity 1.1.2 Implementation of EbA measures and
Climate Resilient Value Chains) and component 2 (regarding activity 2.1.1. establish the Puna Facility for the long-
term financing of EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains), since the competition for funds could be a
conflict driver, therefore and based on the results an ESMP and IPLCEP has been designed for the management
of the identified risks (an overview of environmental and social (E&S) risks and impacts, and mitigation measure
can be found in Error! Reference source not found. below, for ESS 7 Indigenous Peoples Table 9 details the
respective mitigations actions). The implementation of the ESMP will be monitoring. This will involve tracking
compliance with the Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) and assessing the advancement of ESMP
implementation through bi-annual Results-Based Monitoring (RbM) workshops and the Environmental and Social
Safeguards Management and Monitoring System (ESS MS system). The ESS MS system encompasses specific
procedures, plans, organizational structures, planning activities, and resources geared toward establishing,
executing, attaining, reviewing, and sustaining the Environmental and Social Requirements. Its development will
take place during the inception phase, led by GIZ and in close collaboration with all EE ESS focal points.
289. In addition, ESS1 requires the establishment of an external communication and grievance redress mechanism
(GRM) for the project to address grievances from affected communities and individuals, as well as external
communications from stakeholders. At the GCF level, the independent Redress Mechanism handles complaints
related to adverse impacts resulting from the GCF-financed activities' failure to adhere to GCF operational policies
and procedures, including ESS standards. If a complaint is filed with the Independent Redress Mechanism, GIZ, as
the Accredited Entity, will cooperate with both the Independent Redress Mechanism and the GCF. The GRM will
be finalized during the project's inception phase and will be aligned with existing systems of Profonanpe and
MIDAGRI. It will also incorporate cultural sensitivity aspects such as being available in the Quechua and will be
presented in different forms to ensure that it is accessible to all stakeholders (e.g., online, physical in form of a
complain box, etc.). The GRM will also include aspects related to Gender-based Violence (GbV) and Sexual
Exploitation Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) in line with the Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan, ensuring
gender and cultural sensitivity and protecting the anonymity of complainants.
290. The table below shows the proposed mitigation measures E&S risks and impacts as shown in Annex 6b).

=== PAGE 114 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110
G
Table 8. Overview of environmental and social (E&S) risks and impacts, and mitigation measures
ESS ESS Risks and impacts Mitigation measures
ESS1 Environmental and social risks primarily pertain to - Establishment of an ESS review and monitoring
the list of Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) procedure for screening local initiatives in the Puna
measures and proposed Climate Resilient Value Facility.
Chains (CRVC). These risks could materialize in - If necessary, particularly for initiatives falling under risk
the absence of a comprehensive Environmental category B, Profonanpe will provide support to
and Social Safeguards (ESS) review and beneficiaries in crafting ESS plans for their respective
monitoring process. local initiatives.
ESS2 Accidents during construction and land work or - Implementation of health and safety measures based on
contagion could occur, due to the requirement of a safety protocol.
extensive manual labour. Potentially occupational
and safety risks during Local initiative
implementation
ESS3 Risk of GHG emissions and climate change - Adequate following of eligible CRVCs as part of the
mitigation may arise if the proposed interventions selection criteria of the Puna Facility.
for CRVC involve mechanization measures to - Promotion access to national markets.
boost productivity or for processing, especially
when targeting specific overseas markets as part
of the market access support. Additionally, the
mismanagement of water resources in the
watershed, potentially resulting from improperly - Adequate site-specific climate diagnostics and territorial
intervention plan.
designed irrigation and drainage systems, can
have adverse consequences. - Offer of trainings regarding environmental risks.
ESS4 Mismanagement of water resources in the - Implement Gender Action Plan and adequate gender
watershed through unproperly designed of responsive GRM considering SEAH.
irrigation and drainage system could affect - Strengthen women’s empowerment through gender
downstream users and have negative impacts on quota as part of the Puna Facility evaluation.
water, energy, waste and pollution prevention
ESS5 Potential sexual exploitation, abuse, harassment - Develop free, prior and informed consent (FPIC)
(SEAH) towards women’s empowerment actions. - Confirm ownership through mapping of the community,
reviewing individual property and validating with
community and interested persons.
- Adequate review and eligibility documentation by
Profonanpe.
- Develop a Risk Management Plan by a risk manager.
ESS6 Risk of unexpected ecosystem degradation due to - Please refer to measure 4
oil and gas leakage from vehicle, attendance
overrun, overgrazing, introduction of alien species
among others could occur. Potentially risks of
increased frequentation, degradation of existing
system/balance and pests and diseases.
ESS7 Insufficient engagement and consultation of - Implement Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities
Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities could Engagement Plan (IPLCEP, Annex 6c).
generate conflicts during project implementation.
ESS8 Potential risk of unexpected finding of some - Ensure by Profonanpe and MIDAGRI during
archaeological rest and artefact, possible implementation of Local initiative and public investment
unintended negative impacts on cultural heritage. projects that unexpected findings are reported to
MINCUL and local stakeholders.
ESS9 Risk of high expectations amongst Local initiative - Adequately following and implementation by all EEs of
beneficiaries could occur due to improper the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (as part of Annex 7)
development and organization of stakeholder developed for the proposed project.
engagement. Potential risk of insufficient
stakeholder engagement and rise of high
expectations amongst Local initiative
beneficiaries.

--- Table 1 on Page 114 ---
 | ESS |  |  | ESS Risks and impacts |  |  | Mitigation measures | 
ESS1 |  |  | Environmental and social risks primarily pertain to
the list of Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA)
measures and proposed Climate Resilient Value
Chains (CRVC). These risks could materialize in
the absence of a comprehensive Environmental
and Social Safeguards (ESS) review and
monitoring process. |  |  | - Establishment of an ESS review and monitoring
procedure for screening local initiatives in the Puna
Facility.
- If necessary, particularly for initiatives falling under risk
category B, Profonanpe will provide support to
beneficiaries in crafting ESS plans for their respective
local initiatives. |  | 
ESS2 |  |  | Accidents during construction and land work or
contagion could occur, due to the requirement of
extensive manual labour. Potentially occupational
and safety risks during Local initiative
implementation |  |  | - Implementation of health and safety measures based on
a safety protocol. |  | 
ESS3 |  |  | Risk of GHG emissions and climate change
mitigation may arise if the proposed interventions
for CRVC involve mechanization measures to
boost productivity or for processing, especially
when targeting specific overseas markets as part
of the market access support. Additionally, the
mismanagement of water resources in the
watershed, potentially resulting from improperly
designed irrigation and drainage systems, can
have adverse consequences. |  |  | - Adequate following of eligible CRVCs as part of the
selection criteria of the Puna Facility.
- Promotion access to national markets. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | - Adequate site-specific climate diagnostics and territorial
intervention plan.
- Offer of trainings regarding environmental risks. |  | 
ESS4 |  |  | Mismanagement of water resources in the
watershed through unproperly designed of
irrigation and drainage system could affect
downstream users and have negative impacts on
water, energy, waste and pollution prevention |  |  | - Implement Gender Action Plan and adequate gender
responsive GRM considering SEAH.
- Strengthen women’s empowerment through gender
quota as part of the Puna Facility evaluation. |  | 
ESS5 |  |  | Potential sexual exploitation, abuse, harassment
(SEAH) towards women’s empowerment actions. |  |  | - Develop free, prior and informed consent (FPIC)
- Confirm ownership through mapping of the community,
reviewing individual property and validating with
community and interested persons.
- Adequate review and eligibility documentation by
Profonanpe.
- Develop a Risk Management Plan by a risk manager. |  | 
ESS6 |  |  | Risk of unexpected ecosystem degradation due to
oil and gas leakage from vehicle, attendance
overrun, overgrazing, introduction of alien species
among others could occur. Potentially risks of
increased frequentation, degradation of existing
system/balance and pests and diseases. |  |  | - Please refer to measure 4 |  | 
ESS7 |  |  | Insufficient engagement and consultation of
Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities could
generate conflicts during project implementation. |  |  | - Implement Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities
Engagement Plan (IPLCEP, Annex 6c). |  | 
ESS8 |  |  | Potential risk of unexpected finding of some
archaeological rest and artefact, possible
unintended negative impacts on cultural heritage. |  |  | - Ensure by Profonanpe and MIDAGRI during
implementation of Local initiative and public investment
projects that unexpected findings are reported to
MINCUL and local stakeholders. |  | 
ESS9 |  |  | Risk of high expectations amongst Local initiative
beneficiaries could occur due to improper
development and organization of stakeholder
engagement. Potential risk of insufficient
stakeholder engagement and rise of high
expectations amongst Local initiative
beneficiaries. |  |  | - Adequately following and implementation by all EEs of
the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (as part of Annex 7)
developed for the proposed project. |  | 

=== PAGE 115 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111
G
G.1.2 Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities Engagement Plan (IPLCEP)
291. The project area is targeting mainly the Southern High Andes of Peru (SHAP Region), concentrating on four
regions in Southern Peru: Cusco, Apurímac, Puno and Arequipa. The population of the local communities in the
SHAP area are mostly part of the of the country's Quechua indigenous population. Nationally, around 5.1 million
people consider themselves as part of the Quechua people. Most of the Quechua population lives organized
politically and administratively in peasant communities. They are constituted by families linked by ancestral, social,
economic, and cultural features. Almost the entirety of the population in the project area belong to the Quechua
Indigenous Peoples Group . There is considerable uniformity in the cultural-socio-economic conditions within this
area. As a general profile, the Quechua speaking people of the high Andes are subsistence level agriculturalists,
living in poverty or extreme poverty reliant on livestock grazing and limited crop production . While most children
attend primary school only a minority continue and complete their secondary education instead withdrawing to
support the family’s subsistence activities. The Peruvian state has made an initial identification of the Indigenous
Peoples Groups (peasant and native communities) and has formally recognised 55 Indigenous or Original Peoples
in the whole Peruvian territory . However, in the target area of the Resilient Puna project there is only one Indigenous
Peoples Group present: the Quechua.
292. Based on the ESIA and ESMP (please see Annex 6a and b) and the stakeholders’ consultations (please see
Annex 7) it was shown that the main aspects for risks and impacts related to ESS 7 are: (i) conflicts may arise
concerning the ownership and usage rights of the project site, along with the distribution of resulting benefits and
employment opportunities., (ii) conflicts with downstream water user over interruption or alteration of water flows
and water quality during and after the restoration works, (iii) opposition of landowners, land users and residents
over restrictions or lost access to productive, grasslands and other natural resources collection areas and (iv) lack
or poor gender consideration and no opportunities proposed to women.
293. The table below shows the proposed mitigation measures addressing ESS7 (for more information see Annex
6c).
Table 9. Proposed mitigation measures addressing ESS7
Risks and potentials concerning Description of the Measure/Action:
Indigenous peoples and local
communities
Appropriately consider the local knowledge, - Project capacity to implement IPLCEP - Hiring of staff to implement IPLCEP, including
especially in the context of ethnic culture amongst others GIZ- ESS specialist with knowledge of Indigenous peoples and Local
diversity in Peru amongst project staff Communities and Promoters who can speak Quechua.
including ensuring the use of local - Hiring of Quechua interpreters to ensure that all communities understand information
languages (i.e., Quechua) provided by the project.
- Project guidelines and strategies (e.g., communication and engagement) will be
Insufficient consideration and/or design considering Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities.
representation of Indigenous Peoples and - Representatives of Indigenous Peoples and local communities will be given
local communities in project activities. opportunity to participate in project activities (e.g., related to community monitoring,
recover, innovate and scale up ancestral knowledge and practices).
- Set up a consultation register.
- Conduct meaningful consultation (e.g. decision-making body) and ensure transparent
processes throughout project implementation to ensure a free, prior and informed
consent before engaging in project activities.
Insufficient engagement and consultation of
Indigenous Peoples and Local communities - Provide adequate information as well as engage with and seek the support of those
could generate conflicts during project who could be affected by conflicts throughout the whole Local initiative cycle ensuring
implementation. active, free, effective, meaningful, and informed participation of individuals and groups
throughout these processes.
- Ensure equal rights for all different Indigenous Peoples and local communities,
women, and men, while acknowledging differences between women and men and
taking specific measures aimed at accelerating equality when necessary.
- Verify and confirm that there are quotas for the participation of Indigenous Peoples
and Local communities and increase the number within the regulations of regional
platforms. Including awareness raising about the significance of community
involvement.
Insufficient participation and/or inclusion of
Indigenous Peoples and Local communities - Prepare Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities for the participation in regional
platforms.
in regional platforms, territorial planning,
dissemination and monitoring process, and - Social safeguards specialist to ensure that communication and engagement strategy
considers cultural responsiveness and social inclusion. Including on the strategies to
technical capacity building.
project staff and Promoters and CSOs.
- The project will pay special attention to culturally and gender sensitivity, considering
indigenous groups and gender perspectives in the policy development process by
engaging indigenous representatives.

--- Table 1 on Page 115 ---
Risks and potentials concerning
Indigenous peoples and local
communities | Description of the Measure/Action:
Appropriately consider the local knowledge,
especially in the context of ethnic culture
diversity in Peru amongst project staff
including ensuring the use of local
languages (i.e., Quechua) | - Project capacity to implement IPLCEP - Hiring of staff to implement IPLCEP, including
amongst others GIZ- ESS specialist with knowledge of Indigenous peoples and Local
Communities and Promoters who can speak Quechua.
- Hiring of Quechua interpreters to ensure that all communities understand information
provided by the project.
Insufficient consideration and/or
representation of Indigenous Peoples and
local communities in project activities. | - Project guidelines and strategies (e.g., communication and engagement) will be
design considering Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities.
- Representatives of Indigenous Peoples and local communities will be given
opportunity to participate in project activities (e.g., related to community monitoring,
recover, innovate and scale up ancestral knowledge and practices).
Insufficient engagement and consultation of
Indigenous Peoples and Local communities
could generate conflicts during project
implementation. | - Set up a consultation register.
- Conduct meaningful consultation (e.g. decision-making body) and ensure transparent
processes throughout project implementation to ensure a free, prior and informed
consent before engaging in project activities.
- Provide adequate information as well as engage with and seek the support of those
who could be affected by conflicts throughout the whole Local initiative cycle ensuring
active, free, effective, meaningful, and informed participation of individuals and groups
throughout these processes.
- Ensure equal rights for all different Indigenous Peoples and local communities,
women, and men, while acknowledging differences between women and men and
taking specific measures aimed at accelerating equality when necessary.
Insufficient participation and/or inclusion of
Indigenous Peoples and Local communities
in regional platforms, territorial planning,
dissemination and monitoring process, and
technical capacity building. | - Verify and confirm that there are quotas for the participation of Indigenous Peoples
and Local communities and increase the number within the regulations of regional
platforms. Including awareness raising about the significance of community
involvement.
- Prepare Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities for the participation in regional
platforms.
- Social safeguards specialist to ensure that communication and engagement strategy
considers cultural responsiveness and social inclusion. Including on the strategies to
project staff and Promoters and CSOs.
- The project will pay special attention to culturally and gender sensitivity, considering
indigenous groups and gender perspectives in the policy development process by
engaging indigenous representatives.

--- Table 2 on Page 115 ---
Risks and potentials concerning
Indigenous peoples and local
communities

=== PAGE 116 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112
G
- Active engagement of traditional organizations’ leaders, in capacity building, and
development of territorial plans and other project supported measures.
- in cases where the project suggests the restoration or protection of agricultural land,
bofedales, grasslands, or other natural resources utilized by local community
members (comuneros), careful consideration will be given to discussing and offering
Culturally inappropriate access and rights to alternative access and livelihood options.
agricultural, bofedales and grassland. - Efforts will be made to identify similar areas where poorer and landless households
can access and depend on for their livelihoods. The project will employ participatory
approaches, and project personnel, promoters, and Civil Society Organizations
(CSOs) will receive training on gender equality and social inclusion.
Irrespective customary use of lands,
territories and resources and rights related
to cultural and spiritual heritage and values, - Respect Indigenous People and Local Communities’ spiritual/holy land sites and
practices.
traditional knowledge, resource
management systems and practices, and - Respect customary land tenure rights and institutions.
livelihoods.
- Respective trainings for GRM focal points.
- GRM will be communicated to all relevant stakeholders, including the Indigenous
Peoples and Local Communities as part of project engagement.
Possible complaints from Indigenous - GRM developed considering culturally appropriate ways of handling the concerns of
Indigenous Peoples and local communities in the project areas.
Peoples and Local Communities, especially
women, the youth and the elderly are not - Use Indigenous People and Local Communities’ interpreter for all Indigenous Peoples
and Local Communtiies with low Spanish language skills.
being considered.
- Processing of complaints and documentation must include specific timeframe and
commitments to resolve issues.
- All complaint will be recorded (letter, email, record of conversation) and confidentially
and safely stored together, electronically or in hard copy.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
294. The project's Gender Analysis (GA, see Annex 8a) and Gender Action Plan (GAP, see Annex 8b) align with
international principles and commitments such as CEDAW, Beijing, Belém do Pará, and the SDGs, as well as
national policies like the Gender and Climate Change Action Plan-PACC, National Policy on Gender Equality. These
policies support gender equality and non-discrimination of women in various aspects of life, including social,
political, cultural, climatic, and economic rights. Recognizing that the impacts of global warming affect men and
women differently, the project aims to implement adaptation and mitigation measures that consider these distinct
needs. The project's primary approach, Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA), emphasizes working with nature to
address climate impacts while simultaneously reducing vulnerability and generating social and economic benefits.
It's a collaborative process involving communities, public, and private organizations, aimed at creating sustainable
opportunities for all parties at the landscape level.
295. Specifically, the gender analysis has identified the main factors that are hindering women's progress and
resilience in the face of climate change. Overburdened care and unpaid domestic work; low participation in decision-
making; lack of income; vulnerability of their housing and household environment (e.g., health, food, gender-based
violence, poor housing) are the main gendered barriers to more equitable climate adaptation.
296. As mentioned in Section D.3, women in the SHAP area face more barriers than men that hinder the
achievement of gender equity in climate change adaptation measures. Women face unequal access to resources
(use, control) and receive lower income. They also have limited access to microfinance; less opportunities and time
for education, training, and technical assistance/capacity to develop and implement nature-based solutions and
climate-resilient agri-businesses. It is important not only to work to close these gender gaps but also to address the
weaknesses in institutions and regulation policies, to EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains, while also
limited gender-sensitive information (data, systematization of experiences, lessons learnt, behavioural changes).
For this, it is essential that the actions undertaken within the project do not result in an increased workload for
women who already have a double burden between productive and reproductive work (domestic and care work).
For this, the project must recognize women's knowledge, needs and expectations to generate effective responses
in terms of building social and technical capacities, as well as opportunities for their economic autonomy,
participation, and representation in decision-making.
297. Based on the identified gender gaps and recommendations, a Gender Action Plan (GAP) has been developed
for the project. Table 10 includes some of the measures and targets that are integrated in the project’s GAP (for
more detailed information, please see Annex 8b):

--- Table 1 on Page 116 ---
- Active engagement of traditional organizations’ leaders, in capacity building, and
development of territorial plans and other project supported measures.
- in cases where the project suggests the restoration or protection of agricultural land,
bofedales, grasslands, or other natural resources utilized by local community
members (comuneros), careful consideration will be given to discussing and offering
Culturally inappropriate access and rights to alternative access and livelihood options.
agricultural, bofedales and grassland. - Efforts will be made to identify similar areas where poorer and landless households
can access and depend on for their livelihoods. The project will employ participatory
approaches, and project personnel, promoters, and Civil Society Organizations
(CSOs) will receive training on gender equality and social inclusion.
Irrespective customary use of lands,
territories and resources and rights related
to cultural and spiritual heritage and values, - Respect Indigenous People and Local Communities’ spiritual/holy land sites and
practices.
traditional knowledge, resource
management systems and practices, and - Respect customary land tenure rights and institutions.
livelihoods.
- Respective trainings for GRM focal points.
- GRM will be communicated to all relevant stakeholders, including the Indigenous
Peoples and Local Communities as part of project engagement.
Possible complaints from Indigenous - GRM developed considering culturally appropriate ways of handling the concerns of
Indigenous Peoples and local communities in the project areas.
Peoples and Local Communities, especially
women, the youth and the elderly are not - Use Indigenous People and Local Communities’ interpreter for all Indigenous Peoples
and Local Communtiies with low Spanish language skills.
being considered.
- Processing of complaints and documentation must include specific timeframe and
commitments to resolve issues.
- All complaint will be recorded (letter, email, record of conversation) and confidentially
and safely stored together, electronically or in hard copy.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
294. The project's Gender Analysis (GA, see Annex 8a) and Gender Action Plan (GAP, see Annex 8b) align with
international principles and commitments such as CEDAW, Beijing, Belém do Pará, and the SDGs, as well as
national policies like the Gender and Climate Change Action Plan-PACC, National Policy on Gender Equality. These
policies support gender equality and non-discrimination of women in various aspects of life, including social,
political, cultural, climatic, and economic rights. Recognizing that the impacts of global warming affect men and
women differently, the project aims to implement adaptation and mitigation measures that consider these distinct
needs. The project's primary approach, Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA), emphasizes working with nature to
address climate impacts while simultaneously reducing vulnerability and generating social and economic benefits.
It's a collaborative process involving communities, public, and private organizations, aimed at creating sustainable
opportunities for all parties at the landscape level.
295. Specifically, the gender analysis has identified the main factors that are hindering women's progress and
resilience in the face of climate change. Overburdened care and unpaid domestic work; low participation in decision-
making; lack of income; vulnerability of their housing and household environment (e.g., health, food, gender-based
violence, poor housing) are the main gendered barriers to more equitable climate adaptation.
296. As mentioned in Section D.3, women in the SHAP area face more barriers than men that hinder the
achievement of gender equity in climate change adaptation measures. Women face unequal access to resources
(use, control) and receive lower income. They also have limited access to microfinance; less opportunities and time
for education, training, and technical assistance/capacity to develop and implement nature-based solutions and
climate-resilient agri-businesses. It is important not only to work to close these gender gaps but also to address the
weaknesses in institutions and regulation policies, to EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains, while also
limited gender-sensitive information (data, systematization of experiences, lessons learnt, behavioural changes).
For this, it is essential that the actions undertaken within the project do not result in an increased workload for
women who already have a double burden between productive and reproductive work (domestic and care work).
For this, the project must recognize women's knowledge, needs and expectations to generate effective responses
in terms of building social and technical capacities, as well as opportunities for their economic autonomy,
participation, and representation in decision-making.
297. Based on the identified gender gaps and recommendations, a Gender Action Plan (GAP) has been developed
for the project. Table 10 includes some of the measures and targets that are integrated in the project’s GAP (for
more detailed information, please see Annex 8b):

--- Table 2 on Page 116 ---
 | - Active engagement of traditional organizations’ leaders, in capacity building, and
development of territorial plans and other project supported measures.
Culturally inappropriate access and rights to
agricultural, bofedales and grassland. | - in cases where the project suggests the restoration or protection of agricultural land,
bofedales, grasslands, or other natural resources utilized by local community
members (comuneros), careful consideration will be given to discussing and offering
alternative access and livelihood options.
- Efforts will be made to identify similar areas where poorer and landless households
can access and depend on for their livelihoods. The project will employ participatory
approaches, and project personnel, promoters, and Civil Society Organizations
(CSOs) will receive training on gender equality and social inclusion.
Irrespective customary use of lands,
territories and resources and rights related
to cultural and spiritual heritage and values,
traditional knowledge, resource
management systems and practices, and
livelihoods. | - Respect Indigenous People and Local Communities’ spiritual/holy land sites and
practices.
- Respect customary land tenure rights and institutions.
Possible complaints from Indigenous
Peoples and Local Communities, especially
women, the youth and the elderly are not
being considered. | - Respective trainings for GRM focal points.
- GRM will be communicated to all relevant stakeholders, including the Indigenous
Peoples and Local Communities as part of project engagement.
- GRM developed considering culturally appropriate ways of handling the concerns of
Indigenous Peoples and local communities in the project areas.
- Use Indigenous People and Local Communities’ interpreter for all Indigenous Peoples
and Local Communtiies with low Spanish language skills.
- Processing of complaints and documentation must include specific timeframe and
commitments to resolve issues.
- All complaint will be recorded (letter, email, record of conversation) and confidentially
and safely stored together, electronically or in hard copy.

=== PAGE 117 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113
G
Table 10. Overview of gender risks and actions integrated into the design
Risks and potentials Description of the Measure/Action:
concerning gender equality
- Gender-sensitive M&E system to track female and male beneficiaries and ensure gender-
sensitive project management.
- Ensure increasing the participation and capacity building of women and youth in workshops
Risk of not collecting offered by the project.
disaggregated data
- Establish cooperation between gender advisor and communication team to ensure that all project
communication materials and guidelines include a gender equality and social inclusion (GESI)
perspective. Including, when necessary, training on GESI for the communications team.
- Gender based Violence (GbV) and Sexual Exploitation Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) aspects
are include in the grievance mechanism (GRM).
Beneficiaries not using the - Ensure that identified beneficiaries (local communities, producers’ associations, cooperatives,
grievance mechanism for fear of micro and small enterprises, community enterprises and producers’ organizations) include female
harassment. members.
- Promoting a gender-sensitive communal planning process for investing in EbA measures and
Climate Resilient Value Chains.
Designing EbA measures
without considering women´s - Designed and implement of innovative measures for ecosystem-based adaptation with a gender-
needs, responsibilities and sensitive approach
domestic burden
Insufficient participation of
- Ensure women’s access to technical assistance including financial education, access to markets,
women in technical trainings
implementation of Local initiatives.
provided through the project
- Systematization of best practices of women’s knowledge for replication. The project will promote
the development of publications together with universities/public institutions, etc.
- Dissemination of best practices of women’s knowledge for replication. The project will promote
the development of publications together with universities/public institutions, etc.
- Ensure the participation of women in the observation, registration, and dissemination of
Women avoid disclosing information in the environmental community monitoring committees.
ancestral knowledge - Gender criteria considered as part of the Local initiative evaluation.
- Train water utility (EPS) officers of PES/MERESE to promote the inclusion of gender aspects into
the MERESE’s processes (agreements, governance platforms, project development, monitoring).
- Support the design of gender-sensitive financial products to promote EbA and Climate Resilient
Value Chains. The design will include a diagnostics identifying gender gaps and needs.
Planning processes do not - Ensure gender perspective during the planning processes training public officials with an
include gender perspective institutionalized training program led by the Peruvian ministry(s).
Women have difficulties in - Promote the participation of women in decision making planning processes
participation in planning
processes - Strengthening the disaggregation of the M&E system with gender EbA approach at MIDAGRI.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
G.3.1 Financial Management
298. GIZ head office in Germany (GIZ HQ) will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE), administrating project funds and
assuming responsibilities of oversight, guidance and quality assurance to the executing entities in accordance with
the Accreditation Master Agreement signed between GCF and GIZ. The financial management of the project will
follow GIZ’s internal rules and regulations. GIZ has bank accounts with Deutsche Bundesbank and Commerzbank.
GIZ will not open a specific bank account for the GCF project but will ensure that all funds provided are clearly
identifiable and distinguishable from GIZ’s other funds by setting up separate cost units exclusively for the funds
disbursed by the GCF for each funded activity (ledger accounts). Funds received and expenditures incurred will be
booked to the respective cost unit according to generally accepted accounting principles and procedures accepted
by the German Government. As a general principle, GIZ disburses funds to recipients in accordance with the
progress of the project. Executing Entities receiving GCF proceeds by GIZ (Profonanpe and, Instituto de Montaña)
have to report on the proper use of funds and defined progress as a prerequisite for any further disbursement.
Independent external auditors will perform annual financial audits of the project in line with International Auditing
Standards.
299. Profonanpe will host the public-private Puna Facility and manage the different sub-windows and complementary
TA under component 1 and 2. Under GIZ HQ supervision, Profonanpe will ensure that all fiduciary standards of the
GCF are followed. The project Steering Committee will provide the necessary orientations to Profonanpe so
beneficiaries (e.g., producers’ associations, local communities, etc.) and in some cases in partnership with CSOs
can apply to the call for proposal and be supported through TA throughout the implementation of Local initiatives.
Funds received during, but mainly after the project, from the private sector or other international donors are planned

--- Table 1 on Page 117 ---
Table 10. Overview of gender risks and actions integrated into the design
Risks and potentials Description of the Measure/Action:
concerning gender equality
- Gender-sensitive M&E system to track female and male beneficiaries and ensure gender-
sensitive project management.
- Ensure increasing the participation and capacity building of women and youth in workshops
Risk of not collecting offered by the project.
disaggregated data
- Establish cooperation between gender advisor and communication team to ensure that all project
communication materials and guidelines include a gender equality and social inclusion (GESI)
perspective. Including, when necessary, training on GESI for the communications team.
- Gender based Violence (GbV) and Sexual Exploitation Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) aspects
are include in the grievance mechanism (GRM).
Beneficiaries not using the - Ensure that identified beneficiaries (local communities, producers’ associations, cooperatives,
grievance mechanism for fear of micro and small enterprises, community enterprises and producers’ organizations) include female
harassment. members.
- Promoting a gender-sensitive communal planning process for investing in EbA measures and
Climate Resilient Value Chains.
Designing EbA measures
without considering women´s - Designed and implement of innovative measures for ecosystem-based adaptation with a gender-
needs, responsibilities and sensitive approach
domestic burden
Insufficient participation of
- Ensure women’s access to technical assistance including financial education, access to markets,
women in technical trainings
implementation of Local initiatives.
provided through the project
- Systematization of best practices of women’s knowledge for replication. The project will promote
the development of publications together with universities/public institutions, etc.
- Dissemination of best practices of women’s knowledge for replication. The project will promote
the development of publications together with universities/public institutions, etc.
- Ensure the participation of women in the observation, registration, and dissemination of
Women avoid disclosing information in the environmental community monitoring committees.
ancestral knowledge - Gender criteria considered as part of the Local initiative evaluation.
- Train water utility (EPS) officers of PES/MERESE to promote the inclusion of gender aspects into
the MERESE’s processes (agreements, governance platforms, project development, monitoring).
- Support the design of gender-sensitive financial products to promote EbA and Climate Resilient
Value Chains. The design will include a diagnostics identifying gender gaps and needs.
Planning processes do not - Ensure gender perspective during the planning processes training public officials with an
include gender perspective institutionalized training program led by the Peruvian ministry(s).
Women have difficulties in - Promote the participation of women in decision making planning processes
participation in planning
processes - Strengthening the disaggregation of the M&E system with gender EbA approach at MIDAGRI. |  | 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | G.3.1 Financial Management | 
 | 298. GIZ head office in Germany (GIZ HQ) will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE), administrating project funds and | 
 | assuming responsibilities of oversight, guidance and quality assurance to the executing entities in accordance with | 
 | the Accreditation Master Agreement signed between GCF and GIZ. The financial management of the project will | 
 | follow GIZ’s internal rules and regulations. GIZ has bank accounts with Deutsche Bundesbank and Commerzbank. | 
 | GIZ will not open a specific bank account for the GCF project but will ensure that all funds provided are clearly | 
 | identifiable and distinguishable from GIZ’s other funds by setting up separate cost units exclusively for the funds | 
 | disbursed by the GCF for each funded activity (ledger accounts). Funds received and expenditures incurred will be | 
 | booked to the respective cost unit according to generally accepted accounting principles and procedures accepted | 
 | by the German Government. As a general principle, GIZ disburses funds to recipients in accordance with the | 
 | progress of the project. Executing Entities receiving GCF proceeds by GIZ (Profonanpe and, Instituto de Montaña) | 
 | have to report on the proper use of funds and defined progress as a prerequisite for any further disbursement. | 
 | Independent external auditors will perform annual financial audits of the project in line with International Auditing | 
 | Standards. | 
 | 299. Profonanpe will host the public-private Puna Facility and manage the different sub-windows and complementary | 
 | TA under component 1 and 2. Under GIZ HQ supervision, Profonanpe will ensure that all fiduciary standards of the | 
 | GCF are followed. The project Steering Committee will provide the necessary orientations to Profonanpe so | 
 | beneficiaries (e.g., producers’ associations, local communities, etc.) and in some cases in partnership with CSOs | 
 | can apply to the call for proposal and be supported through TA throughout the implementation of Local initiatives. | 
 | Funds received during, but mainly after the project, from the private sector or other international donors are planned | 

--- Table 2 on Page 117 ---
 | Risks and potentials |  | Description of the Measure/Action:
 | concerning gender equality |  | 
Risk of not collecting
disaggregated data |  |  | - Gender-sensitive M&E system to track female and male beneficiaries and ensure gender-
sensitive project management.
 |  |  | - Ensure increasing the participation and capacity building of women and youth in workshops
offered by the project.
 |  |  | - Establish cooperation between gender advisor and communication team to ensure that all project
communication materials and guidelines include a gender equality and social inclusion (GESI)
perspective. Including, when necessary, training on GESI for the communications team.
Beneficiaries not using the
grievance mechanism for fear of
harassment. |  |  | - Gender based Violence (GbV) and Sexual Exploitation Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) aspects
are include in the grievance mechanism (GRM).
 |  |  | - Ensure that identified beneficiaries (local communities, producers’ associations, cooperatives,
micro and small enterprises, community enterprises and producers’ organizations) include female
members.
 |  |  | - Promoting a gender-sensitive communal planning process for investing in EbA measures and
Climate Resilient Value Chains.
Designing EbA measures
without considering women´s
needs, responsibilities and
domestic burden |  |  | - Designed and implement of innovative measures for ecosystem-based adaptation with a gender-
sensitive approach
Insufficient participation of
women in technical trainings
provided through the project |  |  | - Ensure women’s access to technical assistance including financial education, access to markets,
implementation of Local initiatives.
Women avoid disclosing
ancestral knowledge |  |  | - Systematization of best practices of women’s knowledge for replication. The project will promote
the development of publications together with universities/public institutions, etc.
 |  |  | - Dissemination of best practices of women’s knowledge for replication. The project will promote
the development of publications together with universities/public institutions, etc.
 |  |  | - Ensure the participation of women in the observation, registration, and dissemination of
information in the environmental community monitoring committees.
 |  |  | - Gender criteria considered as part of the Local initiative evaluation.
 |  |  | - Train water utility (EPS) officers of PES/MERESE to promote the inclusion of gender aspects into
the MERESE’s processes (agreements, governance platforms, project development, monitoring).
 |  |  | - Support the design of gender-sensitive financial products to promote EbA and Climate Resilient
Value Chains. The design will include a diagnostics identifying gender gaps and needs.
Planning processes do not
include gender perspective |  |  | - Ensure gender perspective during the planning processes training public officials with an
institutionalized training program led by the Peruvian ministry(s).
Women have difficulties in
participation in planning
processes |  |  | - Promote the participation of women in decision making planning processes
 |  |  | - Strengthening the disaggregation of the M&E system with gender EbA approach at MIDAGRI.

=== PAGE 118 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114
G
to be channeled through the Puna Facility to ensure the sustainability. Local initiatives will complement MIDAGRI’s
investments from Sierra Azul, Agrorural, and Agroideas (co-financing).
G.3.2 Procurement
300. In the case of procurement by GIZ, GIZ will follow its own Procurement Guidelines. GIZ is required to comply
with the relevant contracting rules as established in the German Act against Restraints of Competition (GWB), the
German Regulation on the Award of Public Contracts (VgV) and, if applicable, the Contracting Rules for the Award
of Public Service Contracts (VOB, VOL/B and UVgO) when procuring services, construction work and supplies.
301. When awarding contracts for supplies and services (including consultancy services) to be financed in full or in
part from the financing contract, the external Executing Entities will observe their own national regulation for public
procurement and will in any case comply with the provisions mentioned in the Procurement Guidelines for projects
funded by GCF/GIZ.
302. The Procurement Guidelines shall not contradict the applicable national procurement law and/or regulations for
public procurement, which apply in the Executing Entities country. In principle, the regulations of the Executing
Entities country are to be observed; the procurement procedures mentioned in the Guidelines are obligatory
minimum standards (an overview of these minimum standards is available under Annex 10b). While implementing
a project with public funds the Executing Entities should take reasonable account of economic efficiency as well as
ecological and social aspects.
303. GIZ in its function as AE will have monitoring and oversight responsibility on the procurement activities carried
out by the third parties. The monitoring and oversight procedures will follow GIZ’s internal rules and regulations to
ensure compliance with GIZ procurement guidelines which are contractually agreed and reviewed externally via
annual audits.
304. The project’s procurement plan is available in Annex 10a.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential
information.

--- Table 1 on Page 118 ---
 | to be channeled through the Puna Facility to ensure the sustainability. Local initiatives will complement MIDAGRI’s | 
 | investments from Sierra Azul, Agrorural, and Agroideas (co-financing). | 
 | G.3.2 Procurement | 
 | 300. In the case of procurement by GIZ, GIZ will follow its own Procurement Guidelines. GIZ is required to comply | 
 | with the relevant contracting rules as established in the German Act against Restraints of Competition (GWB), the | 
 | German Regulation on the Award of Public Contracts (VgV) and, if applicable, the Contracting Rules for the Award | 
 | of Public Service Contracts (VOB, VOL/B and UVgO) when procuring services, construction work and supplies. | 
 | 301. When awarding contracts for supplies and services (including consultancy services) to be financed in full or in | 
 | part from the financing contract, the external Executing Entities will observe their own national regulation for public | 
 | procurement and will in any case comply with the provisions mentioned in the Procurement Guidelines for projects | 
 | funded by GCF/GIZ. | 
 | 302. The Procurement Guidelines shall not contradict the applicable national procurement law and/or regulations for | 
 | public procurement, which apply in the Executing Entities country. In principle, the regulations of the Executing | 
 | Entities country are to be observed; the procurement procedures mentioned in the Guidelines are obligatory | 
 | minimum standards (an overview of these minimum standards is available under Annex 10b). While implementing | 
 | a project with public funds the Executing Entities should take reasonable account of economic efficiency as well as | 
 | ecological and social aspects. | 
 | 303. GIZ in its function as AE will have monitoring and oversight responsibility on the procurement activities carried | 
 | out by the third parties. The monitoring and oversight procedures will follow GIZ’s internal rules and regulations to | 
 | ensure compliance with GIZ procurement guidelines which are contractually agreed and reviewed externally via | 
 | annual audits. | 
 | 304. The project’s procurement plan is available in Annex 10a. | 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal |  | 
 |  | 
 | ☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | ☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited | 
 | entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 | • full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with | 
 | an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the | 
 | accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and | 
 | • redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential | 
 | information. | 

=== PAGE 119 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 115
H
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☒ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☒ Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☒ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
☐ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☒ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☒ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☐ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a
pilot project
☒ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)
☒ Annex 22 Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and
cross cutting-projects)96
☐ Annex X Other references
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.
96 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.

--- Table 1 on Page 119 ---
ANNEXES |  |  |  |  | 
H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 1 |  | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 2 |  | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☒ |  | Annex 3 |  | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 |  | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 5 |  | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 6 |  | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☒ Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) | 
☒ |  | Annex 7 |  | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☒ |  | Annex 8 |  | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 9 |  | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 10 |  | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 11 |  | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 12 |  | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 13 |  | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 14 |  | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
 | H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 15 |  | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions |  | 
☐ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) |  | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a
pilot project |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 21 | Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 22 | Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and
cross cutting-projects)96 |  | 
☐ |  | Annex X | Other references |  | 

=== PAGE 120 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 121 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Project or programme title
Existence of subproject(s) to Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for sustainable
be identified after GCF Board High Andean communities and ecosystems in Peru
approval
Sector (public or private) Yes
Accredited entity
Public
Environmental and social Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
safeguards (ESS) category (GIZ) GmbH
Location – specific
Category B
location(s) of project or
target country or location(s)
of programme Peru, specifically in the departments of Apurimac,
Arequipa, Cusco, Lima and Puno.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on
Thursday, February 1, 2024
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English, Spanish, and Quechua
Spanish and Quechua are official languages of Peru.
Quechua has been identified as the indigenous language
Explanation on language
largely used in the project area mainly in Cusco, Apurímac,
Puno and Arequipa.
English:
giz2023-en-annex- 6a-environmental-social-impact-
assessment.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5137884-evaluacion-de-impacto-ambiental-
y-social-esia
Spanish:
giz2023-es-anexo-6a-evaluación-impacto-ambiental-
social.pdf
Link to disclosure
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5137884-evaluacion-de-impacto-ambiental-
y-social-esia
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5137884-evaluacion-de-impacto-ambiental-
y-social-esia
Other link(s) Peru - giz.de
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B
Remarks
project is contained in the “ESIA” document (Annex 6a)

--- Table 1 on Page 121 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  | 
Project or programme title |  |  |  | 
 | Existence of subproject(s) to |  | Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for sustainable
High Andean communities and ecosystems in Peru | 
 | be identified after GCF Board |  |  | 
 | approval |  |  | 
 | Sector (public or private) |  | Yes | 
Accredited entity |  |  | Public | 
 | Environmental and social |  | Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
(GIZ) GmbH | 
 | safeguards (ESS) category |  |  | 
 | Location – specific |  | Category B
Peru, specifically in the departments of Apurimac, | 
 | location(s) of project or |  |  | 
 | target country or location(s) |  |  | 
 | of programme |  |  | 
 | Arequipa, Cusco, Lima and Puno.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
Date of disclosure on
accredited entity’s website |  |  | Thursday, February 1, 2024 | 
Language(s) of disclosure
Explanation on language |  |  | English, Spanish, and Quechua
Spanish and Quechua are official languages of Peru.
Quechua has been identified as the indigenous language | 
Link to disclosure |  |  | largely used in the project area mainly in Cusco, Apurímac,
Puno and Arequipa.
English:
giz2023-en-annex- 6a-environmental-social-impact-
assessment.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5137884-evaluacion-de-impacto-ambiental-
y-social-esia
Spanish:
giz2023-es-anexo-6a-evaluación-impacto-ambiental-
social.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5137884-evaluacion-de-impacto-ambiental-
y-social-esia
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes- | 
 |  |  | publicaciones/5137884-evaluacion-de-impacto-ambiental- | 
Other link(s) |  |  | y-social-esia
Peru - giz.de | 

=== PAGE 122 ===
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on
Thursday, February 1, 2024
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English, Spanish, and Quechua
Spanish and Quechua are official languages of Peru.
Quechua has been identified as the indigenous language
Explanation on language
largely used in the project area mainly in Cusco, Apurímac,
Puno and Arequipa.
English:
g iz2023-en-annex-6b-environmental-social-management-
plan.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138370-plan-de-gestion-ambiental-y-
social-esmp
S panish:
giz2023-es-anexo-6b-plan-gestión-ambiental-social.pdf
Link to disclosure
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138370-plan-de-gestion-ambiental-y-
social-esmp
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138370-plan-de-gestion-ambiental-y-
social-esmp
Peru - giz.de
Other link(s)
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B
REnemviarroknsm ental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable)
project is contained in the “ESMP” document (Annex 6b).
Date of disclosure on
N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
OAnthye or tlihnekr( sr)e levant ESS reports, eN./gA. R esettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement
RPoemlicayr kFsr amework (RPF), IndigeNno/Au s Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable)
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Gender Analysis (GA),
Description of
Gender Action Plan (GAP) and Summary of Consultations
report/disclosure on
and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): Thursday,
accredited entity’s website
February 1, 2024
Language(s) of disclosure English, Spanish, and Quechua

--- Table 1 on Page 122 ---
 | Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
Date of disclosure on
accredited entity’s website |  |  | Thursday, February 1, 2024 | 
Language(s) of disclosure
Explanation on language |  |  | English, Spanish, and Quechua
Spanish and Quechua are official languages of Peru.
Quechua has been identified as the indigenous language | 
Link to disclosure |  |  | largely used in the project area mainly in Cusco, Apurímac,
Puno and Arequipa.
English:
g iz2023-en-annex-6b-environmental-social-management-
plan.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138370-plan-de-gestion-ambiental-y-
social-esmp
S panish:
giz2023-es-anexo-6b-plan-gestión-ambiental-social.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138370-plan-de-gestion-ambiental-y-
social-esmp
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes- | 
 |  |  | publicaciones/5138370-plan-de-gestion-ambiental-y-
social-esmp | 
Other link(s) |  |  | Peru - giz.de | 
 | An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B
REnemviarroknsm ental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | project is contained in the “ESMP” document (Annex 6b). | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | OAnthye or tlihnekr( sr)e levant ESS reports, eN./gA. R esettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement |  |  | 
 | RPoemlicayr kFsr amework (RPF), IndigeNno/Au s Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning |  |  | 
 | Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) |  |  | 
Description of
report/disclosure on |  |  | Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Gender Analysis (GA),
Gender Action Plan (GAP) and Summary of Consultations | 
accredited entity’s website |  |  | and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): Thursday,
February 1, 2024 | 

--- Table 2 on Page 122 ---


Description of

=== PAGE 123 ===
Spanish and Quechua are official languages of Peru. Quechua
has been identified as the indigenous language largely used
Explanation on language
in the project area mainly in Cusco, Apurímac, Puno and
Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities
Arequipa.
Engagement Plan (IPLCEP)
English:
giz2023-en-annex-6c-indigenous-peoples-local-
communities-engagement-plan.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138601-plan-de-involucramiento-de-
pueblos-indigenas-y-comunidades-locales-iplcep
Spanish:
giz2023-es-anexo-6c-plan-involucramiento-pueblos-
indigenas-comunidades-locales.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138601-plan-de-involucramiento-de-
pueblos-indigenas-y-comunidades-locales-iplcep
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
Link to disclosure p ublicaciones/5138601-plan-de-involucramiento-de-
pueblos-indigenas-y-comunidades-locales-iplcep
Gender Analysis (GA)
English:
giz2023-en-annex-8a-gender-analysis.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138684-analisis-de-genero-ga
Spanish:
giz2023-es-anexo-8a-analisis-genero.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138684-analisis-de-genero-ga
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
h ttps://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138684-analisis-de-genero-ga

--- Table 1 on Page 123 ---
Explanation on language | Spanish and Quechua are official languages of Peru. Quechua
has been identified as the indigenous language largely used
Link to disclosure | in the project area mainly in Cusco, Apurímac, Puno and
Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities
Arequipa.
Engagement Plan (IPLCEP)
English:
giz2023-en-annex-6c-indigenous-peoples-local-
communities-engagement-plan.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138601-plan-de-involucramiento-de-
pueblos-indigenas-y-comunidades-locales-iplcep
Spanish:
giz2023-es-anexo-6c-plan-involucramiento-pueblos-
indigenas-comunidades-locales.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138601-plan-de-involucramiento-de-
pueblos-indigenas-y-comunidades-locales-iplcep
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
p ublicaciones/5138601-plan-de-involucramiento-de-
pueblos-indigenas-y-comunidades-locales-iplcep
Gender Analysis (GA)
English:
giz2023-en-annex-8a-gender-analysis.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138684-analisis-de-genero-ga
Spanish:
giz2023-es-anexo-8a-analisis-genero.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138684-analisis-de-genero-ga
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
h ttps://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138684-analisis-de-genero-ga

=== PAGE 124 ===
Gender Action Plan (GAP)
E nglish:
giz2023-en-annex-8b-gender-action-plan.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138739-plan-de-accion-de-genero-gap
Spanish:
giz2023-es-anexo-8b-plan-accion-genero.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138739-plan-de-accion-de-genero-gap
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
pSuubmlimcaacrioyn oefs C/o5n13su8l7t3a9ti-opnlasn a-dned- aSctcaikoenh-doel-dgeern ero-gap
Engagement Plan (SEP)
English:
giz2023-en-annex-7-summary-consulations-stakeholder-
engagement-plan.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138757-resumen-de-consultas-y-plan-de-
involucramiento-de-partes-interesadas
Spanish:
g iz2023-es-anexo-7-resumen-consultas-plan-
involucramiento-partes-interesadas.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138757-resumen-de-consultas-y-plan-de-
involucramiento-de-partes-interesadas
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138757-resumen-de-consultas-y-plan-de-
involucramiento-de-partes-interesadas
Other link(s) Peru - giz.de
The IPP document is titled “Indigenous Peoples and Local
RDeismcalorskus re in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
Communities Engagement Plan (IPLCEP)” (Annex 6c).
Date Thursday, February 1, 2024

--- Table 1 on Page 124 ---
 |  |  | Gender Action Plan (GAP)
E nglish:
giz2023-en-annex-8b-gender-action-plan.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138739-plan-de-accion-de-genero-gap
Spanish:
giz2023-es-anexo-8b-plan-accion-genero.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138739-plan-de-accion-de-genero-gap
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
pSuubmlimcaacrioyn oefs C/o5n13su8l7t3a9ti-opnlasn a-dned- aSctcaikoenh-doel-dgeern ero-gap
Engagement Plan (SEP)
English:
giz2023-en-annex-7-summary-consulations-stakeholder-
engagement-plan.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138757-resumen-de-consultas-y-plan-de-
involucramiento-de-partes-interesadas
Spanish:
g iz2023-es-anexo-7-resumen-consultas-plan-
involucramiento-partes-interesadas.pdf
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes-
publicaciones/5138757-resumen-de-consultas-y-plan-de-
involucramiento-de-partes-interesadas
Quechua:
Ökosysteme in den peruanischen Hochanden an den
Klimawandel anpassen - giz.de
https://www.gob.pe/institucion/midagri/informes- | 
 |  |  | publicaciones/5138757-resumen-de-consultas-y-plan-de- | 
Other link(s) |  |  | involucramiento-de-partes-interesadas
Peru - giz.de | 
 | The IPP document is titled “Indigenous Peoples and Local
RDeismcalorskus re in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Communities Engagement Plan (IPLCEP)” (Annex 6c). | 

=== PAGE 125 ===
The ESIA/ESMP, the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPLCEP),
Summary of Consultations and Stakeholder Engagement
Plan (SEP), the Gender Analysis (GA) and the Gender Action
Plan (GAP)
-are made available MasI DhaArGdR cIopies at:
The main office of in Lima and regional offices
wMiItDhAinG tRhIe Lpirmojae ct area:
J irón Cahuide 805, Torre Cahuide, piso 3 y piso 8
ZDoisntrei tUon diet oJefs Aúgs rMoa Rruíar, aPlr Aovpiunrciima Laicm a, Departamento Lima
J r. Andrés Avelino Cáceres N° 374, Distrito Abancay,
PZroonvei nUcniai tA obfa Angcaroy, RDuerpaalr tAarmeeqnutiop aApurímac
U rbanización La Marina C 10, Distrito Cayma, Provincia
AZorenqeu Uipnai,t D oefp Aagrrtaom Reunrtaol ACruezqcuoip a
Av. Micaela Bastidas N° 310-314, Distrito Wanchaq,
PZroonvei nUcniai tC oufz Acog,r Doe Rpuarrtaalm Peunntoo Cuzco
Jr. Moquegua N° 264 Distrito Puno, Provincia Puno,
Place
DZoenpaer Utanmite onft oA Pgruon oR ural Yauyos
Calle Manco Cápac s/n, Distrito Yauyos, Provincia Yauyos,
Departamento Lima SERNANP
The headquarters of in the national protected
aNroera sY wauityhoins Cthoec hparosjLecatn adrsecaa: pe Reserve Headquarters
Av. Huancavelica 3113 Urb. Covica el Distrito Tambo,
PArmovpianyc iNa aHtuioannacal ySoa,n Dcetupaarrtya Hmeeandtoq uJuanrítne rs
Urb. Santa Martha Mz M Lote 2, Distrito Abancay, Provincia
AMbaacnhcua yP, iDccehpuar Htaimsteonrtioc SAapnucrtímuaarcy Headquarters
Avenida Oswaldo Baca N° 402, Urb. Magisterio 1ra. Etapa,
Distrito Cusco, Provincia Cusco, Departamento Cusco
S+a5l1i n8a4s 2 y2 A9g2u9a7d a Blanca National Reserve Headquarters
Urb. Independencia Americana B-28, Umacollo, Yanahuara,
Arequipa
+51 54 257461

--- Table 1 on Page 125 ---
Place | The ESIA/ESMP, the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPLCEP),
Summary of Consultations and Stakeholder Engagement
Plan (SEP), the Gender Analysis (GA) and the Gender Action
Plan (GAP)
-are made available MasI DhaArGdR cIopies at:
The main office of in Lima and regional offices
wMiItDhAinG tRhIe Lpirmojae ct area:
J irón Cahuide 805, Torre Cahuide, piso 3 y piso 8
ZDoisntrei tUon diet oJefs Aúgs rMoa Rruíar, aPlr Aovpiunrciima Laicm a, Departamento Lima
J r. Andrés Avelino Cáceres N° 374, Distrito Abancay,
PZroonvei nUcniai tA obfa Angcaroy, RDuerpaalr tAarmeeqnutiop aApurímac
U rbanización La Marina C 10, Distrito Cayma, Provincia
AZorenqeu Uipnai,t D oefp Aagrrtaom Reunrtaol ACruezqcuoip a
Av. Micaela Bastidas N° 310-314, Distrito Wanchaq,
PZroonvei nUcniai tC oufz Acog,r Doe Rpuarrtaalm Peunntoo Cuzco
Jr. Moquegua N° 264 Distrito Puno, Provincia Puno,
DZoenpaer Utanmite onft oA Pgruon oR ural Yauyos
Calle Manco Cápac s/n, Distrito Yauyos, Provincia Yauyos,
Departamento Lima SERNANP
The headquarters of in the national protected
aNroera sY wauityhoins Cthoec hparosjLecatn adrsecaa: pe Reserve Headquarters
Av. Huancavelica 3113 Urb. Covica el Distrito Tambo,
PArmovpianyc iNa aHtuioannacal ySoa,n Dcetupaarrtya Hmeeandtoq uJuanrítne rs
Urb. Santa Martha Mz M Lote 2, Distrito Abancay, Provincia
AMbaacnhcua yP, iDccehpuar Htaimsteonrtioc SAapnucrtímuaarcy Headquarters
Avenida Oswaldo Baca N° 402, Urb. Magisterio 1ra. Etapa,
Distrito Cusco, Provincia Cusco, Departamento Cusco
S+a5l1i n8a4s 2 y2 A9g2u9a7d a Blanca National Reserve Headquarters
Urb. Independencia Americana B-28, Umacollo, Yanahuara,
Arequipa

=== PAGE 126 ===
Cotahuasi Sub-basin Landscape Reserve Headquarters
Sede principal: Urb. Pampas de Aymaña F-12, Distrito
CPorotafhounaasni,p Per ovincia La Unión, Departamento Arequipa
Jr. Félix Dibós 400, Distrito Magdalena del Mar, Provincia
Lima, Departamento Lima
+51 1 2181097
cGoImZ oufnfiiccaec Pioenreus @ profonanpe.org.pe
Av. Prolongación Arenales 801, Distrito Miraflores,
Provincia Lima, Departamento Lima
+51 1 4229067
+51 1 4226188
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
giz-peru@giz.de
Date of accredited entity’s
N/A
Board meeting
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, March 4, 2024
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

--- Table 1 on Page 126 ---
 |  |  | Cotahuasi Sub-basin Landscape Reserve Headquarters
Sede principal: Urb. Pampas de Aymaña F-12, Distrito
CPorotafhounaasni,p Per ovincia La Unión, Departamento Arequipa
Jr. Félix Dibós 400, Distrito Magdalena del Mar, Provincia
Lima, Departamento Lima
+51 1 2181097
cGoImZ oufnfiiccaec Pioenreus @ profonanpe.org.pe
Av. Prolongación Arenales 801, Distrito Miraflores,
Provincia Lima, Departamento Lima
+51 1 4229067 | 
 | +51 1 4226188
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
giz-peru@giz.de |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
Date of accredited entity’s
Board meeting |  |  | N/A | 

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 127
Secretariat’s assessment of FP226
Proposal name: Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for sustainable High
Andean communities and ecosystems in Peru
Accredited entity: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)
Country: Peru
Project/programme size: Medium
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths Points of caution
The project has a significant impact and The Puna Facility will provide grants and
sustainable development potential thanks to its reimbursable grants for investments with the
combination of ecosystem conservation and potential for financial returns. GIZ has provided
sustainable development interventions along key comprehensive justification on the need for grants
agriculture and animal husbandry value chains (especially for unformalized entities with no
vital to highly vulnerable, yet underserved market/finance access) and reimbursable grants
communities in the Peruvian Southern High (for entities with established capacities and
Andes markets). This should avoid concessionality
capture and the crowding out of private
investment, while delivering fund reflows to
support additional investments
The project features a strong model to address the
geographical, financial, knowledge and
governance barriers that affect climate-affected
value chains in the High Andes. The exit strategy
will feature a combination of grants-based finance
(Puna Facility) along with payments for
ecosystem services and the development of
microcredit products leveraging both public and
private finance for ecosystem-based adaptation
interventions
The project is strongly country driven and will be
executed through Profonanpe, the Ministry of
Agricultural Development and Irrigation of Peru
and the authority in matter of Natural Parks,
which brings in a high level of buy-in and
coordination, on-the-ground capacity and
experience running similar projects
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XVII, titled “List of proposed conditions and
recommendations”, respectively.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment

--- Table 1 on Page 127 ---
 | Strengths |  |  | Points of caution | 
The project has a significant impact and
sustainable development potential thanks to its
combination of ecosystem conservation and
sustainable development interventions along key
agriculture and animal husbandry value chains
vital to highly vulnerable, yet underserved
communities in the Peruvian Southern High
Andes |  |  | The Puna Facility will provide grants and
reimbursable grants for investments with the
potential for financial returns. GIZ has provided
comprehensive justification on the need for grants
(especially for unformalized entities with no
market/finance access) and reimbursable grants
(for entities with established capacities and
markets). This should avoid concessionality
capture and the crowding out of private
investment, while delivering fund reflows to
support additional investments |  | 
The project features a strong model to address the
geographical, financial, knowledge and
governance barriers that affect climate-affected
value chains in the High Andes. The exit strategy
will feature a combination of grants-based finance
(Puna Facility) along with payments for
ecosystem services and the development of
microcredit products leveraging both public and
private finance for ecosystem-based adaptation
interventions |  |  |  |  | 
The project is strongly country driven and will be
executed through Profonanpe, the Ministry of
Agricultural Development and Irrigation of Peru
and the authority in matter of Natural Parks,
which brings in a high level of buy-in and
coordination, on-the-ground capacity and
experience running similar projects |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 128
2.1 Project background
3. Climate change and the unsustainable management of productive practices are
degrading the puna ecosystems (peatlands, wetlands and grasslands) and the services they
provide (provision and regulation of water; provision of fodder, food and fibre; nutrient and
carbon regulation) in the Southern High Andes of Peru (SHAP). The Andean Indigenous Peoples
and local communities (IPLCs) in the SHAP have been characterized throughout history by their
capacity to adapt to environmental changes. Even though this traditional knowledge has been a
key asset for Andean people when facing climate stress, nowadays the Andean population finds
the increasing severity and unpredictability of extreme events, as well as the unpredictability of
hydric regimes, quite challenging.
4. In this context, the project aims to enhance ownership and resources of Andean IPLCs to
build their resilience to climate change by defining, implementing and monitoring their
ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) priorities to improve the puna ecosystems management and
ensure the continuous provision of their services such as water supply that will be captured
during the rainy season for their livelihoods during the dry season.
5. Overall, the project is expected to promote the sustainable management of 23,914 ha of
puna ecosystems, directly benefiting 60,715 people and indirectly another 2,011,856 people.
The mitigation co-benefit is estimated at 407,657 tonnes of carbon dioxideequivalent.
6. The accredited entity (AE) is the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), with the Ministry of Agricultural Development and Irrigation of Peru
(MIDAGRI) as the leading partner. Profonanpe, the non-governmental organization Instituto de
Montaña (IdM) and GIZ Peru will act as executing entities (EEs) receiving GCF funds, while
MIDAGRI and the Peruvian National Service of Natural Protected Areas (SERNANP) will act as
EEs that will contribute with financing to achieve the project’s objective.
7. The project is submitted as environmental and social safeguards (ESS) category B.
8. It was developed with support from the Project Preparation Facility.
2.2 Component-by-component analysis
9. Overall, the project will support promoting a paradigm shift in the management of puna
ecosystems and productive practices to increase the climate resilience of some of the most
vulnerable groups in the country which include rural farming and herding communities that
depend on these ecosystems for their livelihoods. To achieve this, the project consists of three
components: (1) resilient ecosystems and communities, (2) public and private investments for
scaling up EbA measures aligned and leveraged, and (3) multilevel territorial governance for the
incorporation of EbA measures.
Component 1: Puna ecosystems are restored, conserved and better managed through the
implementation of EbA measures complemented by climate-resilient value chains (CRVCs) (total
cost: EUR 58,958,571; GCF cost: EUR 26,427,299; co-finance: EUR 32,531,272)
10. By implementing investments on the ground (through component 1), the aims are (1) to
maintain or improve the provision of puna ecosystem services for the climate resilience of
Andean IPLCs in the SHAP, and (2) to strengthen sustainable and productive value chains that
are dependent on and which impact those ecosystems. This component will provide financial
and technical support, through a call for a proposal mechanism for EbA and CRVC
implementation on the ground.
11. Component 1 is structured in two outputs:

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 129
(a) Output 1.1: Investments for EbA measures and CRVCs are implemented at the local
landscape level; and
(b) Output 1.2: The use of EbA knowledge is recovered and disseminated, and local
monitoring committees and observation systems are implemented.
Component 2: Public and private financing for EbA measures and climate-resilient livelihoods are
established and are actively used by vulnerable communities in the Puna ecosystem (total cost:
EUR 7,172,425; GCF cost: EUR 6,054,159; co-finance: EUR 1,118,266)
12. Through component 2, the project will establish a facility implemented by Profonanpe to
deliver financing through a call for proposal for IPCL-led local initiatives oriented to increase
climate resilience. The Puna Facility has been designed with three financing windows, to allow
the flexibility to provide the adequate amount of support and concessionality to different
groups of beneficiaries, depending on their organization status, commercial capabilities, and
business plans. The second and third windows will provide reimbursable grants, with
reimbursements triggered by various profitability and results-based triggers. This component
will also align and leverage public and private financing for EbA measures and CRVCs at
different and coordinated levels.
13. Component 2 comprises the following output and three activities, each focused on the
establishment and development of complementary financial mechanisms:
(a) Output 2.1. Financial mechanisms for the implementation of EbA measures and
improvement of climate-resilient livelihoods in the Puna ecosystem are established;
(i) Activity 2.1.1: Establish the Puna Facility for long-term financing of EbA
measures and CRVCs;
(ii) Activity 2.1.2: Strengthen capacities to develop and implement innovative
mechanisms for EbA in High Andean ecosystems; and
(iii) Activity 2.1.3: Support the greening of microcredits to promote EbA and CRVCs.
Component 3: EbA and climate resilience are mainstreamed into multilevel landscape governance
instruments (total cost: EUR 5,570,475; GCF cost: EUR 3,934,843; co-finance: EUR 1,635,632)
14. Through component 3, the project will promote integrated gender-sensitive landscape
planning, governance platforms and policy improvement and coordination, fostering dialogue
and improving coordination among stakeholders that intervene in the landscape (local, regional
and national governments, rural communities, producer organizations, watershed committees,
and MIDAGRI extension services, among others).
15. Component 3 consists of the following output:
(a) Output 3.1. Multilevel landscape governance is improved through strengthening of
national capacity, regulatory frameworks and monitoring and evaluation systems.
Project management costs (total cost: EUR 3,812,892; GCF cost: EUR 1,929,721)
16. This cost will support the management, coordination and implementation of the project
activities, in compliance with the contractual obligations that are included or referred to in the
legal agreements entered into with the AE. The GCF portion of the project management cost is
less than 5 per cent of the grant portion of requested funding from GCF and is compliant with
the GCF policy on fees.
Sources (EUR million) Uses (EUR million) (in parenthesis, GCF)
GCF (grant) 40.79 1.1 EbA investments 52.69 (21.65)
1BMZ/GIZ (grant) 7.91 1.2 EbA knowledge 6.27 (4.77)
1 Germany’s Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development

--- Table 1 on Page 129 ---
Sources (EUR million) |  | Uses (EUR million) (in parenthesis, GCF) | 
GCF (grant) | 40.79 | 1.1 EbA investments | 52.69 (21.65)
1BMZ/GIZ (grant) | 7.91 | 1.2 EbA knowledge | 6.27 (4.77)

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 130
MINAGRI (grant + in-kind + 2.41 + 16.88 +
2.1 EbA financial mechanisms 7.17 (6.05)
loan) 9.39
SERNANP (in-kind) 0.95 3.1 Landscape governance 5.57 (3.93)
Monitoring and evaluation +
Total 78.32 5.82 (3.57)
project management cost
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria
17. The Secretariat considers the proposal to be strongly aligned with GCF investment
criteria.
3.1 Impact potential Scale: Medium to high
18. The proposal aims to increase the resilience to climate change of 2,072,571 people living
in southern Peru, including major cities such as Cusco, Arequipa, Abancay and Cañete, who will
experience improvements in ecosystem services, most notably water quality and availability,
generated by the improvement of ecosystems that contribute to water regulation in the upper
and lower parts of watersheds, protecting against increased risks of floods and droughts as a
result of climate change.
19. The project is expected to have 60,715 direct beneficiaries, particularly among Quechua-
speaking Indigenous Peoples living in the highly vulnerable Southern High Andes region of Peru,
will be directly supported by GCF funding, which will support (1) the strengthening of key value
chains such as potatoes, quinoa and camelids, and (2) the implementation of EbA activities
based on best practices and ancestral knowledge on an estimated 23,914 ha of puna ecosystems
that are highly valuable to local communities, enhancing the provision of ecosystem services.
3.2 Paradigm shift Scale: Medium to high
20. The project presents a strong theory of change responding to the threats to Puna
ecosystems and the communities that depend on them. The theory of change focuses on
transforming agricultural and animal husbandry value chains by addressing barriers related to
access to finance, access to knowledge, and governance and institutional coordination.
21. The project will expand EbA approaches, so far piloted but not demonstrated at scale, by
establishing financial mechanisms to channel public finance via the Puna Facility (with funding
windows and instruments tailored to different sets of beneficiaries) and payments for
ecosystem service mechanisms. Further, the project will give the capacity to community-level
institutions to develop business plans, and the microcredit financial sector to develop tailored
financial products for EbA approaches. Parallel development of both public and private finance
sources is vital to the exit strategy and scaling-up of the project’s results.
22. The project features a sound approach to knowledge management based on capturing
ancestral knowledge, community monitoring, and learning lessons to identify and promote best
practices in EbA. MIDAGRI and Ministry of the Environment personnel, in charge of national
programmes and rural extension services, will be trained on sustainable management and
traditional practices and tasked with knowledge dissemination to final beneficiaries.
3.3 Sustainable development potential Scale: High

--- Table 1 on Page 130 ---
MINAGRI (grant + in-kind +
loan) | 2.41 + 16.88 +
9.39 | 2.1 EbA financial mechanisms | 7.17 (6.05)
SERNANP (in-kind) | 0.95 | 3.1 Landscape governance | 5.57 (3.93)
Total | 78.32 | Monitoring and evaluation +
project management cost | 5.82 (3.57)

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 131
23. The programme has highly significant environmental, social and economic co-benefits,
and is closely aligned with several of Peru’s objectives in relation to the Sustainable
Development Goals.
24. Environmental co-benefits are particularly relevant as a result of the project’s
ecosystem-based approach. The restoration and sustainable management of 23,914 ha will
improve ecosystem connectivity and the provision of a broad range of ecosystem services –
from biodiversity to water-flow management and soil protection – that are particularly critical
to the livelihoods of target communities. The sustainable management of ecosystems will also
result in a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, estimated at 407,000 tonnes of carbon
dioxide equivalent over 15 years.
25. Project activities are expected to yield significant social and economic benefits as a
consequence of the strengthening of producer associations and value chains, community
decision-making with a gender-mainstreaming approach, and the preservation of cultural
values, most importantly through the preservation of ancestral landscape practices. The project
is expected to contribute to job and income generation, with a target of increased incomes for
over 42,000 beneficiaries.
3.4 Needs of the recipient Scale: High
26. Despite Peru’s status as a middle-income country, the project targets predominantly
Indigenous Peoples’ communities in isolated areas of the Southern High Andes (69 per cent of
beneficiaries are Quechua Indigenous Peoples). In addition to severe vulnerability to climate
change, particularly droughts and the availability of natural resources in fragile high-altitude
ecosystems, the region ranks among the most impoverished in Peru, with a high incidence of
poverty, low rates of access to basic services, and well-documented barriers to access to finance
or markets.
27. As mentioned as part of the discussion on paradigm shift, the proposal takes on a
comprehensive approach to tackling these needs, strengthening value chains, connectedness,
governance and use of resources, and ultimately the Puna ecosystems which form the basis of
the livelihoods in the region.
3.5 Country ownership Scale: High
28. The programme is part of Peru’s country programme and is well-aligned with both the
Peruvian nationally determined contributions on agriculture and water, national adaptation
plan, as well as sectoral policies on agriculture and green financing. The programme was
developed in close consultation with beneficiaries, including Indigenous Peoples, and with a full
range of stakeholders at national, regional and local levels.
29. The project will be implemented mostly through Profonanpe, which is an AE to GCF and
has ample experience in the operation of similar projects combining funding facilities and the
provision of technical assistance, with community-based action in the areas of forestry and
agriculture. The project will also benefit from the strong involvement as EEs of SERNANP (in
charge of protected areas), IdM (non-profit focused on the conservation of the values of
mountain peoples and ecosystems) and MIDAGRI, which will leverage strong on-the-ground
capabilities and contribute substantial co-financing.
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness Scale: Medium

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 132
30. The funding proposal package presents a well-developed economic and
financial analysis with clear definition of scope and well-referenced assumptions. It covers the
economic and financial performance of the Puna Facility, including repayable, non-repayable
and Agroideas window, which takes 47 per cent of the total GCF budget. The remaining 53 per
cent of the funding is to be used for technical assistance and capacity-building, and therefore is
not taken into account in the economic and financial analysis.
31. The economic analysis uses a social discount rate of 6 per cent, based on World Bank’s
report (2022) on Peru’s climate investment. The results show the net present value of the
project as EUR 11.9 million and the economic internal rate of return as 8.2 per cent over a
reasonable 17-year time horizon, confirming that the proposed project is economically viable.
However, if the discount rate is increased, for example to 8 per cent, which is used in other
public sources such as the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the economic net present value is
reduced significantly to EUR 0.8 million.
32. Financial adequacy and appropriateness of concessionality is demonstrated in the
financial analysis. The AE has conducted a scenario analysis testing financial results with
different financial instruments (loan). The financial model shows mixed results: it is still
financially viable for the interventions under the repayable windows and the financial internal
rate of return is above the weighted average cost of capital. The AE complements the results
with a narrative justification for the need of grants. For the rest of the interventions, loans
would not make the project viable. As cash shortfall is quite significant during the project
implementation period, it would be difficult for beneficiaries to pay back during the project
period. Grants would be the most appropriate instrument.
33. In terms of the financial sustainability beyond the project period, the key to the
sustainability of the Puna Facility lies in the feasibility of mobilizing resources from the private
sector, which is the purpose of subactivity 2.1.1.2. To demonstrate such feasibility, the AE was
requested to conduct a cash flow scenario analysis, incorporating business models and
estimated profits to be achieved by the end of the project, so that the private sector can be
attracted and incentivized to get involved in the proposed initiative. The AE analysed each value
chain under a business-as-usual scenario and climate-resilient (with-the-project) scenario,
where all climate-resilient scenarios show revenue growth and net cash flows.
34. The repayable grants can also be an instrument for the financial sustainability of the
project. The financial model estimates repayment rate as 50 per cent, assuming that different
local initiatives may be able to repay in full or in part. The repayment stops in year 6, and after
the project completion, the revolving funds may flow back into any of the windows under the
Puna Facility, leaving uncertainty on how much funding would be reinvested, their impacts and
sustainability beyond the project. The AE responded that Profonanpe will continue windows 2
and 3, under the same terms and conditions for the investment.
35. The cost-effectiveness is assessed to be medium. The project’s adaptation cost is EUR
672/direct beneficiary and USD 20/total beneficiary. Cost per direct beneficiary is at the higher
range of adaptation portfolio in the Latin America and Caribbean region, as the average
cost/direct beneficiary in the region (single country projects only) stands at USD 348. The co-
financing ratio is 1:0.92, with the sources entirely from the public sector.
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards
36. Project background. The project aims to align public and private investments and
increase access to State programmes with a view to improving the climate resilience of High

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 133
Andean ecosystems and community livelihoods. Activities are intended to reduce the degree of
losses from climate impacts, improve communities’ relationship with ecosystems, increase their
participation in the value chain and product transformation, improve their associative
processes and market access, and monitor progress on decreasing their vulnerability. The
project will finance the implementation of EbA measures and build CRVCs to restore and
conserve the puna ecosystems. The project will also improve structural conditions that will
enable rural communities in the High Andes to use and manage the Puna ecosystems in a more
sustainable and climate-smart way, offering alternatives to reduce the unsustainable practices
that are contributing to ecosystem degradation and magnifying climate change impacts. Among
the environmental and social (E&S) co-benefits are the maintenance of ecosystem services in
the project area, reduced greenhouse gas emissions, improved local economy and
mainstreaming gender-responsive approaches in EbA and CRVC measures.
37. Environmental and social risk category. The AE assigned the project the moderate
E&S risk category, which is considered equivalent of GCF category B. The Secretariat confirms
the proposed E&S risk category, considering that the project will largely have positive E&S
impacts on the ecosystems and the communities in the SHAP. Nevertheless, investments for EbA
and CRVC measures (component 1) may have potential adverse E&S impacts, which will be site-
specific, reversible or easily managed through standard mitigation measures. The Secretariat
confirms that the assigned risk category is within the accreditation level of the AE.
38. Safeguards instrument. The AE has provided an environmental and social impact
assessment (ESIA) and an environmental and social management plan (ESMP) with the funding
proposal as the safeguards document. The document provides an overview of the national
context for the E&S risk assessment, the potential E&S risks likely to be associated with the
project activities and a range of EbA measures and CRVC interventions targeted by the project.
As the project will mobilize public and private financing through the establishment of the Puna
Facility to support local initiatives led by the IPLCs, site-specific ESIAs and ESMPs will be
developed during the project’s implementation.
39. Compliance with the GCF ESS standards. The following paragraphs provide a brief
description of the programme’s compliance with ESS standards.
40. ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and
impacts. The ESIA has discussed the E&S baseline of the districts and regions in the SHAP
targeted by the project and identified the potential E&S risks and impacts against the proposed
EbA measures and CRVC interventions along with the indicative mitigation measures detailed in
the project’s ESMP. Most of the risks and impacts identified by the AE are of moderate scale and
can be readily managed and mitigated through the appropriate procedures and plans as
described in the ESMP. It is worth noting that the AE has identified that there may be pre-
existing or project-induced conflict developing from the participatory process for engaging
beneficiaries and supporting the design of intervention plans where EbA measures and CRVCs
are prioritized for future local initiatives. Identified conflict risks are related to the exclusion of
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups from the potential beneficiaries, competition for access to
project grants, use of limited resources (including for downstream water users) and ownership
and land tenure. To mitigate such risks, the AE will develop and implement an appropriate
gender and culturally sensitive beneficiary engagement and communication strategy to ensure
that the potential beneficiaries are properly identified. In the context of the Puna Facility, where
financial instruments will be applied to support the implementation of local initiatives, because
the potential E&S risks and impacts of such financing cannot be assessed in detail in advance,
the ESIA outlines the general E&S due diligence principles and the E&S risk management
procedures to be followed by activities supported under the Puna Facility. The facility-specific
E&S due diligence and screening checklist will be developed during the project inception on the
basis of the existing environmental, social and governance screening checklist established by
the EE.

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 134
41. ESS 2: Labour and working conditions. The ESIA identifies that the project may
involve potential low risks of accidents or contagion during the construction and land work of
some EbA measures and CRVC interventions, where extensive manual labour may be involved.
As no large-scale and long-lasting interventions are foreseen within the Puna Facility, the
potential occupational and safety risks are expected to be low and limited to the phase of local
initiative implementation. The AE will require site-specific labour management procedures,
including health and safety measures and safety protocol, in each local initiative to ensure the
provision of protective equipment, when necessary, following the code of ethics and
implementation protocol of the EEs.
42. ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution control. The ESIA identifies that the project
may involve low risks related to greenhouse gas emissions if the proposed CRVC interventions
involve mechanization measures to increase productivity or processing, and accessing markets
abroad. The AE also identifies a low risk of pollution concerning the mismanagement of water
resources in the watershed in the case of incorrectly designed irrigation and drainage systems.
The AE will mitigate such risks by following the eligibility criteria to select proper EbA and
CRVC interventions, promoting access to national markets, conducting site-specific E&S due
diligence, and providing technical assistance at the local landscape level on managing the
project’s environmental risks.
43. ESS 4: Community health, safety and security. The AE identifies that the project may
expose local communities to low risks and impacts on their health and safety, including the
exposure to potential accidents and accidents during the construction and land work and the
potential conflicts over ownership and inappropriate selection or implementation of local
interventions and initiatives. The project will require safety protocols specific to each funded
local initiative to be developed and implemented to mitigate such risks. Since the project will be
locally implemented at the community level and by the community members, with support from
local civil society, it is likely that no specific security arrangements will be made for project
activities.
44. ESS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. The project does not include
any activities that will require land acquisition through expropriation or other compulsory
procedures. The EbA measures and CRVC activities that will be funded by the project will be
designed by communities and community entities and the lands to be used for the funded
activities will be in the possession of the community or used by the community. Nevertheless,
the ESIA identifies the need to conduct due diligence on lands where any activity or civil works
may take place to ensure that the land belongs to the community, the community is in
agreement on the proposed use of the land, the land is clear of public/private ownership or use
and the benefits of the activity or civil works to be conducted are distributed equitably across
the community. In terms of the potential risks and impacts on involuntary resettlement, the
ESIA has assessed that there is a risk that project activities could create restrictions on land use
and/or access to natural resources. The ESIA also notes the need to conduct community
consultations to understand the potential losses (and whether they fall disproportionately on
some people in the community) and develop consensus on alternative access, use and/or
livelihoods opportunities. The ESIA and the ESMP require that landowners’ titles be confirmed
and that the users of any selected local initiatives site to be funded by the Puna Facility ensure
the consent of the entire community through the communal assembly and agreement signed.
45. ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural
resources. The AE has identified low risks and impacts on biodiversity as the project aims to
improve the conservation of natural resources and their climate- resilient use. The creation of
improved road access may facilitate greater access to the public and thus accelerate the
degradation of sensitive areas; there could be unexpected damage to wetlands due to an
incorrect assessment of the situation; there could be overgrazing due to an incorrect choice on
the CRVC component; agroforestry and reforestation may attract new pests and diseases into

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 135
the targeted area; increased tourist numbers through community ecotourism may impact
conservation if incorrectly managed; exotic species could be introduced into natural protected
areas; altered drainage patterns in qochas or infiltration ponds could affect adjacent lands; and
the potential beneficiaries, such as members of communities, associations or cooperatives, may
be involved in illegal mining activities. As four national protected areas fall inside of the eligible
districts identified by the project, to prevent and mitigate risks on biodiversity and natural
resources, the project will closely coordinate with SERNANP as EE. The AE will also coordinate
with the chief of each decentralized office in the project’s target areas and conduct a site-specific
assessment on the compatibility of the proposed measures inside the target areas to avoid
introducing prohibited species or risking the existing biodiversity.
46. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples. The funding proposal
seeks to support, through a grant facility and accompanying technical support, investments led
both by Indigenous Peoples and by local communities for resilient ecosystems at the local
landscape level and strengthening CRVCs with access to markets. It acknowledges the many
Indigenous Peoples within the project area and the differential impacts of the project on these
diverse groups. An IPLC engagement plan has been provided. There is potential for benefits to
Indigenous Peoples, including to the promotion of their knowledge systems. In line with their
roles and functions, the Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group is available to provide advice to the
AE and EEs, who are also encouraged to share emerging good practices and success stories with
them.
47. ESS 8: Cultural heritage. The project aims to restore ancient practices and promote the
recovery of ancestral practices in the Puna system. The AE has assessed that the project’s
presence presents limited risks for cultural heritage sites, especially in the southern part of Peru
as the centre of the ancient Inca Empire. To mitigate such risks, the project will request a
Certificate of Non-existence of Archaeological Remains where needed. There is also a risk of
unexpected findings of archaeological remains and artefacts emerging during land work. In such
a case, the project will inform the Ministry of Culture and request it to assess the findings and
define appropriate measures to avoid loss of access to cultural heritage. If a cultural heritage
site is found in the local initiatives, the AE will ensure that unexpected findings are reported to
the Ministry of Culture and local stakeholders and that chance find procedures are followed.
48. Sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) safeguarding. The ESIA has
identified that the project poses potential gender-based violence and SEAH risks as part of the
AE human rights due diligence and gender analysis in the context of project-supported activities
and funded local initiatives. To prevent the project from exacerbating SEAH risks, the AE will
implement a zero-tolerance policy on SEAH and operate a survivor-centred gender-responsive
and culturally sensitive grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to redress SEAH allegations. Upon
obtaining their consent, the project will promptly refer the survivor to the relevant gender-
based violence services, including legal, psychosocial, medical care, safety and security related
support. The AE will also ensure confidential reporting and monitoring of SEAH incidents. The
AE is encouraged to incorporate a SEAH risk assessment as part of the E&S due diligence to be
conducted for funded local initiatives under the Puna Facility and to ensure that all project
stakeholders have access to the dedicated SEAH GRM as well as the GRMs established by the AE
and EEs at the institutional level to redress the project-related SEAH allegations.
49. Implementation arrangements. The AE has identified the primary roles and
responsibilities among the AE, the EEs and implementing partners in detail for the
implementation of the ESMP. The AE, in its additional capacity as EE, will lead and provide
overall management and technical assistance to the project at the national and subnational
level. The AE will also be responsible for ensuring the project’s compliance with the E&S
safeguards standards, the ESMP, the gender action plan and the IPLC engagement plan. GIZ Peru
will act as the technical secretariat within the Project Steering Committee and as the executive
coordination within the Project Management Committee as well as the Territorial

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 136
Implementation Unit. Profonanpe, in its capacity of one of the project’s EEs, will be responsible
for the management of the Puna Facility under the supervision of the AE. Profonanpe will set up
a Facility Management Unit to ensure compliance and alignment with the strategic guidance
established by the Project Steering Committee. Profonanpe will participate in the Project
Management Committee and the Territorial Implementation Unit to liaise and coordinate with
other project partners to guarantee the integral fulfilment of the expected results of the project.
50. Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure. The AE has provided a
stakeholder engagement plan with the proposal, which summarizes the consultations
conducted during the design and development of the project and identifies key stakeholders and
their respective roles and interests in the project, including the relevant ministries, local
government agencies, non-government institutions, civil society institutions, representative
organizations for Indigenous Peoples, other local organizations (such as cooperatives,
productive organizations) and women’s organizations. The stakeholder engagement plan
outlines the strategy and processes and identifies specific actions to be taken by the AE and the
EEs to ensure that stakeholders are continuously engaged throughout the project’s life cycle,
including the level-local initiatives funded by the project. The project will conduct participatory
community monitoring and the scaling-up of best practices, including ancestral knowledge and
practices. As the site-specific E&S due diligence will be conducted during the project
implementation, the AE should disclose the ESS documentation of all category B subprojects
funded by the Puna Facility in both English and the local language (if not English).
51. Grievance redress mechanism. The project will establish a project-level GRM during
the inception phase that will allow any individual to register a complaint and will be
harmonized with the existing GRMs established by the AE and the EEs at the institutional level.
The project will also establish a dedicated SEAH-related GRM system to align with the
requirements of the GCF Environmental and Social Policy, including to ensure accessibility to
the Secretariat’s Independent Redress Mechanism. The ESIA outlines the detailed steps to be
followed during implementation to ensure the effectiveness of the GRM system to be applied by
the project and its stakeholders.
4.2 Gender policy
52. The AE has provided a gender assessment and Gender Action Plan therefore complies
with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.
53. The gender assessment was conducted through desk review of available data and
fieldwork in which consultations were conducted with officials within project locations, while
also engaging in discussion with communities with significant numbers of women and men.
54. The gender analysis has identified key factors that are hindering women’s progress and
resilience in the face of climate change. Although there is a formal institutional framework for
gender mainstreaming in public institutions, the mechanisms to operationalize them are fragile.
This is characterized by a high rotation of human capital and a type of management that usually
lacks resources and capacities for the fulfilment of its functions. Despite these challenges,
MINAM and SERNANP have shown a sustained interest in incorporating gender approaches in
their actions that should be strengthened and made visible. Rural women are often in charge of
collecting water for cooking and cleaning, using the land for livestock grazing and fetching
firewood, among others. Women use and interact with natural resources and ecosystems on a
daily basis and as a result are also among the first to feel the adverse effects of climate change.
Rural women also face several barriers such as lower levels of education, inability to speak a
language other than Spanish, low empowerment and leadership experience and the burden of
domestic and productive work. Despite women’s important roles in small scale agriculture and
water harvesting, women’s heavy domestic workload, along with social norms and resultant
barriers, limit their availability, access to resources and opportunities for education, training,

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 137
paid employment, and participation in decision-making spaces. These translate into under-
representation in community organizations, in water users’ organizations, and in decision-
making spaces. Women also have less access to and control of natural resources and decisions
about land, water, production and sale of agricultural products.
55. The gender action plan provides actions that address the gender gaps identified through
the gender assessment. Actions have corresponding targets, indicators, timeline, budget and the
requisite gender expertise. The activities in the Gender Action Plan align with the broader
theory of change and the three major components of the project: implementing investments on
the ground (through component 1), establishing a facility implemented by Profonanpe to
deliver financing for IPCL-led local initiatives oriented to increase climate resilience
(component 2), and promote integrated gender-responsive landscape planning, governance
platforms and policy improvement and coordination, fostering dialogue and improving
coordination among stakeholders that intervene in the landscape (component 3). The theory of
change has also included co-benefit 5 “Gender-sensitive approaches mainstreamed in EbA and
CRVC measures. Specific activities include training water utility officers of the Mechanisms of
Remuneration for Ecosystem Services Program (MERESE) to promote the inclusion of gender
aspects into the MERESE’s processes (agreements, governance platforms, project development,
monitoring). Supporting the design of gender-responsive financial products that improve access
to finance for women and other traditionally marginalized groups (with a 50 per cent target
going to women, women-led micro, small and medium-sized enterprise’s and women-led
initiatives) and promote EbA and CRVCs. Strengthen gender mainstreaming during the planning
processes and training of public officials with an institutionalized training programme led by
the Peruvian ministry(ies). Further, the activities support and promote the participation of
women in decision-making planning processes through training and requirements for women’s
representation and gender expertise in decision-making bodies of the project. Capacity-building
and communication initiatives will be designed to be accessible for women and address
practical barriers to women’s participation. Women’s access to technical assistance will include
financial education, access to markets, implementation of local initiatives and the collection and
systematization of best practices for women’s engagement and women-led EbA initiatives for
sharing and replication.
56. Given the content and scope of documents submitted, the following recommendations
are made to the AE:
57. The AE to include baseline data collection activity related to the number of women
producers and for women-led initiatives at the inception phase. Such information on intent
needs to be included in the Gender Action Plan along with a timeline, budget and
responsibilities. Changes to the Gender Action Plan as a result of this action should be
communicated to the Secretariat;
58. The Secretariat notes that each IPLC will voluntarily apply to the Puna Facility with
tailored technical support to refine their original proposals. Addressing the challenges for
women, women-led organizations or groups in voluntarily applying should be given due
attention and strategies clearly outlined to ensure sufficient applications will be received from
women. (The ability to volunteer might depend on many factors such as awareness, know-how
and ability to engage (permissive society or the enabling environment within the home) in such
voluntary action.);
59. The AE indicates that pre- and post-surveys will be given to recipients to measure
increased capacity. There is a need to include indicators to measure this aspect.
4.3 Risks
4.3.1. Overall programme assessment (medium risk)

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 138
60. GCF is requested to provide a grant of EUR 40.79 million to improve the Puna ecosystem
management through EbA in the Southern High Andes of Peru. BMZ via the AE is co-financing a
grant of EUR 7.91. MIDAGRI is providing a total of EUR 28.67 million through grants (EUR 2.41
million), in-kind (EUR 16.88 million) and loan (EUR 9.39 million) and SERNANP is providing an
in-kind support of EUR 0.95 million. The total co-financing is EUR 37.53 million.
61. The Puna Facility will be EUR 20.6 million in size, including GCF and co-financing, which
will have three sub-windows targeting different beneficiaries with non-repayable and payable
resources.
62. Peru has an investment grade credit rating and the government’s strong balance sheet
may support availing concessional debt from GCF. The AE has requested full grant financing
based on the insufficient national resources to meet the climate change adaptation needs.
4.3.2. Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme
(medium risk)
63. GIZ is the AE and co-EE of the project. It has been operating in Peru for over 50 years,
over 20 years of which have been on climate change and biodiversity issues. The technical
assistance in the sector currently amounts to approximately EUR 60 million.
64. There are four additional co-EEs, namely (i) MIDAGRI, (ii) SERNANP, (iii) Profonanpe
and (iv) IdM). MIDAGRI and SERNANP are government entities, Profonanpe is a private non-
profit institution of public and social interest, also an AE to GCF, and IdM is a non-government
organization. The AE carried out the capacity assessment of the EEs and provided
recommendations based on the gaps identified.
4.3.3. Project-specific execution risks (medium risk)
65. Lack of interest from the local stakeholders: successful implementation of some of the
project activities (e.g. activities under output 1.1) lies on the participation of the local
stakeholders on a largely voluntary basis. If there is lack of interest and motivation from the
local participants, the project may be delayed in its implementation. The AE states that the main
incentives are learning opportunities and community reciprocation for the participation and the
low interest can be mitigated by a communication and engagement strategy which is part of the
project activities.
66. The sustainability of Puna Facility will depend on multiple factors:
67. The successful implementation and continuous maintenance of the subprojects financed
by the facility, currently the financial analysis assumes six to ninefold net income increase with
the project support;
68. The repayment ratio by the beneficiaries, currently estimated at EUR 3.4 million, which
accounts for approximately 50 per cent;
69. Profonanpe’s additional contribution as indicated in the funding proposal (to be
confirmed); and
70. Additional resources mobilized from the private sector as envisaged in Sustainable
Financing Strategy (activity 1.2.2.1).
71. Monitoring responsibility: The community monitoring committees will play an
important role in monitoring the impacts of projects by having a dialogue with the participating
communities and reporting the progress made by the business and subprojects. The reporting
obligation, including repayment trigger will be part of these monitoring efforts. Therefore, there
could be a potential conflict of interest between the grant recipient groups and monitoring
groups. The AE mentioned that one of the EEs (Profonanpe) will have regional monitors who

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 139
will validate the information with appropriate means of verification that will be established
according to the nature of the individual local initiatives.
72. Supply and demand risk of leveraged financing from microfinance institutions (MFIs):
leveraged financing from MFIs is not considered as part of the project impact. Instead,
additional resources are anticipated to be necessary for the sustainability of the Puna Facility
and local initiatives, therefore this project supports technical assistance for the MFIs to facilitate
this process. The lack of interest from MFIs in attending such training and the risk of low
demand from MFIs to develop a new financial product for the EbA measures can be mitigated by
a providing a perspective of EbA being a new market for MFIs. Additionally, generating EbA-
related data aims to create profit-oriented cashflows, contributing to value chains and portfolio
diversification or restructuring. Regarding the risk of low demand from loan seekers, given that
concessional financing from the Puna Facility is a one-time occurrence, it is anticipated that the
new financial products will meet the needs of groups/beneficiaries in the future even when the
interest rates are high.
73. Project viability and concessionality: The AE carried out the economic and financial
analysis with the EUR 19.2 million of GCF grant portion to fund the establishment and operation
of the Puna Facility, which has revenue generation potential. The benefit is calculated based on
the financial and economic benefit from local initiatives financed under the Puna Facility and
the full financial analysis shows financial internal rates of return before and after GCF support.
Without the GCF grant, the analysis results in an internal rate of return (IRR) of 8.4 per cent to
25.8 per cent while with the GCF grant, IRR of 48.1 per cent to 121.8 per cent. Despite those high
IRR results, the AE argues that the loan option is not feasible, and grant is still required due to
(1) large negative cash flow in an earlier project stage; and (2) high interest rate and margins
from MFIs given the credit risk of the target beneficiaries. The economic internal rate of return
was positive with the sensitive analysis considering changes in shadow carbon price,
greenhouse gas reduction volume and social discount rate.
4.3.4. GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)
74. In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in
terms of results area and single proposal is not material.
4.3.5. Compliance risk (medium risk)
75. This project is largely focused on addressing the resilience and sustainability of
communities in Peru. As such, much of the work will be undertaken with local communities and
institutions. Potential risks of money laundering or countering the financing of terrorism do not
seem unusually great or significant. As an AE, GIZ has considerable experience in managing and
supervising similar projects and has established policies and procedures in place for managing
financial risks and compliance issues. Nevertheless, as capabilities of implementing partners
and beneficiaries may vary, it is important that the AE ensures appropriate implementation of
its internal controls and policies to address any risks and vulnerabilities as they may arise.
Accordingly, based on the project description and the experience and policies and procedures of
GIZ, the compliance risk here is rated as medium.
4.3.6. Recommendations
Summary risk assessment
Overall programme Medium
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to implement this programme Medium
Project-specific execution Medium
GCF portfolio concentration Low

--- Table 1 on Page 139 ---
 | Summary risk assessment |  | 
Overall programme |  | Medium | 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to implement this programme |  | Medium | 
Project-specific execution |  | Medium | 
GCF portfolio concentration |  | Low | 

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 140
Compliance Medium
4.4 Fiduciary
76. GIZ serves a dual role, acting as both the AE and one of the EEs through its management
structure in Peru. In its capacity as the AE, GIZ oversees the project in accordance with the
accreditation master agreement (AMA) and administers GCF funds on behalf of the Secretariat,
providing guidance to EEs (Profonanpe and IdM).
77. GIZ, as an EE, leads the technical assistance efforts at national and subnational levels,
ensuring coordination, compliance with safeguards, and mainstreaming climate resilience and
gender aspects.
78. In order to implement the project, GIZ will establish legal arrangements with MIDAGRI,
SERNANP, Profonanpe and IdM to facilitate project execution.
79. Profonanpe, an EE, manages the Puna Facility with a budget of EUR 19.175 million,
implementing EbA measures and CRVCs. IdM will act as an EE by contributing and scaling up its
experience in the implementation of EbA measures in the Nor Yauyos Cochas Landscape
Reserve to the other regions of the project. It will use participatory tools for participatory
design, implementation and monitoring of EbA measures, which contribute to the ownership
and sustainability of the local initiatives supported by the project. Lastly, MIDAGRI and
SERNANP act as EEs with their own funds, coordinating activities and contributing to the
project’s objectives.
80. Funds from GCF will be transferred to GIZ as the AE, who will then transfer funds to
Profonanpe, GIZ Peru and IdM (in their respective role as EEs).
81. The financial management of the project will follow GIZ internal rules and regulations.
GIZ will not open a specific bank account for the GCF project but will ensure that all funds
provided are clearly identifiable and distinguishable from other funds of the AE by setting up
separate cost units exclusively for the funds disbursed by GCF for each funded activity (ledger
accounts).
82. As a general principle, GIZ disburses funds to recipients in accordance with the progress
of the project. EEs receiving GCF proceeds from GIZ (Profonanpe and IdM) must report on the
proper use of funds and defined progress as a prerequisite for any further disbursement.
Independent external auditors will perform annual financial audits of the project in line with
international auditing standards.
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting
83. This is an adaptation project that contributes to GCF adaptation results areas 1, 2 and 4.
In addition, it has a strong mitigation co-benefit. The AE provided a strong monitoring and
evaluation approach as part of the proposal, which was further refined during the review
process. The project is expected to reach 60,715 direct beneficiaries (0.2 per cent of the national
population) and 2,011,856 indirect beneficiaries (6.8 per cent of the national population). The
AE has provided a methodology for estimation of beneficiaries across different activities.
84. The theory of change is well developed and provides a logical link between the activities,
outputs and outcomes under the project. It also lists five co-benefits likely to be generated
under the project, which are adequately categorized. The assumptions articulated are relevant
and realistic.
85. The logical framework provides a strong set of indicators that can be monitored under
the project linked with the guidance contained in the Integrated Results Management

--- Table 1 on Page 140 ---
Compliance | Medium

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 141
Framework. This includes outcome-level project indicators, listed in section E5 of the funding
proposal. The targets provided are clearly explained, and any assumptions explicitly identified.
4.6 Legal assessment
The AMA was signed with the AE on 15 November 2017, and became effective on 18
January 2019. The first term of accreditation of the AE lapsed on 17 January 2024. The AE was
86.
re-accredited by the Board pursuant to decision B.37/18. The first amendment and restatem ent
agreement amending and restating the AMA was signed on 3 December 2023 and became
effective on January 2024.
The AE has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all internal approvals,
18
and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.
87.
The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Peru. The Secretariat
provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other
88.
things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need
to be further assessed. The GCF Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and
immunities and a background note to the Government of the Republic of Peru on 9 September
2015.
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or
89.
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after
GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country, or
has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal)
90. To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by
the Board is made subject to the following conditions:
91. Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the
Secretariat within 180 days of the date of Board approval; and
92. Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 142
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP226
Proposal name: Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for sustainable
High Andean communities and ecosystems in Peru
Accredited entity: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)
Country: Peru
Project/programme size: Medium
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1. This funding proposal1 for a medium-sized adaptation project in environmental and
social safeguards category B is submitted by the Government of Peru through the Deutsche
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) as accredited entity (AE).
2. The five executing entities (EEs) are GIZ, the Ministry of Agricultural Development and
Irrigation (MIDAGRI), the National Service of Natural Areas Protected by the State (SERNANP),
the Peruvian Trust Fund for National Parks and Protected Areas (Profonanpe) and Asociación
Instituto Andino de Montaña (IdM). MIDAGRI and SERNANP are Government of Peru entities,
Profonanpe is a private non-profit institution of public and social interest and IdM is a non-
governmental organization.
3. The total cost of the funding proposal is EUR 78.32 million, of which EUR 40.79 million
is GCF finance and EUR 37.53 million is co-finance from the German Federal Ministry for
Economic Cooperation and Development and from the Government of Peru through MIDAGRI
and SERNANP.
4. The aim of the Resilient Puna project is to increase the resilience of communities,
ecosystems and livelihoods in the southern High Andes, which are negatively affected by climate
change, through implementation of ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) measures,
complemented by climate-resilient value chains, the establishment of public and private
financing for investing in these measures, and support from multilevel landscape governance
instruments. The project supports Quechua-speaking and other farming communities to revive
ancestral knowledge on sustainable land and water management, to enhance productivity even
in the face of climate change, while simultaneously maintaining crucial hydrological services for
downstream water users and important stocks for global carbon regulation.
5. The project is structured into three main components, with the outcomes as shown in
the table below.
Component Outcome GCF funding
1. Resilient ecosystems and Puna ecosystems are restored, conserved and EUR 26.42
communities better managed through the implementation of million
ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) measures
complemented by climate-resilient value chains
2. Public and private Public and private financing for EbA measures EUR 6.05
investments for scaling up and climate-resilient livelihoods are accessible million
EbA measures and being actively used by vulnerable
communities in the Puna ecosystem
1 Funding proposal package for “Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for sustainable High Andean
communities and ecosystems in Peru”, received from GIZ on 15 December 2023.

--- Table 1 on Page 142 ---
Component | Outcome | GCF funding
1. Resilient ecosystems and
communities | Puna ecosystems are restored, conserved and
better managed through the implementation of
ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) measures
complemented by climate-resilient value chains | EUR 26.42
million
2. Public and private
investments for scaling up
EbA measures | Public and private financing for EbA measures
and climate-resilient livelihoods are accessible
and being actively used by vulnerable
communities in the Puna ecosystem | EUR 6.05
million

=== PAGE 143 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 143
3. Multilevel territorial EbA and climate resilience are mainstreamed EUR 3.93
governance for the into multilevel landscape governance million
incorporation of EbA instruments
measures
6. The project includes the establishment and operation of the Puna Facility, implemented
by Profonanpe, to deliver financing – through a call for proposals for local initiatives, led by
indigenous peoples and local communities (IPLCs), that aim to increase climate resilience. The
Puna Facility will fund EbA measures and climate resilient value chains, and will have three sub-
windows: (i) Non-Repayable Grant Sub-Window: for IPLCs with various forms of organization
(local communities, producers’ associations and cooperatives in the process of formalization),
applying with the support of local CSOs trusted by communities; (ii) Results-based Repayable
Grant Sub-Window: for micro and small enterprises, community enterprises and established
cooperatives; and (iii) Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Window: for formalized producers’
organizations with commercial capacities and clear target markets, that are eligible for the
MIDAGRI support programme Agroideas2.
Figure 1. Structure of the proposed Resilient Puna project
7. The outputs and activities leading to these outcomes are as shown in figure 1,3 which
also indicates the EE or EEs responsible for executing each activity.
1.1 Impact potential Scale: High
8. The project targets three adaptation results areas, enhancing the resilience of (i) most
vulnerable people and communities; (ii) health and well-being, and food and water security; and
(iii) ecosystems and ecosystem services.
2 The Agroideas scheme promotes cooperatives, strengthening of business management, and adoption of sustainable
agricultural technologies, through non-reimbursable grants covering 60-80% of the investment required, with a cap
of ~EUR 315.000. The Puna Facility Agroideas Matchmaking Sub-Window will provide a complementary repayable
grant to advanced businesses in climate resilient value chains.3.
3 Source: Figure 10 in the funding proposal.

--- Table 1 on Page 143 ---
3. Multilevel territorial
governance for the
incorporation of EbA
measures | EbA and climate resilience are mainstreamed
into multilevel landscape governance
instruments | EUR 3.93
million

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 144
9. Climate change mitigation through avoided emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) as a
result of project interventions, estimated at 407,657 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO
2
eq) over 15 years, is considered as a co-benefit of the project, and is discussed under section 1.3
below.
10. The funding proposal outlines the major climate change related hazards characterizing
the southern High Andes of Peru. Increased temperatures have contributed to glacier melting,
while changing rainfall patterns, including longer periods of drought, are affecting water
availability in an area where 80 per cent of the population is heavily reliant on rain-fed
agriculture. Ongoing climate change is combined with unsustainable productive practices that
are degrading the Puna ecosystems (peatlands, wetlands or bofedales, and grasslands) and the
services they provide (provision and regulation of water; provision of fodder, food and fibre;
nutrient and carbon regulation).
11. The project will work in 91 districts in the regions of Puno, Cusco, Arequipa, Apurimac
and Lima, covering 5,314,607 ha. These districts comprise high-altitude Andean areas (over
3,500 m above sea-level), or are in a buffer zone above 2,800 m, where vulnerable communities
practice crop and livestock farming in Puna ecosystems with high or very high risks of droughts
and other climate hazards, and including degraded lands and areas that have suffered melting of
glaciers. Of the 91 districts, 58 will be eligible for the Puna Facility (covering 4,116,475 ha) and
capacity-building activities, while 33 districts will benefit only from capacity-building activities.
Four natural protected areas managed by SERNANP fall inside eligible districts: Nor Yauyos-
Cochas Landscape Reserve in the Lima region; Cotahuasi Subbasin Landscape Reserve and
Salinas y Aguada Blanca National Reserve in the Arequipa region; and Ampay National
Sanctuary in the Apurimac region.
12. The project aims to directly benefit 60,715 people (of whom 30,088 will be female). This
number is made up of:
(a) Individuals who implement local initiatives financed and supported by the Puna Facility,
multiplied by the average number of members of the groups/legal entities supported
and the average number of members per household in the region, representing 31,750
people;
(b) Individuals who will be supported by MIDAGRI co-finance programmes, multiplied by
the average number of members per household in the region, representing 26,315
people;
(c) Individuals who will receive technical assistance from the GCF-funded intervention (e.g.
training, support to develop site-specific climate diagnostics and preparation of
participatory intervention plans), representing 1,740 people; and
(d) Public officials who will receive capacity-building for adjusting regulations and norms,
representing 910 people.
13. The project will also indirectly benefit 2,011,856 people (of whom 1,005,928 are female)
who will benefit from water generated by the improvement of ecosystems that contribute to
water regulation in the upper and lower parts of watersheds, including residents of major
downstream cities such as Cusco, Arequipa, Abancay and Cañete.
14. Site-level activities will engage local farming communities, including Indigenous
Quechua Peoples, farm households, producer associations and agricultural cooperatives, micro,
small and medium-sized enterprises, and local government. Adaptation benefits will accrue to
vulnerable communities and downstream water users, through EbA and climate-resilient value
chain interventions in component 1 of the project, to be sustainably financed and embedded in
governance regimes through interventions in components 2 and 3 respectively. The on-the-

=== PAGE 145 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 145
ground interventions will take place across 23,914 ha Puna ecosystems, contributing to the
results targeted in the updated Strategic Plan for the GCF 2024–2027.4
15. Ecosystem-based adaptation. The funding proposal highlights seven key EbA
measures and shows how each reduces vulnerability to specific climate hazards. The measures
are conservation and restoration of bofedales (wetland ecosystems), improvement of family
qochas (natural reservoirs), agroforestry, forest restoration with native species, restoration of
andenes (agricultural terraces), integrated soil fertility management, infiltration ditches,
contour farming, conservation agriculture and sustainable grassland management. Enhancing
the likely impact of these measures in the landscape is the excellent resource in the feasibility
study annexed to the funding proposal,5 outlining restoration techniques, costs and goals in
great detail. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) suggests that this could usefully
be made into a manual for project implementers and producers, translated into Spanish and
Quechua.
16. Climate-resilient value chains. Support to climate-resilient value chains includes a
comprehensive approach to enhance the productivity and climate resilience of production
systems (supported by the EbA measures), as well as technical assistance for value addition.
Target value chains are alpaca and vicuña fibres, potato and Andean grains, with
complementary chains including traditional Andean crops,6 breeding of small animals (guinea
pigs), community-based tourism and traditional handicrafts. Technical assistance is provided to
access and implement Puna Facility funded local initiatives (both EbA and climate-resilient
value chains, business development and access to finance). The component also involves
facilitating access to MIDAGRI technical assistance and the promotion of market access for new
or expanded products.
Figure 2: Structure of the proposed Puna Facility
4 The updated Strategic Plan for the GCF 2024–2027 includes the targeted result “Ecosystems: Support for developing
countries that results in 120 to 190 million hectares of terrestrial and marine areas conserved, restored or brought
under sustainable management”.
5 See funding proposal, annex 2a, section 9.2, pp.184–226.
6 Traditional crops include Kiwicha (Amaranthus caudatus), Cañihua (Chenopodium pallidicaule), Tarwi, Oca (Oxalis
tuberosa) and Mashua.

--- Table 1 on Page 145 ---
4 The updated Strategic Plan for the GCF 2024–2027 includes the targeted result “Ecosystems: Support for developing
countries that results in 120 to 190 million hectares of terrestrial and marine areas conserved, restored or brought
under sustainable management”.

=== PAGE 146 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 146
17. The iTAP assesses the impact potential of the project as high.
1.2 Paradigm shift potential Scale: Medium to high
18. The proposed project is designed to bring about a paradigm shift away from the current
situation of continuing degradation of Puna ecosystems of the southern High Andes region, with
declining agricultural productivity and downstream water provision (and increasing GHG
emissions), leaving communities increasingly vulnerable to climate change. Under the project, a
new approach is developed in which communities, as stewards of the Puna, are supported to
manage the ecosystems sustainably, adapt to a changing climate and break the cycle of poverty
and degradation. This requires a transformation of practices by farming communities, and a
new approach by government in supporting them to become productive and ecologically
sustainable, even in the face of a changing climate.
19. Sustainability of results. Central to achieving a sustained effect, beyond the project
interventions on the ground in component 1, is the establishment of mechanisms for long-term
financing of EbA and climate-resilient value chains in component 2, through three approaches:
(i) establishing the Puna Facility and working to ensure its long-term viability; (ii) leveraging
public funds from existing payments for watershed services (MERESE) schemes;7 and (iii)
increasing producers’ access to Agroideas, Sierra Azul and other public programmes that
promote investment in nature-based solutions, business development, product transformation
and value addition in target value chains.
20. Upscaling and replication. The potential for replicating the project approach in other
parts of the High Andes is strong, and is set up by component 3, enhancing the enabling
environment for support to climate-resilient agriculture and value chains, and developing the
policy and regulatory framework. The creation of an enabling environment relies on
transformational planning and programming to scale up EbA, integrating community-
responsive technologies, ancestral practices and landscape interventions into local, regional and
national planning processes. Also important in this regard are the investments in public
institutional capacity and coordination to mainstream EbA through national and regional
government. Development of regulatory frameworks is achieved through mainstreaming of EbA
and gender considerations within the daily operations of MIDAGRI, MINAM and SERNANP;
improving norms, laws, budget and investment guidelines to enhance EbA and climate-resilient
approaches in agriculture and land-use planning; and feeding into and strengthening the
national monitoring and evaluation systems to allow the incorporation of EbA.
21. Knowledge and learning. Knowledge has a very central role in the project strategy,
which emphasizes the value of traditional practices (combined with modern scientific
knowledge). A key part of the EbA approach is consciously reviving and disseminating ancient
practices that are crucial for adapting to climate change, for example (i) storing rainwater in
micro water reservoirs (qochas in Quechua) for recharging aquifers; (ii) constructing stonework
irrigation channels to bring water from high-altitude rivers and qochas to irrigate pastures or
create watering troughs; and (iii) holding annual festivals for communal clearing of irrigation
channels (as well as vicuña shearing and other communal activities). Although much knowledge
has been lost through what the funding proposal describes as “low valuation of native cultures,
cultural erosion, high rates of rural-urban migration”,8 knowledge is still present, especially in
some Quechua communities of Cusco, Apurimac and Puno, who retain forms of organization
7 Established through Law 30215, MERESE provides that water utility companies must make regular payments that
must be used for the restoration and conservation of ecosystems that provide them with hydrological services.
8 Funding proposal, paragraph 19.

=== PAGE 147 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 147
based on the ayllu concept,9 with strong cultural and spiritual values promoting conservation,
equity and social cohesion at the landscape level.
22. The iTAP welcomes the inclusion of targeted activities in output 1.2 to make this
knowledge revival possible. Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 builds the capacity of local experts for the
transfer of ancestral and innovative knowledge linked to EbA and climate-resilient value chains
measures, involving yachachiqs, kamayocs,10 talentos rurales11 and rural extensionists, in a
capacity-building programme and in transferring knowledge to communities and the technical
teams of national and subnational institutions. This includes knowledge of ancestral and
innovative techniques for small irrigation systems, installation of greenhouses, animal breeding,
cultivating pastures and growing crops. Other sub-activities facilitate knowledge-sharing among
beneficiary communities with a gender perspective, and disseminate information materials in
accessible formats and language.
23. Sub-activity 1.2.1.4, “Facilitating intergenerational dialogue on ancestral practices and
innovation in a changing context”, led by IdM and working through local civil society
organizations, is an important intervention. It is surprising, however, that no other project
activities focus on youth, or target them for training on climate-resilient value chains, to counter
the trends of out-migration and erosion of knowledge. A full revival of traditional practices will
not be possible without more systematic engagement of the next generation, and the iTAP
recommends that youth who are present in the target regions, while not necessarily being active
in farming, should be included in the EbA, climate-resilient value chains, entrepreneurial and
financial training under sub-activity 1.1.3.1.
24. It is welcomed that the project will collect and analyse information on the impact of EbA
measures, to improve evidence of EbA effectiveness and inform future decision-making
processes, through sub-activity 1.2.2.3. Studies and research will be conducted using data
generated by the community monitoring committees, for example on impact measurement of
EbA (carbon sequestration, ecosystem recovery and water regulation), cost–benefit analysis,
cost risk reduction in business operations, cost-effectiveness and the type of ecosystems to be
investigated (e.g. peatlands, wetlands, grasslands). This is important as part of building the
evidence base for the CGF global investment in EbA approaches.
25. Overall, based on the above, the paradigm shift potential of the project is assessed as
medium to high.
1.3 Sustainable development potential Scale: High
26. The proposed project is aligned with the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including significant contributions towards Peru’s efforts to meet Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) 1 (No Poverty), SDG 2 (Zero Hunger), SDG 5 (Gender Equality), SDG 6
(Clean Water and Sanitation), SDG 10 (Reduced Inequalities), SDG 13 (Climate Action) and SDG
15 (Life on Land). Specific co-benefits anticipated from project interventions are discussed
below.
9 The funding proposal (para. 19) states that “In the pre-colonial times Andean worldview was represented by the
ayllu concept which is understood as the form of social organization in Andean communities where individuals
share same reciprocity norms and rituals with respect to humans, animals, rocks, spirits, mountains, lakes, rivers,
pastures, crops. The main objective of ayllu was to give guide in the positive relationship between communities and
their social and natural environment.”
10 These are Indigenous experts who obtained their practical knowledge on agricultural and livestock practices by
ancestral ways and transfer this knowledge to others.
11 These are men and women who live in peasant communities and are known for their capacities and abilities to
experiment, adapt, develop and teach good intercultural practices and rural innovations.

=== PAGE 148 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 148
27. Environmental co-benefits. As a climate change mitigation co-benefit, GHG emissions
will be avoided through the conservation, restoration and sustainable management of Puna
ecosystems across 23,914 ha. The proposed intervention measures aim to prevent emissions
from existing carbon sources through inappropriate management practices in livestock and
crop farming, and contribute to carbon sequestration in soil and vegetation, through grassland
management, forest restoration, integrated soil fertility management, agroforestry and
wetlands restoration and conservation. Anticipated GHG reductions are calculated using the
methodology presented in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Good Practice
Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry, applied though the tool EX-ACT (version
9.4) developed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The overall
expected mitigation impact is a reduction in GHG emissions of 407,657 t CO eq in the 15 years
2
analysed (5-year implementation phase and 10-year capitalization phase), measured against a
scenario without the project interventions (see funding proposal, annex 22b).
28. In addition to carbon sequestration, the project will enhance biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning – protecting and restoring peatlands, wetlands and grasslands, which provide a
habitat for a range of fauna, as well as ecosystem services – including soil formation, nutrient
recycling, water regulation, water purification, local climate regulation, water retention and
storage, groundwater recharge and discharge, recovery and removal of excess nutrients and
pollutants, and a peat blanket protecting the underlying soils from erosion.
29. Socioeconomic co-benefits. Awareness-raising and capacity-building of local
stakeholders, including women, on EbA and value chain strengthening will improve social
capital and cohesion. Ancient knowledge and local expertise will be integrated through a
participatory approach. Activities to enhance the productivity of farming and grazing should
improve household income and nutritional status, and the iTAP welcomes the inclusion of an
indicator in the logical framework to measure this co-benefit.12 New livelihoods based on
climate-resilient value chains are expected to bring about local economic development, with
new jobs and markets being created. Reducing the barriers to access to finance for expanding
production and agri-processing through the Puna Facility will also promote rural prosperity.
The extent to which grants and repayable grants (flexible, zero-interest loans) will promote
financial literacy and the development of a track record that can enable future access to
microfinance remains to be seen (see section 1.6 below).
30. Gender co-benefits. Engagement of women in project livelihood opportunities and
decision-making will promote women’s empowerment. The mainstreaming of a gender
approach within all the project activities will promote gender equality and enhance the living
conditions and economic opportunities of Andean women. This is achieved through promoting
local initiatives (including EbA measures and climate-resilient value chains) with a gender-
sensitive approach, integrating gender issues in platforms of knowledge exchange for ancestral
practices and increasing women’s participation in watershed dialogue decision-making
platforms. For this purpose, the project includes a gender action plan with specific activities and
an indicator for co-benefit 5 “Gender responsive approaches mainstreamed in EbA and CRVC
measures”.13
31. The iTAP assesses the sustainable development potential of the project as high.
1.4 Needs of the recipient Scale: High
32. Peru’s southern High Andes region is highly vulnerable to climate change, and is
expected to experience a continuing trend of increased maximum temperatures, decreased
12 “Number of producers, of whom 50% are women, have confirmed an improvement in their income from Climate
Resilient Value Chains”.
13 “Number of innovative Local initiatives (including EbA and CRVC) with a gender-sensitive approach implemented”.

=== PAGE 149 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 149
minimum temperatures (with frost affecting crops), increased heavy rainfall events, longer dry
periods between rains, and ongoing glacial retreat and melting. High-mountain peatlands and
wetlands are particularly vulnerable to the increasing length of dry spells and drought
conditions, and will become more susceptible to fragmentation, damaging their role in water
regulation and carbon storage.
33. Climate change impacts are compounding already unsustainable farming practices by
agropastoral communities, worsening vulnerability. A decline in the once-widespread
traditional knowledge used to sustainably manage the natural resources that support Andean
livelihoods, combined with continued lack of access to agricultural extension, finance and
markets, are causing declining agricultural productivity and incomes, with young people leaving
the mountains to seek work in cities. In some areas, this loss of labour has caused households to
shift from crop farming to less labour-intensive cattle farming, accelerating the cycle of
degradation of the native grasslands. This is compounded by higher temperatures allowing the
introduction of sheep and cattle for extensive grazing in parts of the region where previously
only lower-impact South American camelids were roaming.14 Today, the once biodiverse and
highly productive Puna ecosystems are vulnerable to overgrazing, uncontrolled expansion of
the agricultural frontier, poor management of grasslands and degradation of peatlands and
wetlands (also causing GHG emissions).
34. The target agropastoralist communities in the southern High Andes of Peru region are
highly vulnerable to climate change because of their reliance on rain-fed agriculture and
extensive grazing. This is compounded by poverty and underdevelopment – 73 per cent of the
southern High Andes of Peru districts have a low or very low Human Development Index. Local
communities are geographically dispersed, lack basic services such as healthcare, potable water,
sanitation education and financing, and rely on wood, dung and peat as energy sources. Poverty
is compounded by limited access to existing government agricultural support programmes, and
access to finance often only at exorbitant costs via informal lenders known as “drop by drop” or
“express loans”, with low penetration by rural microfinance institutions.
35. Downstream communities that rely on the mountain catchments’ water regulatory
services to maintain flow for hydropower, domestic and industrial use are also vulnerable to
climate change worsened by poor catchment management. Increased temperatures have
already contributed to the melting of 51 per cent of the region’s glaciers, while changing rainfall
patterns and longer drought periods have affected water availability, with decreases in overall
rainfall projected for southern Peru. In addition, huge stocks of carbon stored in the Puna
ecosystems could be released into the atmosphere if they continue degrading, with global
consequences.
36. Overall, based on the above, the needs of the recipients are rated as high.
1.5 Country ownership Scale: High
37. The Resilient Puna project has been prioritized by the Ministry of Economy and Finance
(MEF), as Peru’s nationally designated authority, for presentation to GCF. It has the full support
of the Peruvian Government through MEF, MIDAGRI, as the ministry leading the project, and
MINAM, which leads climate change action in Peru.
14 Research indicates that over 40 per cent of grazing areas across the High Andes are in poor condition and acutely
deteriorating, with further 20 per cent at risk of being degraded by 2070. Cooper, D. et al. “Drivers of peatland
water table dynamics in the Central Andes, Bolivia and Perú”, Hydrological Processes 33 (13) (2019), pp. 1913-
1925.

=== PAGE 150 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 150
38. Policy and strategy alignment: The project is closely aligned with the targets set out in
Peru’s nationally determined contribution,15 supporting the fulfilment of four adaptation
measures related to agriculture and water: (i) AGRI7, “Natural grassland management to secure
feed for livestock and reduce vulnerability to climate change”; (ii) AGRI11, “Management of wild
South American camelids (vicuñas) considering effects of climate change”; (iii) AGRI16,
“Implementation of business strategies addressing risks and opportunities in the face of climate
change”; and (iv) AGU2, “Interventions on planting and water harvesting for agricultural water
security in watersheds vulnerable to climate change”. The iTAP welcomes the attempt by the AE
to quantify the project’s potential contribution to these four targets (see table 21 in annex 2a to
the funding proposal), and hopes the actual results will be tracked and fed into the national
monitoring and evaluation system for reporting to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change secretariat on adaptation.
39. The project will support the implementation of Peru’s national adaptation plan through
focusing on ecosystems, hydrographic watersheds, restoration and conservation of ecosystems,
recovering traditional knowledge and territorial planning, as well as microfinancing for the
promotion of EbA practices. The project is also aligned with the National Agrarian Policy 2021–
2030 and the Plan for Risk Management and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Agricultural
Sector for 2012–2021. The establishment of the Puna Facility and the support to climate-
resilient value chains are well aligned with the Road Map for Green Financing, the National
Strategy for Green Growth and the objectives of the National Competitiveness and Productivity
Plan 2019–2030.
40. Roles of key entities. The roles of the key entities in overseeing or implementing the
project, and their relevant experience, capacity or mandate to play these roles, are set out
below. It is noted that two separate entities of GIZ are involved in the project, playing distinct
roles, which will not overlap. The roles are as follows:
(a) GIZ is a German-based private, limited liability, non-profit company owned by the
Federal Republic of Germany; It is serving as AE, providing oversight of the project. GIZ,
as an AE to GCF since 2016, has already developed and submitted several funding
proposals to GCF, with six approved proposals under implementation (FP117, FP132,
FP103, FP059, FP198 and FP200) and a seventh starting soon (FP214). GIZ is one of the
largest international providers of capacity development and technical assistance on
climate change worldwide;
(b) GIZ Peru, with its management structure based in Peru, is the main EE, and is
responsible, either alone or with other EEs, for the execution of all the project activities
except for activity 1.1.2. MIDAGRI, SERNANP, Profonanpe and IdM will also serve as EEs;
(c) MIDAGRI has extensive experience of channelling loan and grant resources for national
and subnational rural development projects from international financial institutions. It
is currently implementing several projects from the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank. The project
will enable target communities to access a number of existing MIDAGRI programmes,
which form co-finance to the project (see section 1.6 below);
(d) Profonanpe, a private non-profit organization, is the EE responsible for the
implementation of activities 1.1.2 (with MIDAGRI), 1.1.3 (with GIZ Peru) and 2.2.1 (with
GIZ Peru). Profonanpe’s capacity is indicated by its accreditation as a national direct
access entity by GCF since 2015, with two projects under implementation as AE and EE
(FP001 and FP193). Profonanpe‘s experience in designing and managing several
15 Peru’s first nationally determined contribution, as updated in 2020.

=== PAGE 151 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 151
environmental and watershed funds in Peru will be key for its role in managing the Puna
Facility and leveraging the MERESE funds for the exit strategy;
(e) SERNANP is the Government entity, attached to MINAM, in charge of ensuring the
conservation of national protected areas (NPAs). As the governing entity of the national
protected areas system, it has experience on project implementation in the NPAs, and
will be in charge of the execution of the project activities within the NPAs and buffer
zones; and
(f) IdM is a non-profit organization that works for the conservation of the natural, cultural
and spiritual values of mountain peoples and ecosystems. It has been working in the
Andes since 1995 and in Peru is currently implementing programmes in the highlands of
Ancash, Piura, Junín and Lima.
41. Engagement with stakeholders, including civil society. Several consultations in the
target areas have been carried out by GIZ in close coordination with project partners. At the
national level, initial meetings were held with national government programmes operating in
the project territory, such as MIDAGRI programmes, the Camelid Textiles Innovation Institute
and, with SERNANP, the National Institute for Research on Glaciers and Mountain Ecosystems
and the National Meteorological and Hydrological Service of Peru. The project development
team also engaged with related donor-funded initiatives, to integrate lessons learned and best
practices into the project design. In addition, consultations were held with non-governmental
organizations that work in the Puna region, such as the Water Competence Centre, the Centre
for Studies and Promotion of Development in the South, and the Consortium for the Sustainable
Development of the Andean Ecoregion to understand their perceptions of communities’ needs
in the context of climate change,
42. During the development of the funding proposal, consultations were held with national,
regional and local stakeholders in October and November 2022 and May 2023, with
presentation and validation of activities through workshops in target project departments, after
which feedback was integrated into the project design. In total, the project has consulted 783
people (38 per cent women and 62 per cent men) out of which 65 per cent were members of the
potential direct project beneficiaries (e.g. local communities, producers’ associations and
cooperatives), most of them of the Quechua population (see annex 7 to the funding proposal).
Consultations were conducted and coordinated by MIDAGRI and SERNANP, ensuring the
participation of communities, producer associations, women, youth and elderly people. During
project inception and implementation, the project will follow a stakeholder engagement plan,
including “a culturally adequate consultation and communication strategy”16 and a grievance
redress mechanism.
43. In response to a question from the iTAP about why consultations with Quechua-
speaking Indigenous Peoples had been limited to individual communities rather than national
bodies,17 the AE explained that the period of initial consultations coincided with a political crisis
in Peru, making such consultations impossible, but that “the first consultations with
representatives at national level took place in December 2023 with the National Agrarian
Confederation and with the National Organization of Andean and Amazonian Indigenous
Women of Peru”, and indicated that annex 7 could be updated to reflect ongoing consultations.
The iTAP also welcomed the news that the AE had already had an initial engagement with the
GCF civil society organization network.
44. Country ownership of the project is thus seen to be high.
16 Funding proposal, paragraph 266.
17 See written questions from the iTAP (4 January) and responses from GIZ (11 January).

--- Table 1 on Page 151 ---
regional and local stakeholders in October and
presentation and validation of activities through workshops in target project departments, after
which feedback was

=== PAGE 152 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 152
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness Scale: Medium
45. Of the project’s total proposed budget of EUR 78.32 million, 52 per cent (EUR 40.79
million) is proposed to be a GCF grant, and 48 per cent (EUR 37.53 million) is made up of co-
financing to the project, closely woven into the project logic, and broken down as follows:
(a) MIDAGRI will contribute EUR 28.67 million through grants (EUR 2.41 million), in-kind
contributions (EUR 16.88 million) and loans (EUR 9.39 million). These will cover (i)
public investments projects(implemented by the Agrarian Productive Development
Program, Sierra Azul, the Subsectoral Irrigation Program, the National Institute for
Agricultural Innovation and the National Forestry and Wildlife Service; (ii) operational
activities (implemented by programmes such as Agroideas, providing matching funding
for agribusiness); and (iii) individual credit lines to producer organizations. Supporting
target communities to meet the established technical, financial or institutional
requirements for these MIDAGRI programmes and funds18 is central to the project’s exit
strategy;
(b) SERNANP will contribute in-kind contributions worth EUR 0.95 million to the
implementation of the project in the Arequipa, Apurimac and Lima regions, including
staff time contributions in order to coordinate project interventions in NPAs; and
(c) Co-financing from the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and
Development for the project will be fully integrated into the project activities, with a
total grant amount of EUR 7.91 million. EUR 6.26 million will be implemented through
GIZ as an EE for eight activities; EUR 1.5 million will be forwarded to Profonanpe for the
Puna Facility and EUR 150,000 to IdM.
46. In addition to the co-finance included in the funding proposal, the project aims to
mobilize additional resources from international donors and the private sector to support
Profonanpe in ensuring the sustainability of the Puna Facility (through sub-activity 2.1.1.2). The
Government of Canada has already expressed interest in contributing approximately EUR 6
million, particularly for financing gender and monitoring related activities, and replenishing the
Puna Facility to continue financing local initiatives, although this is still to be confirmed.
47. Level of concessionality. For the elements of the project unrelated to the Puna Facility,
that is, investment in public goods for EbA and strengthening of the enabling environment, the
100 per cent grant from GCF seems justified. The GCF investment in implementing, financing
and scaling up EbA represents a cost-effective and efficient integrated landscape approach to
obtaining adaptation benefits and mitigation co-benefits. There is a growing body of evidence,
including from High Andes interventions, on the cost-effectiveness of EbA approaches to
addressing climate change, to which the proposed project will contribute.19 Other parts of the
project involve private goods, for example Puna Facility investments in family crop farming or
agribusiness micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, where profits will be made, although
probably with relatively small margins (see discussion below on financial rate of return).
48. Economic rate of return. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project as
a whole is 8.2 per cent, which is more than two percentage points above the 6 per cent Peru
18 These include Agroideas, Sierra Azul, Sierra y Selva Exportadora, AgroBanco, Catastrophic Insurance, Rural and
Indigenous Women’s Fund, Regional Government (ProCompite) and the Ministry of Development and
Social Inclusion (social programmes).
19 For example, a cost–benefit analysis conducted for the Global Mountain EbA project, funded by the International
Climate Initiative, on the management of native grasslands in Chanchayllo and Miraflores, Peru, showed a benefit–
cost ratio of 2.2:1, with the break-even point at 10–15 years. Podvin, K. et al. “Climate Change Adaptation in the
Peruvian Andes: implementing no-regret measures in the Nor Yauyos-Cochas Landscape Reserve” in Murti, R. and
Buyck, C. (ed.) (2014). Safe Havens: Protected Areas for Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation.
Gland, Switzerland.

=== PAGE 153 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 153
social discount rate estimated by the World Bank and MEF. The economic net present value,
based on the 6 per cent social discount rate, is a positive EUR 11.9 million. A sensitivity analysis
shows that the EIRR is positive even with very low carbon prices and with a 30 per cent drop in
emission savings volume and income generated by the initial calls for proposals. The EIRR
remains above the social discount rate of 6 per cent and the economic net present value is
therefore positive if the emission savings volume and economic benefits do not drop more than
10 per cent, even at carbon prices substantially lower than the base case assumption of EUR
60/t.
49. Financial rate of return and choice of financial instruments. The financial rates of
return on climate-resilient production of the key products of native potatoes and alpacas are
estimated by the AE as shown in the table below.
Local initiative type Financial internal rate of Financial internal rate of
return without grant return with grant
Non-repayable – Native potatoes 12.6% 121.8%
Non-repayable – Alpacas 8.4% 63.7%
Repayable – Native potatoes 25.8% 84.3%
Repayable – Alpacas 17.1% 48.1%
Agroideas – Alpacas 19.5% 56.8%
50. These potential rates of return, calculated for the financial analysis, appear to the iTAP
to have been overestimated,20 creating an apparent mismatch between the potential
profitability of these key agricultural activities and the possibility of funding them through pure
grants from the Puna Facility. The iTAP acknowledges that the principle underlying the three
sub-windows is related to the segmentation of the potential beneficiaries by organizational and
commercial capacities and the level of barriers they face.21 However, it seems short-sighted not
to also take into account the potential profitability of activities to be invested in. Pure grants
may indeed make sense for collective EbA investments in the landscape. But offering a pure
grant to a producers’ association that is expecting a high financial return on its activity,
represents a missed opportunity – both to maximize the development of the association’s
financial track record and to generate a return for replenishing the facility.
51. The non-repayable grant window is currently proposed to form 52 per cent of the total
funds in the Puna Facility22. The iTAP believes that the total volume of pure (non-repayable)
grants should be as small as possible, with such grants reserved for local initiatives that are
unlikely to generate significant profits. The iTAP notes that GIZ is not accredited with GCF for
on-lending, but believes that the design of the facility to cover only pure grants and repayable
grants (that are effectively zero-interest loans, with highly flexible repayment terms) means
that the effect on promoting recipients’ financial literacy and financial inclusion will be limited.
Ideally, it would have been preferable for the facility to have included regular low-interest,
favourable-term (long tenor, long grace period) loans, in order to maximize eligible participants’
capacity to understand the principles of risk and repayment, develop their financial literacy,
enhance their prospects of accessing future commercial microfinance, and help to break the
cycle of poverty.
52. The iTAP recommends that the AE and Profonanpe should think strategically about the
balance between pure grants and repayable grants offered through the Puna Facility. Ideally, the
project should apply the principle of minimum concessionality, and avoid giving pure grants to
20 See written questions from the iTAP (4 January) and responses from GIZ (11 January).
21 Funding proposal, paragraph 190.
22 Funding proposal, Table 5. Preliminary Grant Breakdown per Sub-Window.

--- Table 1 on Page 153 ---
Local initiative type |  | Financial internal rate of |  |  | Financial internal rate of | 
 |  | return without grant |  |  | return with grant | 
Non-repayable – Native potatoes | 12.6% |  |  | 121.8% |  | 
Non-repayable – Alpacas | 8.4% |  |  | 63.7% |  | 
Repayable – Native potatoes | 25.8% |  |  | 84.3% |  | 
Repayable – Alpacas | 17.1% |  |  | 48.1% |  | 
Agroideas – Alpacas | 19.5% |  |  | 56.8% |  | 

=== PAGE 154 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 154
productive investments identified as having a high financial internal rate of return even without
grants – instead providing repayable grants in these cases. This would help to maximize the
borrowing organizations’ repayment track record, and replenish the fund to reach more people.
53. It is noted that the project explicitly addresses barriers to beneficiaries’ future access to
commercial finance though a sub-activity under output 2.1 on “Support to financial institutions
in greening microcredits” – working with microfinance institutions with a presence in the
project area and with interest on expanding their credit portfolio to small-scale farmers for
adaptation measures (e.g. Caja Rural los Andes, Caja Cusco, and Financiera Confianza – an entity
of BBVA Microfinance Foundation) and providing technical assistance to adjust existing
products (including for women) or develop new ones, incorporating the EbA approach in the
financial risk analysis for prioritized value chains. Another sub-activity aims to “Raise
awareness of greener microcredits to promote EbA and Climate Resilient Value Chains” through
an awareness campaign for potential clients, training for field personnel of financial institutions,
and cooperation in strengthening risk management approaches. This needs to be complemented
by in-depth entrepreneurial and financial training in sub-activity 1.1.3.1 – currently described
only in broad terms.
54. Replenishing the facility. Although the project proponents anticipate some return on
the repayable grants, this amount is expected to be only 50 per cent of the total disbursed, and
applies to only 48 per cent (windows 2 and 3) of the portfolio as currently structured. In effect,
much of the Puna Facility operates like a small grants facility, and seems unlikely to attract
private sector investors who would expect a conventional return. The AE has acknowledged
that a special strategy is required for replenishment, and has designed sub-activity 2.1.1.2 to
address this: “Development and implementation of an innovative strategy to mobilize resources
from the private sector and different donors”. This activity focuses on accessing funding from
the private sector and other donors, and includes mapping and engagement of potential private
sector actors, both those interested in corporate social responsibility investment in the Andes
and those whose businesses depend on the ecosystem services provided by the Puna
ecosystems, such as hydroelectric, cement, mining, beverages and camelid fibre products, who
might wish to invest in the facility.
55. One-off contributions from donors or companies, however, would not constitute a long-
term replenishment strategy for the Puna Facility. Two more sustainable options exist and
could be explicitly addressed in the strategy to be developed for the facility. One option, which
may be implied in the funding proposal, is for Profonanpe to reach long-term agreements with
companies dependent on upper catchment management for water provision such as
hydropower or beverage industries – in effect a type of payment for watershed services scheme.
A second option could be a long-term source of State revenue channelled into the facility by law
– such as a portion of the national Tax on Consumption of Plastic Bags or the Aporte por
Regulación contribution by mining, hydrocarbon, electricity and other companies to the
Environmental Assessment and Control Agency. The iTAP recommends that a full business plan
should be developed in sub-activity 2.1.1.2, explicitly targeting long-term agreements and State
revenue sources.
56. Payment for Watershed Services. The efficiency and effectiveness of the project
interventions is further enhanced by sub-activity 2.1.2.1, which will help to activate Peru’s
existing payment for watershed services scheme, MERESE, bringing additional resources into
the target regions.23 The project will provide technical assistance to water utilities for five
existing MERESE schemes in Arequipa, Lima, Cusco and Apurimac (details can be found in
annex 23 to the funding proposal). Technical assistance packages may include support in
planning, evaluation and selection of EbA public investment projects; strengthening governance
platforms; contributing to the design of the monitoring, gender and capacity development
23 Not directly linked to the Puna Facility, given that MERESE schemes are clearly circumscribed in how they operate.

=== PAGE 155 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 155
systems; developing methodological tools for implementation; and reaching contractual
agreements with communities. A methodology will also be developed, in coordination with
MIDAGRI and MINAM, to calculate carbon sequestration in the Puna ecosystems and provide
capacity-building for local actors (e.g. communities, local government, academia) aligned with
national legal and institutional arrangements for carbon markets.
57. The project’s overall efficiency and effectiveness is rated as medium.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
58. The iTAP believes that the project “Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for
sustainable High Andean communities and ecosystems in Peru” has been well planned,
consulted and designed by GIZ and the Government of Peru. The project is an important one for
reducing the vulnerability of High Andean agropastoral communities and downstream water
users, and contributing to arresting an ongoing cycle of poverty and degradation that would
otherwise lead to ecosystem collapse and significant GHG emissions.
59. The iTAP recommends that the AE undertake the following actions to strengthen the
sustainability of project results:
(a) Include youth who are present in the target regions, while not necessarily being active in
farming, in the entrepreneurial training (including financial literacy) through the
technical assistance facility for the Puna Facility (sub-activity 1.1.3.1);
(b) Consider carefully the balance between pure grants and repayable grants offered
through the Puna Facility, and apply the principle of minimum concessionality when
supporting profit-making activities (sub-activity 2.1.1.1); and
(c) Develop a full business plan for the Puna Facility, explicitly targeting long-term
agreements with private sector partners, and long-term sources of revenue, including
from national environmental taxes and payments (sub-activity 2.1.1.2).

=== PAGE 156 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 156
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP226)
Proposal name: Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for sustainable High
Andean communities and ecosystems in Peru
Accredited entity: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)
Country: Peru
Project/programme size: Medium
Impact potential
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments.
Paradigm shift potential
Thank you for the positive assessment. We welcome iTAP’s recommendation. No further
comments.
Sustainable development potential
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments.
Needs of the recipient
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments.
Country ownership
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments.
Efficiency and effectiveness

--- Table 1 on Page 156 ---
Impact potential
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments.
Paradigm shift potential
Thank you for the positive assessment. We welcome iTAP’s recommendation. No further
comments.
Sustainable development potential
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments.
Needs of the recipient
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments.
Country ownership
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments.
Efficiency and effectiveness

=== PAGE 157 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.06
Page 157
Thank you for the positive assessment. We welcome iTAP’s recommendations. No further
comments.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
Thank you for the positive assessment. We welcome iTAP’s recommendations. No further
comments.

--- Table 1 on Page 157 ---
Thank you for the positive assessment. We welcome iTAP’s recommendations. No further
comments.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
Thank you for the positive assessment. We welcome iTAP’s recommendations. No further
comments.

=== PAGE 158 ===
Gender Documentation for FP226
GIZ Standard outline for the preparation of gender analyses
G ender analy sis for Resilient Puna:
Ecosystem based Adaptation for sus-
tainable High Andean communities and
ecosystems in Peru
The preparation of this document has been made possible thanks to the valuable support of Global Affairs
Canada

=== PAGE 159 ===
Title of the project: Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for sustainable High Andean
communities and ecosystems in Peru
Country/countries: Peru
Sector: Climate change: ecosystems-based adaptation
Commissioning party: BMZ and the Green Climate Fund (GCF)
Recommendation for If the marker has already been determined, this should be stated here. In case
gender policy marker1: the recommendation based on the gender analysis deviates from the previ-
ously assigned marker, this should also be noted.
Purpose for conducting ☒ for a new project ☐ for a follow-on project
the gender analysis ☐ for a modification offer ☐ for the GIZ portfolio in a country
☐ other: Click here to enter text.
Status of the gender ☐ Provisional gender analysis ☒ Finalised gender analysis
analysis
Method conducting the ☐ Desk study
gender analysis ☒ Desk study + data collection (e.g. on-site appraisal mission, interviews etc)
Involved Gender More than one option can be selected::
FP
☒ at the project level: Enter name
☐ *at the country level: Enter name
☐ *at the level of the department or regional division: Enter name
☐ *of the responsible unit in GloBe: Enter name and unit
☐ of the sectoral department: Enter name and unit
* Please note: The Gender FP must be copied into all emails sent to the S+G Desk.
For bilateral projects, the Gender FP of the country office should be involved; for re-
gional projects, either the Gender FP of the country or area where the project has its
headquarters, or the Gender FP of the department; for sectoral and global projects, the
Gender FP of the responsible unit in GloBe.
Other persons involved ☐ officer responsible for the commission ☐ project member
☐ appraisal mission team member ☐ planning officer
☒ external consultant
Author(s) of the gender GIZ
analysis
Date December 2023
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
1 According to the OECD DAC, all ODA-financed projects should be assigned a marker. The gender marker is requested for BMZ
projects and EU co-financing arrangements. Other public German commission parties do not currently request it.

--- Table 1 on Page 159 ---
Title of the project: | 
 | 
 | 
Country/countries: | 
Sector: | 
Commissioning party: | 
Recommendation for | If the marker has already been determined, this should be stated here. In case
the recommendation based on the gender analysis deviates from the previ-
ously assigned marker, this should also be noted.
gender policy marker1: | 
 | 
Purpose for conducting | ☒ for a new project ☐ for a follow-on project
☐ for a modification offer ☐ for the GIZ portfolio in a country
☐ other: Click here to enter text.
the gender analysis | 
 | 
Status of the gender | 
analysis | 
Method conducting the | 
gender analysis | 
 | 
Involved Gender | 
FP | 
 | 
Other persons involved | 
 | 
Author(s) of the gender | 
analysis | 
Date | 

=== PAGE 160 ===
List of Abbreviations
ANA National Water Authority
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
CONAMUCC National Committee on Women and Climate Change
CSW Commission on the Status of Women
EBA Ecosystems based Adaptation
ECOSOC UN Economic and Social Council
ENAHO National Household Survey
FEMUCARINAP the National Federation of Peasant, Artisan, Indigenous, Native and Salaried
Women of Peru
GG GIZ Gender Equality Marker Policy
INEI National Institute of Statistics and Informatics
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
JNE National Election Jury of Peru
MESAGEN Gender Roundtable for International Cooperation in Peru
MIDAGRI Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
MINAM Ministry of Environment
MIMP Ministry of Women and vulnerable populations
NDC Nationally Determined Contribution
NGO Non-Government Organisation
ONAMIAP Organisation of Andean and Amazonian Indigenous Women of Peru
PAGCC Gender and Climate Change Action Plan
PEMIG Multisectoral Strategic Plan for Gender Equality
PNIG National Gender Equality Policy
PROFONANPE Peruvian Environmental Fund for the Conservation of Protected Areas
SDG Sustainable Development Goals
SERNANP National Service for Natural Protected Areas
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
WEF World Economic Forum
46

=== PAGE 161 ===
Chapter 1: Introduction
The “Resilient Puna: Ecosystem-based approaches for sustainable High Andean communities
and ecosystems in Peru” Project (hereafter “Resilient Puna”) aims to increase the resilience of
Andean communities in the departments of Arequipa, Cusco, Puno and Apurimac, through the
management, conservation and restoration of high Andean ecosystems; an increased access
to public and private financing; and a stronger territorial planning towards Ecosystem-based
Adaptation (EbA). It is organised into three components: (i) Puna ecosystems are restored,
conserved and better managed to support climate resilient livelihoods, through the implemen-
tation of EbAs measures ; (ii) Public and private financing for EbA measures and climate resil-
ient livelihoods are in place and accessible for vulnerable communities in the Puna Ecosystem;
and, (iii) EbA and climate resilience are mainstreamed into multilevel landscape governance
instruments. The project will invest in EbA and climate resilient value chains, providing tech-
nical support to communities and producer associations to achieve sustainable business plans;
directly benefiting the conservation and restoration of 23,914 hectares of high Andean ecosys-
tems.
Various international and national instruments have defined guidelines for gender equality in
key climate change mitigation and adaptation actions2. Not only from a social, but also from an
economic and climate perspective. The link between gender, environment and climate en-
compasses a number of issues based on the socially constructed relationships between men
and women, which vary across cultures, geographies and time. Gender gaps are still wide and
trigger inequalities in access to their basic rights, opportunities and benefits throughout their
life cycle, which are reflected in their health, education, employment, participation, decision-
making power, access to and control of natural resources, capabilities, living a life free of vio-
lence, among others. Climate change represents a major driver of biodiversity loss, while eco-
system degradation undermines the resilience of people and nature to climate-related shocks
and stressors. Persistent gender inequalities underpin both of these crises, which increase
vulnerability to risks and reduce the options available to people, especially women, in main-
taining their livelihoods and good living, and their access to rights, goods and services.
The gender analysis of the Resilient Puna (RP) Project is in harmony with these international
principles and commitments (CEDAW, Beijing, Belém do Pará, SDGs), as well as with national
ones (Gender and Climate Change Action Plan-PACC, National Policy on Gender Equality3,
National Strategic Development Plan to 2050, National Plan against Gender Violence, among
other policies) that support work in favour of gender equality and non-discrimination of women
in the access to their social, political, cultural, climatic and economic rights and resources.
According to the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC) (2017), the impacts of global warming that affect men and women differently, require
adaptation and mitigation measures that recognise their different needs. It also implies pro-
moting the mainstreaming of a gender perspective in public policies to address climate change,
with the aim of observing, analysing and transforming inequalities and inequities in the condi-
tion, construction of roles and position of men and women in society (UN-Women, 2017).
The project has adopted as its main approach "Ecosystem-based Adaptation" (EbA), an ap-
proach that promotes working with nature to cope with gradual and extreme climate impacts,
which affect people, their livelihoods and their economy. In this approach, two central charac-
teristics are identified in order to better understand the gender approach:
i) it is a people-based approach, as it seeks to reduce their vulnerability while at the
same time generating social and economic benefits; and,
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
2 Peru is committed to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and its follow-up through the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Conferences of
the Parties (COP) to the convention, among other standards, commitments and recommendations, permeate national spheres.
3 "The public need for a National Gender Equality Policy aimed at correcting the problem of structural discrimination against
women stems both from constitutional norms and the Peruvian State's commitment to human rights treaties...". PNIG, 2019.
47

--- Table 1 on Page 161 ---

The gender analysis of the Resilient Puna (RP) Project is in harmony with these international
principles and commitments (CEDAW, Beijing, Belém do Pará, SDGs), as well as with national
ones (Gender and Climate Change Action Plan-PACC, National Policy on Gender Equality3,
National Strategic Development Plan to 2050, National Plan against Gender Violence, among
other policies) that support work in favour of gender equality and non-discrimination of women
in the access to their social, political, cultural, climatic and economic rights and resources.
According to the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC) (2017), the impacts of global warming that affect men and women differently, require
adaptation and mitigation measures that recognise their different needs. It also implies pro-
moting the mainstreaming of a gender perspective in public policies to address climate change,
with the aim of observing, analysing and transforming inequalities and inequities in the condi-
tion, construction of roles and position of men and women in society (UN-Women, 2017).

=== PAGE 162 ===
ii) it is a collaborative process in which communities, public and private organisations,
work together to have an impact at the landscape level and generate sustainable op-
portunities over time for all parties4.
Linking the gender EbA approaches is both challenging and enriching. It allows to move from
analysing the resources, decisions, behaviours, roles and interrelationships of men and
women with their environment, towards integrating ways and mechanisms to break down the
barriers that have been hindering women's progress in the framework of their adaptation and
resilience to climate change.
Specifically, the gender analysis has identified the main factors that are hindering women's
progress and resilience in the face of climate change. Overburdened care and unpaid domestic
work; low participation in decision-making; lack of income; vulnerability of their housing and
household environment (e.g., health, food, gender-based violence, poor housing) are the main
gendered barriers to more equitable climate adaptation. Although the response to this situation
requires the involvement of both women and men, it is important to mention that the gender
dimension addressed in the project defines actions that mainly strengthen the role of women,
seeking to "levelling the playing field" for their real and effective involvement in the implemen-
tation of the project, as well as a better appropriation of the EbA issue and taking advantage
of the opportunities and benefits provided by the project.
The project recognises that an adequate vision and inclusion of gender aspects in its different
stages is one of the main pillars for the effectiveness and sustainability of the intervention. For
this reason, both the Gender Analysis (GA) and the Gender Action Plan (GAP) of the Resilient
Puna project focus on the mainstreaming of the gender approach from its formulation to its
implementation, monitoring and evaluation. Therefore, the RP project will also conduct a mon-
itoring strategy to evaluate and verify that no negative results are produced (under the principle
of do no harm). The project will encourage women's participation and leadership to be pro-
moted and recognised in the environments in which the project will be developed, in many of
which they have been traditionally excluded. The central objective of the analysis and integra-
tion of the gender approach in the project is visibilise women´s barriers to contribute reducing
asymmetric situations in the care, exploitation and use of natural resources, as well as the
rights of people, especially women, within a natural ecosystem. In this sense, having a reading
of the gender approach in this area leads us to build egalitarian processes that allow people
to build climate resilience and exercise their rights, while protecting the ecosystems on which
they depend.
Finally, the methodology to collect information to prepare this gender action plan involved a
desk review of available data and fieldwork data collection techniques. Regarding desk review,
it included analysis of available secondary data sources such as national policies and work of
national mechanisms, as well as a comprehensive review of secondary literature that includes
various research reports, articles and papers on the subject from both national and interna-
tional organisations. Regarding fieldwork data collection, between August and November
2022, two fieldtrips were organised to potential districts of intervention in the departments of
Arequipa, Cusco and Puno. During these fieldtrips, personnel from GIZ, MIDAGRI and FIAP
conducted focus groups, in-depth interviews and surveys to analyse general perceptions about
the Resilient Puna project, governance structures regarding management of natural resources,
local livelihoods and gender gaps in rural communities. To address gender topics, 89 in-
depth interviews were conducted, of which 40 were with women and 49 with men. The greater
number of interviews with men was due to their greater willingness to be interviewed. Likewise,
surveys were applied to build a baseline that gathers evidence and statistical data, for the
definition of indicators of the Gender Action Plan of the project. Likewise, the baseline reflects
as close reality of the situation of women and men at the territorial level as well as the actors
involved in the context in which they develop.
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
4 UICN. Soluciones AbE. Información disponible en internet. Página: solucionesabe.org
48

=== PAGE 163 ===
Chapter 2: Information on gender dimensions in the country or the region
2.1 Meta level (norms)
Peru is the fourth country with the largest population in South America. In 2020, the population
was 32.6 million inhabitants: 50.4% women and 49.6% men. This population lives mostly in
urban centres (79%) and 21% in rural areas (INEI, 2020b). Peru also hosts great cultural di-
versity with 55 indigenous peoples, 51 from the Amazon and 4 from the Andes (Ministerio de
Cultura, 2022). According to the last National Population Census (2017), 26% of the popula-
tion identifies as part of an indigenous group, which makes around 6 million people(INEI,
2017).
Moreover, Peru is a country with high levels of inequality, in terms of income, property, access
to basic social services, infrastructure and gender. In 2020, monetary poverty increased by 9.9
percentage points and reached 30% of the Peruvian population. This affected 46% of people
living in rural areas (3.1 million people) and 26% of people living in urban areas (6.8 million
people) (INEI, 2021b).
In terms of gender inequity, Peru has progressed launching different norms for the main-
streaming of a gender approach in public policy, but it is still insufficient. The most recent 2020-
21 World Economic Forum (WEF) Global Gender Gap Index placed Peru 37th out of 156 coun-
tries in terms of gender gaps pertaining to economic participation and opportunity, education,
health and survival, and political empowerment dimensions (WEF, 2020-2021) and 7th place
in Latin America. Similarly, the Gender Inequality Index in 2019 placed Peru with 0.395 points,
a position below the average of countries with high human development (0.340) (UNDP, 2022).
Peru is a state that prohibits discrimination and recognises equality as a fundamental human
right (Political Constitution of 1993, Art. 2 numeral 2). Article 191 of the Constitution establishes
the responsibility of the Peruvian State to remove obstacles that limit the right to equality or
that constitute discriminatory acts. However, there is structural discrimination against women
in Peru, which is systematic, generalised, and massive. This discrimination generates multiple
oppressions for women, limiting their opportunities and systematically violating their rights.
Women are affected by multiple discriminations that are evident in the persistence of limitations
to their autonomy (physical, economic and decision-making), as well as the existence of gaps
in different dimensions (reproductive health, empowerment and labour market) and areas
(health, education, employment, participation, use of time, among others), with the situation
worsening in the rural settings. Structural discrimination based on gender does not affect all
women equally, who do not constitute a homogeneous group, since there are indigenous, Afro-
Peruvian, disable, displaced, poor and non-poor women.
The supremacy of the masculine over the feminine is institutionalised in social relations, in
public and private institutions and in politics, through discriminatory sociocultural patterns (be-
liefs, prejudices, dogmas, and customs), which are reproduced, transmitted intergenerationally
and, therefore, perpetuated. The origin of these sociocultural norms lies in the differences in
power between women and men and male privilege. Discrimination against women is rooted
in norms and an institutional culture that reinforce women's subordination. Violence against
women is one of the main instruments used to maintain women in a situation of subordination
and as a means of disciplining them to prevent their access to rights. This not only prevents
their participation in social, political, economic, and cultural decision-making processes, but
also makes it impossible for them to transform these spaces that reproduce patriarchal struc-
tures of domination.
According to the National Social Relations Survey in 2019 (ENARES, for its acronym in Span-
ish), the index of social tolerance towards violence against women is 59% of the surveyed.
When referring to attitudes that support such violence, 53% of male and female respondents
49

=== PAGE 164 ===
state that women should first fulfil the role of mother and wife, and only then can achieve their
personal projects (INEI, 2019).
Gender inequality has an impact on development and the economy, but above all on families’
wellbeing, where unpaid labour and care roles are still locked by stereotypes, and stigmas, in
which women tend to have a heavier burden than men and fewer opportunities to achieve their
wellbeing. In the context of confinement due to the Covid 19 pandemic, there was a difference
of 19 percentage points between men and women, regarding the time spent on household
chores (MIMP, 2020). This burden for women made it more difficult for them to re-enter the job
market under similar conditions as their male counterparts. In 2022, 82% of women perform
domestic care work as opposed to 16% of their male counterparts, showing that women spend
27 hours more on unpaid domestic work per week (Flora Tristan & IEP, 2021).
By positioning the gender approach with key partners throughout the project implementation
process, it will be ensured that the impact of the project will contribute to promote the improve-
ment of living conditions for the entire population in general, and for women in particular. To
do this, it is necessary to strengthen the process of making visible the disadvantaged condi-
tions in which rural women's participation in communities and decision-making spaces related
to natural resources’ management takes place. The political and economic empowerment of
rural women has positive effects on household income, food security and nutrition, in general
in families’ wellbeing.
2.2 Macro level (policies and laws)
At the international level, Peru has ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW, 2010). It has also ratified the Inter-American Con-
vention on the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women (Conven-
tion of Belém do Pará), which establishes international standards to prevent, punish and erad-
icate violence against women in the public and private spheres. It has also signed commit-
ments such as the Beijing Declaration and World Platform (1995) and the 2030 Agenda, whose
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5 establishes gender equality and whose target 5.5
seeks to ensure women's full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership
at all decision-making levels in political, economic and public life.
At the national level, in addition to the constitutional norms, the Peruvian State has laws, reg-
ulations and guidelines that are mandatory for all levels of government. There are different
policies that promote equal opportunities between men and women in public policies and
plans, the main one being the National Policy on Gender Equality, which establishes 6 priority
objectives: 1.To reduce violence against women; 2. To guarantee women's access to and par-
ticipation in decision-making spaces; 4.To guarantee the exercise of women's economic and
social rights; 5.To reduce institutional barriers that hinder equality in the public and private
spheres between men and women; and 6.To reduce the incidence of discriminatory socio-
cultural patterns in the population. This policy has a Multisectoral Strategic Plan for Gender
Equality (PEMIG, for its acronym in Spanish).
These policies stipulate the obligation to promote the adoption of egalitarian values, practices,
attitudes and behaviours between men and women, to guarantee the right to non-discrimina-
tion and the eradication of violence against them. They seek to guarantee the full exercise of
all their rights (civil, political, economic, social, and cultural). They also establish obligations to
promote the physical, economic, and decision-making autonomy of women in society and in
public administration. They also contemplate the intersectionality approach, paying special at-
tention to the most vulnerable groups. With respect to gender mainstreaming in the State, it
basically involves capacity building for civil servants, the generation of differentiated infor-
mation, the participation of women in spaces for dialogue and decision-making, as well as the
incorporation of this approach in management documents, programs and projects.
50

=== PAGE 165 ===
Main national instruments on gender
• Political Constitution of Peru (1993). Art. 2 inc. 2 (equality and non-discrimination based
on sex). Art. 191 (State responsibility for removing obstacles to equality or that consti-
tute discriminatory acts).
National Policies
• National Agreement (2002). Policy 11 (seeks to combat discrimination and promote
equal opportunities between men and women).
• Supreme Decree N° 054-2011-PCM Bicentennial Plan: Peru to 2021 (throughout the
text, non-discrimination, equity between men and women, affirmative actions and equal
opportunities and universal access to basic services are proposed).
• National Agreement (2019). Vision of the country to 2050; proposes to eradicate dis-
crimination and ensure equal access to opportunities and conditions, in a fair and in-
clusive society that leaves no one behind.
Laws and regulations of legal rank
• Legislative Decree N°635 Criminal Code (1991) amended by Legislative Decree N°
1323 (2017) and Legislative Decree N°1410 (2018); criminalises the delinquencies of
discrimination and incitement to discrimination, aggravated in the case of public officials
and harassment, sexual harassment, sexual blackmail and dissemination of images,
audio visual materials or audios with sexual content and modifies the procedure for
sanctioning sexual harassment.
• Law N°26772 (1997), prohibits discrimination, annulment or alteration of equal oppor-
tunities or treatment in job offers and access to educational training.
• Law N° 27942 (2003), to prevent and punish sexual harassment.
• Law N° 28983 (2007), to promote equal opportunities between women and men.
• Legislative Decree N°1098 (2012). Law of Organisation and Functions of the Ministry
of Women and Vulnerable Populations - MIMP. Governing body for public policies for
women and gender mainstreaming.
• Law N° 30314 (2015), to prevent and punish sexual harassment in public spaces.
• Law N° 30364 (2015), to prevent, punish and eradicate violence against women and
members of the family group.
• Law N° 30982 (2019), amends Law 24656, General Law of Peasant Communities, to
strengthen the role of women in Peasant Communities.
• Legislative Decree N°1470 (2020), establishes measures to guarantee the care and
protection of victims of violence against women and members of the family group dur-
ing the health emergency declared by COVID-19.
• Law N° 31030 (2020), modifies norms of the electoral legislation to guarantee parity
and gender alternation in the lists of candidates.
• Law N° 30982, (2021) that amends Law 24656, General Law of Peasant Communities,
which strengthens the role of women by establishing that at least 30% of the members
of the Community Board, the body responsible for the government and administration
of the community, must be women.
• Supreme Decree N° 010-2022-MIMP, promotes mandatory training on gender per-
spective for the prevention of violence and discrimination in public administration.
Supreme Decrees and Resolutions
• Supreme Decree N° 005-2017-MIMP: Public entities of the National Government and
Regional Governments create a commission, committee or working group, for Gender
Equality.
• Supreme Decree N° 002-2018-JUS: National Human Rights Plan 2018 – 2021; estab-
lishes four strategic objectives for the protection of women: (1) Reduce violence against
women, (2) Promote the participation of women in decision-making spaces, (3) Guar-
antee the exercise of women's sexual and reproductive rights, (4) Guarantee the gen-
eration of women's own income.
51

=== PAGE 166 ===
• Supreme Resolution N° 129-2018-PCM, creates the multisectoral commission of a
temporary nature against VAW, the fight against which constitutes a national priority.
• Supreme Decree N° 056-2018-PCM, approves the General Policy of the Government
to 2021 and sets as a priority guideline to promote equality and non-discrimination be-
tween men and women, as well as to guarantee the protection of women against all
types of violence.
• Supreme Decree N° 008-2019-MIMP, approves the National Policy on Gender Equal-
ity.
• Supreme Decree N° 014-2019-MIMP: Regulation of Law N° 27942, Law for the Pre-
vention and Punishment of Sexual Harassment.
• Supreme Decree N° 002-2020-MIMP, approves the Multisectoral Strategic Plan for
Gender Equality of the National Gender Equality Policy.
• Supreme Decree N° 012-2016-MINAM, approves Peru's Gender and Climate Change
Action Plan.
• Chief Resolution N°187-2020-ANA conforms the Commission for Gender Equality of
the National Water Authority.
Although these regulations are in place, the main challenge is their limited implementation.
The persistence of inequality between women and men is reflected in the insufficient political
will for the effective mainstreaming of the gender approach, the absence of adequate diagno-
ses, inter-institutional coordination, unified records, and a trained and sensitised civil service,
so that they understand that if they are not committed to closing gender gaps and their ade-
quate management, the actions carried out within the framework of their function are contrib-
uting to deepening them.
2.3 Meso level (institutions)
Peru has a governing body for public policies for women since 1996 (Legislative Decree N°866,
then MIMDES, Organic Law 27779). Since 2012, it changed its name to the Ministry of Women
and Vulnerable Populations (MIMP, for its acronym in Spanish), with Legislative Decree N°
1098. Today, this is the governing body for addressing national and sectoral policies on wom-
en's rights, as well as prevention, protection and care against violence against women, pro-
motion and strengthening of gender mainstreaming in policies, plans, programs and projects
of the state and public and private institutions. Although this ministry has the steering role, it
needs to be strengthened, especially for the articulation with all sectors and levels of govern-
ment. Its main weakness lies in the limited capacities, institutional resources, and budget to
fulfil its role. This weakness expands with the continuous political instability, absence of long-
term state policies, and political willingness of some key sectors of the government, like the
current Parliament that avoids debates on key issues like the sexual rights for women and
girls.
However, there is a strong social movement that defend women’s and LGTBQ+ human rights,
including the National Network for the Promotion of Women, the Stop Street Harassment col-
lective, the Manuela Ramos Movement and the Flora Tristán Peruvian Women's Centre (a
member of the Latin American Women and Habitat Network), among others. There is also a
rural and indigenous women's movement with groups and organisations such as: the National
Organisation of Andean and Amazonian Indigenous Women of Peru (ONAMIAP), the National
Federation of Peasant, Artisan, Indigenous, Native and Salaried Women of Peru (FE-
MUCARINAP), among others. All these organisations do influence the issuance of regulations
and public policies favourable to women, carrying out awareness campaigns towards public
opinion and defend emblematic cases before national and international judicial instances.
In Peru, the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH
participates in the Gender Roundtable for International Cooperation in Peru (MESAGEN). This
is a coordinating body for international cooperation in Peru. Its objective is to contribute to
gender equality and the empowerment of women, girls and adolescents, within the framework
52

=== PAGE 167 ===
of national plans and policies, international commitments and obligations signed by Peru. Cur-
rently, MESAGEN is made up of diplomatic representations and international organisations of
official cooperation (bilateral and/or multilateral) that work in gender equality and the promotion
of women's human rights in Peru. Currently, GIZ is implementing a project on the prevention
of gender violence against women, supporting the consolidation of the Specialised Justice
System on Violence (SNEJ) for the protection and punishment of violence against women and
family members.
2.4 Micro level (target groups)
In Peru, there are marked patterns of gender-based roles and/or behaviours, and historically
established stereotypes and social expectations about women's and men's aspirations and
opportunities persist and are clearly discriminatory in that they limit women's options for full
development. In both political and economic participation, men have a large advantage over
women, for example, in access to paid employment, in the quality of employment accessed,
and in control over time available for work and training. According to the World Economic Fo-
rum (WEF, 2020), Peru is one of the countries in the world that shows only setbacks in the
wage gap, ranking 128th out of 144 countries in the world.
Health: Andean and indigenous women are the population group with the least access to
prenatal check-ups by a medical professional. During 2020, only 13.1% of women were at-
tended by a medical professional compared to 39.5% of women living in urban areas. Like-
wise, in the same year, limited access to institutionalised deliveries were reported, with a
difference of 15.8% between urban (96.9%) and rural (81.1%) institutional deliveries. In ad-
dition to the limited institutional care for deliveries, the deliveries that took place in a health
facility were carried out by nurses and not by medical professionals (17.4% rural versus 4.2%
urban) (INEI, 2021).
Regarding the birth rate and teenage pregnancy, although the departments prioritised by the
project do not have the highest teenage pregnancy rates at the national level, the department
of Apurimac presents a rate of 10.7% of teenage pregnancy, compared to 5% in the depart-
ments of Arequipa, Cuzco and Puno. Also, 5% of women reported unmet needs for family
planning in the same departments, with Puno having the lowest percentage of modern con-
traceptive use of the four departments prioritised by the project (See Table N°1) (INEI, 2021).
Table N°1
Percentage of adolescent pregnancy, use of modern contraceptive methods, and family planning needs,
in the prioritised departments
(%) women using (%) women with unmet
(%) Adolescents 15-19
modern contracep- needs for family plan-
Department years ever pregnant
tive methods ning
National 6.6% 78.1% 5.5%
Apurímac 10.7% 79.9% 5.9%
Arequipa 5.0% 80.7% 5.0%
Cusco 4.6% 80.1% 7.1%
Puno 5.7% 75.3% 5.1%
Source: INEI, 2021
In 2020, acute respiratory infections (ARI) in children under five years of age were higher in
rural areas (7.2%) compared to 4.9% in urban areas. ARI in children is more prevalent in
households where charcoal is used as fuel for cooking, 12.9% compared to 7.3% of cases
where firewood, straw or agricultural waste is used. On the other hand, acute diarrhoeal dis-
ease (ADD) continues to be an important cause of mortality in children, with 9.4% of children
under five years of age suffering from the disease, with a higher percentage of boys (9.9%)
than girls (8.9%) (INEI, 2021).
53

--- Table 1 on Page 167 ---
Health: Andean and indigenous women are the population group with the least access to
prenatal check-ups by a medical professional. During 2020, only 13.1% of women were at-
tended by a medical professional compared to 39.5% of women living in urban areas. Like-
wise, in the same year, limited access to institutionalised deliveries were reported, with a
difference of 15.8% between urban (96.9%) and rural (81.1%) institutional deliveries. In ad-
dition to the limited institutional care for deliveries, the deliveries that took place in a health
facility were carried out by nurses and not by medical professionals (17.4% rural versus 4.2%
urban) (INEI, 2021).

Regarding the birth rate and teenage pregnancy, although the departments prioritised by the
project do not have the highest teenage pregnancy rates at the national level, the department
of Apurimac presents a rate of 10.7% of teenage pregnancy, compared to 5% in the depart-
ments of Arequipa, Cuzco and Puno. Also, 5% of women reported unmet needs for family
planning in the same departments, with Puno having the lowest percentage of modern con-
traceptive use of the four departments prioritised by the project (See Table N°1) (INEI, 2021).

--- Table 2 on Page 167 ---
Department |  |  | (%) Adolescents 15-19
years ever pregnant |  |  |  | (%) women using |  |  | (%) women with unmet | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | modern contracep- |  |  | needs for family plan- | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | tive methods |  |  | ning | 
 | National |  |  | 6.6% |  |  | 78.1% |  |  | 5.5% | 
 | Apurímac |  |  | 10.7% |  |  | 79.9% |  |  | 5.9% | 
 | Arequipa |  |  | 5.0% |  |  | 80.7% |  |  | 5.0% | 
 | Cusco |  |  | 4.6% |  |  | 80.1% |  |  | 7.1% | 
 | Puno |  |  | 5.7% |  |  | 75.3% |  |  | 5.1% | 

--- Table 3 on Page 167 ---

Department

--- Table 4 on Page 167 ---
(%) Adolescents 15-19
years ever pregnant

=== PAGE 168 ===
Education: Llliteracy rates of women in the departments prioritised by the project exceed the
national average (8% form women and 3% for men). In the case of Apurimac, 20% of women
are illiterate compared to 5.8% of illiterate men. The same occurs in Cusco, 16% of women
are illiterate and 3.8% of illiterate men; in Puno, 14.2% of women are illiterate and 3% of men.
Arequipa has a lower percentage of illiteracy, with 4.7% of illiterate women (4.7%) and illiterate
men (1.5%) (INEI/ENAHO, 2019).
In 2021, the net school attendance rate was 91.4% for females and 91.1% for males (INEI
2022). Also, by 2021, Cusco had a higher net primary school attendance rate for girls than for
boys, in contrast to Apurímac, Arequipa and Puno. On the other hand, Cusco has a higher net
secondary education attendance rate for adolescent girls aged 12 to 16 than for boys in the
same age group, while Puno has the largest gap in favour of adolescent boys (MINEDU, 2020).
At the primary level, the access gap between girls and boys has been closed at the national
level (See Table N°2). However, at the secondary level, inequality reappears, to the detriment
of adolescent girls. In 2020, 71.9% of females compared to 76.7% of males attended a sec-
ondary educational centre. Part of the explanation for the gaps at secondary level is due to
dropping out of school, caused by economic or family reasons (45.8% rural, 43.9% urban);
pregnancy or early marriage (24.9% rural and 16.8% urban), and graduation or studies at an
academy (11% rural and 27.5% urban) (MINEDU, 2020).
Table N°2
Illiteracy, school attendance and dropout rates
Illiteracy rate for Dropout rate in
Net attendance ratio (*) in regular edu-
people aged 15+ regular educa-
cation (b)
(a) tion (b)
Early
child- Primary
Department Secondary Ed-
Women Men hood Educa- Total
ucation
Educa- tion
tion
National 8.1% 3.0% 81.2% 94.4% 83.5% 9.1%
Apurímac 20.0% 5.8% 99.0% 97.7 87.0% 1.1%
Arequipa 4.7% 1.5% 82.9% 95.6% 90.2% 3.8%
Cusco 16.0% 3.8% 84.4% 98.8% 89.8% 4.7%
Puno 14.2% 3.1% 65.0% 99.3% 93.8% 2.3%
Source: MIMP Policy Monitoring and Evaluation Office
(a) INEI/ENAHO, 2019
(b) MINEDU, 2020
(*): number of persons attending a given level of education (pre-primary/primary/secondary) who are in the age group
set for that level, as a proportion of the total population of that age group (INEI, MINEDU)
Income and employment: Between 2010 and 2019, the department with the largest income
gap was Apurimac, with 28.2% more women than men with no income of their own. It is
followed by Cusco and then Arequipa and Puno, all below the national average. In 2020
during the pandemic, the income gap narrowed in all department, but with two different dy-
namics. In Apurímac, Cusco and Puno, while the percentage of men with no income of their
own had risen, the percentage of women felled significantly. One possible explanation is that,
faced with the loss of formal employment for men, women started new activities and enter-
prises to generate income. In Arequipa and at the national level, the reverse is true: confine-
ment has affected many enterprises and employment. As a consequence, both percentages
of people with no income of their own have risen sharply, men more than women, narrowing
the gap between the two (INEI, 2020).
54

--- Table 1 on Page 168 ---
Department |  |  |  | Illiteracy rate for |  |  |  |  | Net attendance ratio (*) in regular edu-
cation (b) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Dropout rate in | 
 |  |  |  | people aged 15+ |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | regular educa- | 
 |  |  |  | (a) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | tion (b) | 
 |  |  | Women |  |  | Men |  |  |  | Early |  | Primary
Educa-
tion |  |  | Secondary Ed-
ucation |  |  | Total |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | child- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | hood |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Educa- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | tion |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | National |  |  | 8.1% |  |  | 3.0% |  |  | 81.2% |  |  | 94.4% |  |  | 83.5% |  |  | 9.1% | 
 | Apurímac |  |  | 20.0% |  |  | 5.8% |  |  | 99.0% |  |  | 97.7 |  |  | 87.0% |  |  | 1.1% | 
 | Arequipa |  |  | 4.7% |  |  | 1.5% |  |  | 82.9% |  |  | 95.6% |  |  | 90.2% |  |  | 3.8% | 
 | Cusco |  |  | 16.0% |  |  | 3.8% |  |  | 84.4% |  |  | 98.8% |  |  | 89.8% |  |  | 4.7% | 
 | Puno |  |  | 14.2% |  |  | 3.1% |  |  | 65.0% |  |  | 99.3% |  |  | 93.8% |  |  | 2.3% | 

--- Table 2 on Page 168 ---
Net attendance ratio (*) in regular edu-
cation (b)

--- Table 3 on Page 168 ---


Department

--- Table 4 on Page 168 ---
Primary
Educa-
tion

--- Table 5 on Page 168 ---
Secondary Ed-
ucation

--- Table 6 on Page 168 ---
Income and employment: Between 2010 and 2019, the department with the largest income
gap was Apurimac, with 28.2% more women than men with no income of their own. It is
followed by Cusco and then Arequipa and Puno, all below the national average. In 2020
during the pandemic, the income gap narrowed in all department, but with two different dy-
namics. In Apurímac, Cusco and Puno, while the percentage of men with no income of their
own had risen, the percentage of women felled significantly. One possible explanation is that,
faced with the loss of formal employment for men, women started new activities and enter-
prises to generate income. In Arequipa and at the national level, the reverse is true: confine-
ment has affected many enterprises and employment. As a consequence, both percentages
of people with no income of their own have risen sharply, men more than women, narrowing
the gap between the two (INEI, 2020).




=== PAGE 169 ===
Table N°3
Women and men with no income of their own, 2010-2019 and 2020
2010-2019 (%) 2020 (%)
Department
Women Men Gap W-M Women Men Gap W - M
National 31.3 12.1 19.2 36.0 19.7 16.3
Apurímac 39.6 11.5 28.2 32.8 12.1 20.7
Arequipa 28.4 12.0 16.4 38.1 22.3 15.8
Cusco 33.4 13.7 19.7 30.5 18.2 12.3
Puno 29.6 15.9 13.7 25.1 17.4 7.7
Source: INEI; Gender Indicators, 2020.
Regarding employment, in rural areas, 68% of women are engaged in agricultural work. Sales
and service jobs represent 41.9% of job positions for women in urban areas and 18.7% in rural
areas (INEI/ENDES, 2021). At the national level, 28.1% of women aged 15-49 who are self-
employed have an agricultural job, while 36.2% have a non-agricultural occupation. In the case
of women in agricultural occupations, 37.6% are unpaid family workers and only 46.3% of
women in agricultural occupations received cash income. Of the total number of women who
did not receive income in cash or in kind in return for their work, 32% were in agricultural
occupations (INEI/ENDES, 2021).
Paid and unpaid domestic work: In general, in Peru, there is a higher percentage of women
in informal sectors who carry a greater burden of unpaid domestic work, which reduces or
prevents them from having a paid job. Domestic chores and care for family members, like
children, the elderly, and sick/disable family members fall mainly on women. On average,
women assume 23 hours more unpaid work per week than men (39 hours and 28 minutes vs.
15 hours and 54 minutes) (INEI/ ENUT, 2011). Moreover, analysing women's employment is
challenging as some of the occupations they carry out are not perceived as work and are not
reported, especially when it is agricultural work on family plots, family businesses or in the
informal sector (INEI/ ENDES, 2021). While the burden of unpaid and care work at home has
historically fallen on women, during the pandemic, the closure of schools and the saturation of
the health system affected them doubly, placing a greater burden of unpaid work on them for
the duration of their confinement at home.
Participation in decision-making: Since the implementation of the Parity and Alternation Law
in 2021 for parliament Congress and sub-national authority candidates, there has been an
increase in women's participation at these levels5. In 2021, 49 women and 81 men were
elected for Parliament (See Table N° 4). Political participation of women increased from 27.7%
in the previous period (2016 – 2021) to 37.30% today. However, women's subnational repre-
sentation in the Parliament is still limited, with women representing half the number of male
representatives from the departments of Apurímac, Arequipa and Cusco. For Puno, there is
no representation of women in Parliament, compared to five male congressmen representing
this department (ONPE, 2022).
Table N°4
Political participation, by prioritised department
N° seats at national parliament 2021-2026
Region
Women Men
National 49 81
Apurímac 1 1
Arequipa 2 4
Cusco 2 3
Puno 0 5
Source: ONPE, 2022
Regarding female sub national authorities, out of 25 departments, only 2 are governed by
women (See Table N°5). Of these two women, none of them correspond to the departments
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
5 In 2021, the Law No. 30996, of parity and alternation for elected positions became mandatory. This law stipulated that in the
2021 women should occupy 40% of the lists, in 2026 45% and in 2031, 50%.
55

--- Table 1 on Page 169 ---
Table N°3
Women and men with no income of their own, 2010-2019 and 2020

--- Table 2 on Page 169 ---
Department | 2010-2019 (%) |  |  | 2020 (%) |  | 
 | Women | Men | Gap W-M | Women | Men | Gap W - M
National | 31.3 | 12.1 | 19.2 | 36.0 | 19.7 | 16.3
Apurímac | 39.6 | 11.5 | 28.2 | 32.8 | 12.1 | 20.7
Arequipa | 28.4 | 12.0 | 16.4 | 38.1 | 22.3 | 15.8
Cusco | 33.4 | 13.7 | 19.7 | 30.5 | 18.2 | 12.3
Puno | 29.6 | 15.9 | 13.7 | 25.1 | 17.4 | 7.7

--- Table 3 on Page 169 ---
Region |  |  |  | N° seats at national parliament 2021-2026 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Women |  |  | Men | 
 | National |  |  | 49 |  |  | 81 | 
 | Apurímac |  |  | 1 |  |  | 1 | 
 | Arequipa |  |  | 2 |  |  | 4 | 
 | Cusco |  |  | 2 |  |  | 3 | 
 | Puno |  |  | 0 |  |  | 5 | 

=== PAGE 170 ===
prioritised by the RP project. In terms of local authorities, Cusco has 2 from 13 provinces with
female mayors. Neither Apurimac, Arequipa, nor Puno have women mayors at the provincial
level. Despite the parity and alternation rule applied on sub national elections on 2022, the
position of women's political participation in the prioritised departments were critical (INEI
2022).
Regarding female local authorities, out of more than 1800 municipalities, only 90 municipalities
have a female mayor. In the prioritised departments, Apurímac has two elected female mayors
from 84 municipalities. In Arequipa, out of 109 municipalities, only 9 have a female mayor. In
Cusco, out of 112 municipalities, only two are female mayors; in Puno, out of 109 municipali-
ties, only four are women.
Table N° 5
Number and percentage of subnational government authorities
Sub national governors Provincial mayors Municipal mayors
Department
Women Men Women Men Women Men
National 2 (8%) 23 (92%) 8 (4,8 %) 188 (95, 2%) 90 (4,9%) 1772 (95,1%)
Apurímac 0 1 0 7 (100%) 2 (2,4%) 82 (97,6%)
Arequipa 0 1 0 8 (100%) 9 (8,3%) 100 (91,7%)
Cusco 0 1 2 (15,4%) 11 (84,6%) 2 (1,8%) 110 (98,2%)
Puno 0 1 0 13 (100%) 4 (8,3%) 105 (91,7%)
In general terms, the situation of women's political participation reflects the situation of all forms
of women's participation in decision-making, whether at national, sub-national or community
level. This situation deserves special attention if the project aims at strengthening climate gov-
ernance and adaptation from a gender perspective.
Gender Violence: In 2022, 55% of Peruvian women were victims of violence perpetrated by
their husband or partner. Both physical violence and sexual violence were reported in higher
proportions in rural areas, 28.6% and 7.2%, respectively; if ethnic self-identification6 is taken
into account, the proportion of women who were victims of violence was higher in rural areas,
28.6% and 7.2%, respectively, women of native origin represent the highest percentage of
violence victims with 54.4%7. In the case of psychological and/or verbal violence, it occurred
more frequently in women in urban areas (51.5%). Of the four prioritised departments, Apuri-
mac shows higher percentages of violence against women (total and psychological violence);
the percentage of physical violence is higher in Cusco and sexual violence is higher in Puno
(See Table N°6). Reasons stated by women victims of physical violence for nor reporting nor
seeking help was because it was not necessary (42.9%), followed by a feeling of shame
(16.8%) and lack of knowledge (they did not know where to go or did not know about services,
11.0%), among other reasons was fear of being beaten or their children, fear of causing prob-
lems to the person who hit them, fear of divorce/separation (INEI/ENDES 2021). Women vic-
tims of trafficking registered with the National Police of Peru have also been reported in the
departments prioritised by the project. In 2020, Cusco reported 19 trafficked women and Are-
quipa reported 13, the highest figures of the four prioritised departments (National Prosecution,
2020). Regarding feminicides; in 2022, 7 feminicides were reported in Cusco and 4 in Arequipa
(MIMP, 2022).
Table N° 6
Percentage of family, physical and/or sexual violence, trafficking and feminicide
Violence against women ever Physical and/or sexual vio- Women vic- Number
perpetrated by a husband or lence by spouse or partner tims of traf- of femini-
partner (a) in the last 12 months (a) ficking(b) cide (c)
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
6 Quechua, Aymara, native of the Amazon, belonging to or part of another indigenous or aboriginal people.
56

--- Table 1 on Page 170 ---
Department | Sub national governors |  | Provincial mayors |  | Municipal mayors | 
 | Women | Men | Women | Men | Women | Men
National | 2 (8%) | 23 (92%) | 8 (4,8 %) | 188 (95, 2%) | 90 (4,9%) | 1772 (95,1%)
Apurímac | 0 | 1 | 0 | 7 (100%) | 2 (2,4%) | 82 (97,6%)
Arequipa | 0 | 1 | 0 | 8 (100%) | 9 (8,3%) | 100 (91,7%)
Cusco | 0 | 1 | 2 (15,4%) | 11 (84,6%) | 2 (1,8%) | 110 (98,2%)
Puno | 0 | 1 | 0 | 13 (100%) | 4 (8,3%) | 105 (91,7%)

--- Table 2 on Page 170 ---
Table N° 6
Percentage of family, physical and/or sexual violence, trafficking and feminicide

--- Table 3 on Page 170 ---
 |  | Violence against women ever |  |  | Physical and/or sexual vio- |  |  | Women vic- |  |  | Number | 
 |  | perpetrated by a husband or |  |  | lence by spouse or partner |  |  | tims of traf- |  |  | of femini- | 
 |  | partner (a) |  |  | in the last 12 months (a) |  |  | ficking(b) |  |  | cide (c) | 

--- Table 4 on Page 170 ---



=== PAGE 171 ===
Psy-
Depart-
Total cho- Physical Total Sexual Total Total
ment
logical
National 54.9% 50.8% 26.7% 33.6% 5.9% 342 67
Apurímac 64.1% 60.7% 37.8% 43.3% 11.8% 4 1
Arequipa 60.7% 54.0% 36.3% 36.0% 9.5% 13 4
Cusco 62.2% 58.6% 38.7% 42.0% 11.4% 19 7
Puno 62.2% 57.8% 36.3% 38.5% 12.2% 1 4
Source: MIMP; Policy Monitoring and Evaluation Office.
(a) INEI/ENDES, 2021
(b) National Prosecution, 2020
(c) MIMP/ National Programme for the Prevention and Eradication of Violence against Women and Family Group Members;
2022
Conclusion 1 for the project
The formal right to equality faces multiple barriers that are expressed in the persistence of
gender gaps at all levels and in all social spheres, constituting one of the main obstacles to
sustainable development that leaves no one behind. In Peru, there is still no adequate guar-
antee for the full realisation of the right to equality and the context of the health emergency
due to the presence of COVID-19 placed women in a situation of vulnerability. In spite of this,
there is a fairly advanced regulatory framework that obliges all sectors of the State and all
levels of government to mainstream a gender perspective in public policies. In this line, work-
ing with political partners and agriculture and water stakeholders and users provides an op-
portunity to contribute to closing the gaps through gender mainstreaming, making visible the
need to carry out actions that, in the long term, collaborate in achieving a social and institu-
tional transformation towards greater equality in highly masculinised sectors and in a post-
pandemic context.
Chapter 3: Gender dimensions in the sector
3.1 Meta level
On July 28, 2022, the UN General Assembly adopted resolution A/RES/76/300, that recog-
nises access to a clean and healthy environment as a human right, as well as the need for full
implementation of environmental agreements. It also recognises that climate change, overuse
of natural resources, air, land and water pollution, loss of biodiversity, among other factors,
prevent the full enjoyment of this right. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) in addition to impacting women and girls in different ways, climate change can
aggravate gender inequalities and increase women's vulnerability.
One of the most important international instruments in the field of women's human rights is the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW, 1979).
This instrument provides an understanding of the gender equality dimension in order to take
measures against discrimination against women and to guarantee their access to the same
rights and opportunities as men. In 2018, the CEDAW Committee highlighted the importance
of reinforcing the collection and analysis of disaggregated data, ensuring policy coherence,
improving coordination between sectors, promoting the role of subnational governments, and
capacity building and access to technology. Similarly, with regard to rural women's rights, it
recommended reinforcing rural economies, promoting local employment and livelihood oppor-
tunities for women.
The Declaration and Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing,
1995, is another key international instrument. It was one of the first platforms to state the im-
portance of gender mainstreaming in all areas, including the environment. This platform in-
cludes 12 prioritised axes, one of which is "Women and the environment", highlighting the need
for women's participation in decision making spaces, the incorporation of their interests and
57

--- Table 1 on Page 171 ---
Depart-
ment |  |  | Total |  |  |  | Psy- |  | Physical |  |  | Total |  |  | Sexual |  |  | Total |  |  | Total |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | cho- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | logical |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | National |  |  | 54.9% |  |  | 50.8% |  |  | 26.7% |  |  | 33.6% |  |  | 5.9% |  |  | 342 |  |  | 67 | 
 | Apurímac |  |  | 64.1% |  |  | 60.7% |  |  | 37.8% |  |  | 43.3% |  |  | 11.8% |  |  | 4 |  |  | 1 | 
 | Arequipa |  |  | 60.7% |  |  | 54.0% |  |  | 36.3% |  |  | 36.0% |  |  | 9.5% |  |  | 13 |  |  | 4 | 
 | Cusco |  |  | 62.2% |  |  | 58.6% |  |  | 38.7% |  |  | 42.0% |  |  | 11.4% |  |  | 19 |  |  | 7 | 
 | Puno |  |  | 62.2% |  |  | 57.8% |  |  | 36.3% |  |  | 38.5% |  |  | 12.2% |  |  | 1 |  |  | 4 | 

--- Table 2 on Page 171 ---
Depart-
ment

=== PAGE 172 ===
concerns in programmes and policies, and the need to establish mechanisms to measure the
impact of environment and development policies on women's lives. In this framework, the Com-
mission on the Status of Women (CSW), under the UN Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC), focused exclusively to gender equality and the empowerment of women and to
the follow-up of the Beijing Platform for Action, stated that gender equality and the empower-
ment of women and girls is a key aspect of climate change and risk disaster reduction
(CSW66). It also highlights and reaffirms the leadership of women and girls as key agents of
change in safeguarding the environment and addressing the adverse effects of climate
change. (E/CN.6 /2022/L.7. United Nations. Economic and Social Council. Commission on the
Status of Women Sixty-sixth session).
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) seeks to stabilise
greenhouse gas concentrations at levels that prevent human intervention that puts the envi-
ronment at risk. In 2014, the UNFCCC Conference of the Parties (COP) in Lima adopted the
Lima Work Programme on Gender to promote gender balance and gender-responsive8 climate
policy. In 2017, the Bonn Gender Action Plan (GAP) was agreed to advance gender main-
streaming in all climate action. In this framework, the Paris Agreement, a commitment by UN-
FCCC member states to limit global warming to less than 2 degrees Celsius, includes three
lines of action linked to: emissions reduction, adaptation to climate impacts and financing of
actions, including mentions linked to gender equality and women's empowerment, as
measures that must be respected, promoted and taken into account in responses to climate
change.
The 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) include SDGs linked to
gender equality, in addition to SDG 5, which aims to achieve gender equality and the empow-
erment of women and girls, as well as other SDGs that include gender-specific targets. For
example, SDGs 6, 10, 13 and 15 are closely linked. Target 6.2 addresses equitable access
and the need to pay special attention to women, girls and people in vulnerable situations; SDG
10 is about reducing inequalities and including all people in social, political and economic life;
SDG 13 is about taking urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts; and SDG 15
is linked to the conservation and sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems and includes the
promotion of fair and equitable participation. In sum, the agenda highlights that gender equality
is necessary to achieve the SDGs.
3.2 Macro level
At the national level, Peru was one of the first countries to have a Gender and Climate Change
Action Plan (PAGCC, for its acronym in Spanish), aimed at state action to reduce gender gaps
in the fight against climate change. This Plan focuses on eight priority areas: forests, water
resources, energy, food security, health, education, risk management. The PAGCC empha-
sises the greater disadvantage of women in rural areas and indigenous populations. Its objec-
tives are mainly focused on technical capacity building, generation and management of dis-
aggregated information (and recognition of ancestral and local knowledge and practices), de-
velopment of policies and instruments, and the development of mitigation and adaptation
measures with a gender perspective, which are also included in the Regulations of the Frame-
work Law on Climate Change.
Peru's National Policy on Gender Equality (PNIG) is in line with the main international decla-
rations and agreements on the protection of women's rights and gender equality9, identifies
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
8 Please note that the GIZ working definition for gender responsive follows the OECD Gender Equality Continuum (2022): A
gender-responsive approach not only considers gender differences, inequalities, ratios and aspects, e.g., by targeting and in-
cluding a certain number of women in project activities but goes a step further in responding to gender specific needs and/or
requirements, or by collecting gender-disaggregated data for monitoring purposes. Gender responsiveness aims to ensure that
all people can engage in and/or benefit from certain measures regardless of their gender (e.g., trainings or strategies are de-
veloped that consider gendered needs, preferences, and constraints).
9 Like CEDAW, Beijin Declaration 1995, Belén Do Pará, among others.
58

=== PAGE 173 ===
structural discrimination against women as a public problem. This policy points out that dis-
crimination against women is caused by socio-cultural patterns that privilege the masculine
over the feminine, assigning them unequal social roles to the detriment of women, reinforcing
inferior and subordinate treatment that restricts their rights, opportunities and economic, social,
political and cultural benefits (MIMP, 2019).
In 2019, the National Policy on Gender Equality (PNIG, 2019) was approved, whose objective
is to "address, from various angles, the causes and consequences of the persistence of struc-
tural discrimination against women", in accordance with the CEDAW and the Beijing Platform
for Action. The priority objective 4 of the PNIG states "to guarantee the exercise of women's
economic and social rights" and considers the guidelines 4.2: Increase women's access to and
control of natural, productive and patrimonial resources, whose related services are: 4.2.3:
Grant rights linked to water and its associated goods in rural areas, for domestic and productive
use and 4.2.4: Management of the conservation, recovery and sustainable use of ecosystems
and natural resources, with the participation of women, in a context of climate change; where
it is expected to work on the formalisation of agrarian property, women's rights linked to water
and associated goods, management of the conservation, recovery and sustainable use of eco-
systems and natural resources, training, technical assistance and financing for women's en-
terprises. Priority objective 5 is also linked to the development of capacities for public manage-
ment with a gender perspective and the elimination of institutional and socio-cultural barriers
that hinder equality (services 5.1.1, 5.3.1, 5.4.2) and objective 6, associated with information
management, such as the generation of disaggregated statistical information and follow-up
information on public investment and expenditure with a gender.
Regarding spaces and mechanisms for the advancement of women and gender equality as-
sociated with adaptation to the impacts of climate change, the government of Peru has the
Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations (MIMP) and the Ministry of Environment (MI-
NAM). Both ministries are governing bodies for national gender equality and environmental
policies, respectively. They are responsible for designing guidelines, policies, norms, pro-
grammes and budgets related to women, environment and climate change respectively.
At the subnational level, through the Supreme Decree 005-2017-MIMP, the government of
Peru established a mechanism for Gender Equality in each of the entities of the national and
subnational governments. The main purpose of this decision is to advance towards the main-
streaming of the gender approach within state institutions and the reduction of gender inequal-
ities at the institutional level, but also at the level of goods and services of state bodies at the
national, subnational and local levels of government, including the agencies involved in the
implementation of the Resilient Puna Project.
There is also a National Committee on Women and Climate Change - CONAMUCC. This or-
ganisation was set up by MINAM and made up of representatives of more than 50 organisa-
tions to strengthen women's participation in climate action. The CONAMUCC was created in
response to the need to support the presence and participation of women and indigenous
peoples in environmental decision-making. This space was created in the framework of the
development of the Regulations of the Framework Law on Climate Change, which included a
prior consultation with indigenous organisations in Peru (including women's organisations),
highlighting the need to work with a gender focus and cultural and linguistic relevance between
sectors and levels of government, taking the PAGCC and the PNIG as a reference and con-
sidering it as a space to make indigenous women visible, the valuation of their knowledge and
the promotion of education for women and girls. The Multisectoral Strategic Plan (PEMIG)
operationalises the implementation of the PNIG in the 52 services prioritised for the 21 public
institutions responsible. As the MIMP is the lead agency for gender issues, the sectors must
report to it on their progress in implementing the PEMIG. It is important to note, as an oppor-
tunity, the current process of formulating the National Climate Change Strategy 2050, which
proposes the inclusion of cross-cutting approaches (gender, interculturality, intergenerational)
59

=== PAGE 174 ===
and includes a participatory process that includes indigenous and women's organisations,
among other key actors at the national level.
3.3 Meso level
Women in the Andes, due to their socially constructed roles and responsibilities, and the still
existing conceptions of male superiority struggle with a position of inferiority regarding access
and control over natural resources such as land, water, production and commercialisation of
agricultural products. Moreover, their responsibilities in the reproductive sphere, like domestic
labour and family care limit their availability of time and opportunities for education, training,
paid employment and participation in decision-making spaces. This translates into under-rep-
resentation in different type of organisations. Despite this, women actively participate in the
management of key natural resources such as water and land. While men concentrate their
participation and decision making in agriculture and husbandry, women are responsible for
water supply for subsistence farming, food preparation, cleaning and hygiene of family mem-
bers, including the ill and disable (Carrillo & Remy, 2022).
The livelihoods of rural communities in the Andes are scarce and quite vulnerable to climatic
factors: sale of alpaca fibre and vicuña wool, sale of alpaca meat, sale of textile handicraft
products, sale of natural salt and iodine. The quantities available for the sale of these products
are highly variable because they depend on the quality of their productive resources (quality
of pastures for livestock feed, access to water sources) and environmental factors (timely and
sufficient rainfall), so that their monetary income is also highly variable. The harsh climate
(strong winds, low temperatures) as well as the scarcity of water sources do not allow them to
grow agricultural crops or high nutritional quality pastures for livestock. Due to this precarious
livelihood situation, young and middle-aged women and men travel frequently to nearby urban
centres to earn supplementary income. In the absence of husbands and young people, house-
hold chores and child rearing fall more heavily on women in rural households, who may also
wish to migrate permanently to the cities if their husbands can find income opportunities to
make and sustain this decision.
Family economy in rural households: During fieldwork, on the question of who contributes
the most money to household expenses, women's answers reveal a new situation: 40% of
women contribute the most money to the household; then 30% of women state that the contri-
bution is equal from both sides: husband and wife; while men's answers are different: 46%
think that husband and wife contribute in a similar way, but 42% state that it is men who con-
tribute the most. Women interviewed mentioned six main products as income sources, the
most important being textile handicrafts (33%), alpaca on foot (20%) and guinea pigs (13%).
Raising and selling guinea pigs is the most important economic activity for women, as it allows
them to obtain a greater income for their households. On the other hand, men control the
income obtained from the sale of livestock and by-products (alpaca on the hoof, 38%; alpaca
fibre, 19%). They show little or no participation in the commercialisation of textile products
(2%).
Domestic labour: Interviews conducted in the field with rural women from Cusco and Puno
(November 2022) indicate that 58% of rural women dedicate 4 hours of domestic work per day,
and 20% more than 4 hours. In contrast, the hours reported by men are significantly lower:
only 21% of rural men spend 4 hours on domestic chores, and only 9% spend more than 4
hours. In this respect, 18% of women mentioned the acquisition of improved cookers or lique-
fied gas cookers, as options to alleviate the time spent cooking. In the case of rural women, if
we add 4 hours of domestic work to 9 hours of productive work, the total workload is at least
13 hours a day, and the time can be longer, because many of them declare that each day they
start their work at 4 am and finish at 8 pm, which means a total of 16 hours. It is known that in
many cases women do not recognise as “work” activities such as tending livestock, fetching
water or firewood. On the other hand, 70% of rural men reported a domestic workload of less
than 4 hours, and 52% a productive workload of more than 9 hours. This makes a total of less
60

=== PAGE 175 ===
than 13 hours of work per day. This imbalance is greatest in households where men are absent
to work outside the community, and where women head the household (40%). In terms of
cooking devices, more than 80% of the respondents stated that they do not own improved
cookstoves. Most rural women have traditional cookers and use firewood and dung as fuel.
Even in the case of rural households that have electricity, it is used only for internal lighting,
and is avoided for electric cookers or cookers, because of the costs it could generate. Firewood
and dung are used to heat houses to mitigate low temperatures in the highlands.
Participation and leadership: The interviews conducted in the field indicate that rural women
do not have equal access to communal government positions compared to men. In the inter-
views, 55% of women report having held community government positions, 20% lower than
that reported by men (75%). This gap is caused by several barriers faced by rural women,
such as lower levels of formal education, speaking a language other than Spanish, low em-
powerment and leadership, and the burden of domestic and productive work, among others.
To date, there is still a wide gap in the presence of women as decision-makers. As noted
above, women's political participation in decision-making in the departments prioritised by the
project represents 25% compared to 75% for men. This same gap is reflected in the decision-
making spaces in the territories and in the community, participation spaces in the four priori-
tised departments.
Access to water: According to interviewed women during fieldwork, the availability of safe
water is less than or equal to 50%. The other half of households obtain water from various
sources, some unreliable in the sanitary sense. According to the 2017 National Demographic
Census, 48% of rural households receive water supply from a public network inside the dwell-
ing, 13% obtain water from a well, 9% from a public network outside the dwelling, and 8% from
a river, ditch or spring (INEI, 2018). In the rural Andes, the main carriers of water for human
and animal consumption are women (Carrillo & Remy, 2022). According to the field results,
the task of carrying water from a spring to the household is not a burden assigned only to
women in rural households. It is likely that families can easily access to springs that arise from
the proximity of glaciers. Regarding, access to water for farming, 51% of interviewed persons
during fieldwork indicated that they have the chance to irrigate their plots when there is no
rainfall, using water from streams and brooks. However, there were almost no mention to avail-
able reservoirs to capture rainwater. Irrigation tasks in plots and pastures in highland areas
are considered masculine tasks.
Health: In addition to the scarcity and distance of the health posts, a significant proportion of
rural women and men distrust the medical personnel who provide healthcare. Only 43% of
women have declared that they have confidence in the services of the health posts, but it is
worth mentioning that this degree of acceptance is higher in the districts of Puno: Nuñoa (57%)
and Santa Rosa (63%). Rural men show a higher degree of trust in health posts (50%), and
even more so in the districts of Puno. The reasons for rural women's distrust are mistreatment
and communication difficulties due to the use of a language other than Spanish. The main
reason cited by men was language differences. Regarding domestic violence, 93% of inter-
viewed women stated that this is a reality that they face frequently. 85% of men had the same
opinion. In terms of where to report violence episodes and request protection, 44% mentioned
that they appeal to peasant round (ronda campesina), mostly made up of men.
Education: Education among farmer population of the SHAP area shows very low rates (See
Table N° 7). Cusco and Puno are the departments with the highest level of population that did
not pass the primary level of education, with 50% or more of their population, about one third
(31%) of the population over 25 years old had only primary education, while 17% had no or
only initial education. The level of access to higher education in the Apurímac area stands out
as 21%, while in the rest of the departments this level is around 8%. The gender gap across
the four prioritised departments for primary and secondary education is between 9 and 17
points with a more dramatic situation in Puno.
61

=== PAGE 176 ===
Table N°7
Gender gaps in education among farmer population in prioritised departments
Education level achieved (%) Gender gap (W-M) (%)
Department At most primary Secondary Superior 1/ At most Second- Superior
Women Men Women Men Women Men primary ary 1/
National 74.0 63.8 19.5 28.7 6.5 7.5 10.2 -9.2 -1.0
Apurímac 77.6 61.8 17.1 30.4 5.3 7.7 15.8 -13.3 -2.4
Arequipa 51.7 39.3 14.5 29.2 17.2 20.1 12.4 -14.7 -2.9
Cusco 74.6 62.9 19.8 30.6 5.6 6.5 11.7 -10.8 -0.9
Puno 72.3 54.9 23.7 36.9 4.0 8.2 17.4 -13.2 -4.2
1/ Includes non-university and university higher education.
Source : INEI/ IV Agrarian Census 2012.
For women and men aged 25 and over with secondary education, Puno and Apurimac are the
two departments with higher gender gap, followed by Cusco (See Table N°8). Gender gaps in
secondary education rates between 10 and 21 points. These three departments overcome the
national average, except for Arequipa which is slightly below. For the RP project, acknowledg-
ing the gender gap in secondary and primary education is essential to strengthen capacity
building for women in EbA.
In terms of the labour force, the gap between women and men aged 15 and over is also con-
siderable, with Arequipa having the largest gap (-22.9%), above the national average (21.8%).
The participation of women and men in Arequipa is also far below the other departments and
the national level. Apurímac comes second (-14.6%), while Cusco and Puno have a much
smaller gap, around 10%.
Table N° 8
Gender inequality in terms of education and employment of the population at re-
gional and national level - 2020
(%) Population 25+ with at least second- (%) Labour force participation
ary edu cation rate for population 15+
Department
Gap Gap
Women Men Women Men
W- M W - M
National 65.9 76.4 -10.4 55.4 76.2 -21.8
Apurímac 47.9 69.0 -21.2 73.2 86.8 -14.6
Arequipa 74.5 84.5 -10.1 49.2 71.1 -22.9
Cusco 54.1 69.9 -16.8 70.6 79.5 -9.9
Puno 51.4 75.1 -24.6 73.3 81.8 -9.5
Source: INEI – Gender Indicators, 2020
Participation of women and men in farming: Between the 1994 and 2012 agrarian cen-
suses, women's participation in farming increased significantly in the four prioritised depart-
ments. Therefore, gender gap in this section reduced by about half, especially in Apurimac,
Cusco and Puno (See Table N°9). These rates are similar to the national level (from 59.5% in
1994 to 38.4% in 2012), with the exception of Puno where the reduction of the gender gap was
lower. Unfortunately, the increased participation of women in farming production is not neces-
sarily linked to the improvement of their living conditions. Indeed, rural women have felt an
increase workload in farming and reduced participation of men in this sector. The low expec-
tation of men to improve their net income from subsistence agriculture and the low productivity
led men to leave farming and migrate looking for better off jobs like mining, construction, and
transport. In these scenarios women are usually left to take care of the children and the elderly,
the house and the farm, with few prospects for a real increase in income, due to lack of time,
technology, infrastructure, access to water, to training, linkage to markets, and funding.
Table N° 9
Women and men working in farming
Agricultural producers Participation in agricultural production
Department (Thousands of people) (in %)
1994 2012 1994 2012
62

--- Table 1 on Page 176 ---
Department |  |  |  | Education level achieved (%) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Gender gap (W-M) (%) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | At most primary |  |  |  |  |  | Secondary |  |  |  |  | Superior 1/ |  |  |  |  |  | At most |  |  |  |  | Second- |  |  | Superior | 
 |  |  |  | Women |  |  | Men |  |  | Women |  |  | Men |  | Women |  |  | Men |  |  | primary |  |  |  |  | ary |  |  | 1/ | 
 | National |  |  | 74.0 |  |  | 63.8 |  |  | 19.5 |  |  | 28.7 |  | 6.5 |  |  | 7.5 |  |  | 10.2 |  |  |  |  | -9.2 |  |  | -1.0 | 
 | Apurímac |  |  | 77.6 |  |  | 61.8 |  |  | 17.1 |  |  | 30.4 |  | 5.3 |  |  | 7.7 |  |  | 15.8 |  |  |  |  | -13.3 |  |  | -2.4 | 
 | Arequipa |  |  | 51.7 |  |  | 39.3 |  |  | 14.5 |  |  | 29.2 |  | 17.2 |  |  | 20.1 |  |  | 12.4 |  |  |  |  | -14.7 |  |  | -2.9 | 
 | Cusco |  |  | 74.6 |  |  | 62.9 |  |  | 19.8 |  |  | 30.6 |  | 5.6 |  |  | 6.5 |  |  | 11.7 |  |  |  |  | -10.8 |  |  | -0.9 | 
 | Puno |  |  | 72.3 |  |  | 54.9 |  |  | 23.7 |  |  | 36.9 |  | 4.0 |  |  | 8.2 |  |  | 17.4 |  |  |  |  | -13.2 |  |  | -4.2 | 

--- Table 2 on Page 176 ---

For women and men aged 25 and over with secondary education, Puno and Apurimac are the
two departments with higher gender gap, followed by Cusco (See Table N°8). Gender gaps in
secondary education rates between 10 and 21 points. These three departments overcome the
national average, except for Arequipa which is slightly below. For the RP project, acknowledg-
ing the gender gap in secondary and primary education is essential to strengthen capacity
building for women in EbA.

In terms of the labour force, the gap between women and men aged 15 and over is also con-
siderable, with Arequipa having the largest gap (-22.9%), above the national average (21.8%).
The participation of women and men in Arequipa is also far below the other departments and
the national level. Apurímac comes second (-14.6%), while Cusco and Puno have a much
smaller gap, around 10%.

--- Table 3 on Page 176 ---
 | Table N° 8 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Gender inequality in terms of education and employment of the population at re- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | gional and national level - 2020 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Department |  |  | (%) Population 25+ with at least second-
ary edu cation |  |  |  |  | (%) Labour force participation
rate for population 15+ |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Women | Men |  | Gap |  | Women | Men |  | Gap | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | W- M |  |  |  |  | W - M | 
 | National |  | 65.9 | 76.4 | -10.4 |  |  | 55.4 | 76.2 | -21.8 |  | 
 | Apurímac |  | 47.9 | 69.0 | -21.2 |  |  | 73.2 | 86.8 | -14.6 |  | 
 | Arequipa |  | 74.5 | 84.5 | -10.1 |  |  | 49.2 | 71.1 | -22.9 |  | 
 | Cusco |  | 54.1 | 69.9 | -16.8 |  |  | 70.6 | 79.5 | -9.9 |  | 
 | Puno |  | 51.4 | 75.1 | -24.6 |  |  | 73.3 | 81.8 | -9.5 |  | 

--- Table 4 on Page 176 ---
(%) Population 25+ with at least second-
ary edu cation

--- Table 5 on Page 176 ---
(%) Labour force participation
rate for population 15+

--- Table 6 on Page 176 ---
Participation of women and men in farming: Between the 1994 and 2012 agrarian cen-
suses, women's participation in farming increased significantly in the four prioritised depart-
ments. Therefore, gender gap in this section reduced by about half, especially in Apurimac,
Cusco and Puno (See Table N°9). These rates are similar to the national level (from 59.5% in
1994 to 38.4% in 2012), with the exception of Puno where the reduction of the gender gap was
lower. Unfortunately, the increased participation of women in farming production is not neces-
sarily linked to the improvement of their living conditions. Indeed, rural women have felt an
increase workload in farming and reduced participation of men in this sector. The low expec-
tation of men to improve their net income from subsistence agriculture and the low productivity
led men to leave farming and migrate looking for better off jobs like mining, construction, and
transport. In these scenarios women are usually left to take care of the children and the elderly,
the house and the farm, with few prospects for a real increase in income, due to lack of time,
technology, infrastructure, access to water, to training, linkage to markets, and funding.


--- Table 7 on Page 176 ---
Department | Agricultural producers
(Thousands of people) |  |  | Participation in agricultural production
(in %) |  |  |  | 
 | 1994 |  | 2012 | 1994 |  |  | 2012 | 

=== PAGE 177 ===
Gap Gap
Women Men Women Men Women Men Women Men
W-M W-M
National 346.0 1 360.9 691.9 1 554.8 20.3 79.7 -59.5 30.8 69.2 -38.4
Apurímac 12.9 54.7 26.1 56.6 19.1 80.9 -61.8 31.5 68.5 -36.9
Arequipa 11.0 32.7 19.9 37.8 25.3 74.7 -49.5 34.5 65.5 -31.0
Cusco 26.4 116.6 55.3 125.4 18.5 81.5 -63.1 30.6 69.4 -38.8
Puno 45.8 136.2 85.0 128.4 25.2 74.8 -49.6 39.8 60.2 -20.3
Sources: INEI, Gender Indicators, 2022/ Agrarian Census 1994 and 2012.
Farming land managed by women and men: On average women manage between 30% to
34% less farming land than men in the four prioritised departments (See Table N°10). Available
non-farming land per capita (mainly grassland) in Arequipa and Puno is higher than in Cusco
and Apurimac and the national average. These gender gaps are considerable, similar to the
national level, which limits the prospects of raising women's income due to lack of innovation
and diversification to increase land and labour productivity. In the area of influence of the RP
project it will be necessary, in addition to knowing the areas managed by women and men, to
verify the ownership of the land, its productive potential (arable and non-arable, with and with-
out access to irrigation) and who uses it, considering that within the high Andean peasant
communities it is very common to allocate communal land for grazing without possession titles,
let alone formal ownership titles.
Table N° 10
Farming area managed by women and men
Farming land Gender gap (W-M)
(Per capita in hectares) (Surface in hectares) (in %)
Depart- Non-farm-
Total Farming Non-
ment ing Farm- Non- Farm-
Total Total farm-
Wo Wo Wo ing farming ing
Men Men Men ing
men men men
National 4.6 7.0 1.8 3.0 2.8 4.0 - 2.4 - 1.2 - 1.2 -34% -40% -30%
Apurímac 2.3 3.4 1.9 2.7 0.4 0.7 - 1.2 - 0.8 - 0.3 -34% -31% -46%
Arequipa 1.7 2.7 - 3.8 - 1.0 - 2.8
17.8 21.6 16.0 18.8 -18% -36% -15%
Cusco 4.6 6.7 1.6 2.2 3.0 4.5 - 2.1 - 0.6 - 1.5
-31% -27% -33%
Puno 9.2 1.3 1.7 7.9 - 4.1 - 0.4 - 3.7
13.3 11.6 -31% -26% -32%
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/Agrarian CENSUS 2012
Cultivated area managed by women and men by type of irrigation: In all four prioritised
departments, women manage between 25% and 35% of the irrigated arable area, while men,
in between 65% and 76% of the irrigated arable area. In rainfed land (rainfall only) the gap is
wider, with only 15% to 31% of women managing arable area, while men manage between
69% and 85% (See Table N°11). In terms of irrigated area, the gap between women and men
in Arequipa is similar to the national level, far exceeding Cusco, Puno and Apurímac. In the
rainfed gap, Apurímac and Cusco are well above Arequipa. Puno has the smallest gap. The
availability of irrigation water all year round is a key factor to increase the productivity of family
farming, particularly for families in the Andean region, that raise livestock, such as camelids
and small farming animals (guinea pigs, poultry). Livestock raising is an activity mostly carried
out by women and requires fodder in the dry season (from June to October or November) to
maintain the size of the herds, their productivity and income. In order to establish the baseline
for the RP project in selected communities and districts, in addition to quantifying the irrigated
and rainfed arable land available to women and men, it will be necessary to collect disaggre-
gated by sex information about grasslands with irrigation potential through sowing and water
harvesting.
Table N°11
Cultivated farming area managed by women and men by type of irrigation
63

--- Table 1 on Page 177 ---
 |  | Women |  | Men |  |  |  | Men |  |  | Women |  | Men |  | Gap |  | Women |  |  |  | Gap | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Women |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Men |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | W-M |  |  |  |  |  | W-M | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | National |  | 346.0 |  | 1 360.9 |  | 691.9 |  | 1 554.8 |  | 20.3 |  | 79.7 |  | -59.5 |  | 30.8 |  | 69.2 |  | -38.4 | 
 | Apurímac |  | 12.9 |  | 54.7 |  | 26.1 |  | 56.6 |  | 19.1 |  | 80.9 |  | -61.8 |  | 31.5 |  | 68.5 |  | -36.9 | 
 | Arequipa |  | 11.0 |  | 32.7 |  | 19.9 |  | 37.8 |  | 25.3 |  | 74.7 |  | -49.5 |  | 34.5 |  | 65.5 |  | -31.0 | 
 | Cusco |  | 26.4 |  | 116.6 |  | 55.3 |  | 125.4 |  | 18.5 |  | 81.5 |  | -63.1 |  | 30.6 |  | 69.4 |  | -38.8 | 
 | Puno |  | 45.8 |  | 136.2 |  | 85.0 |  | 128.4 |  | 25.2 |  | 74.8 |  | -49.6 |  | 39.8 |  | 60.2 |  | -20.3 | 
Sources: INEI, Gender Indicators, 2022/ Agrarian Census 1994 and 2012. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 177 ---
Depart-
ment |  |  |  | Farming land |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Gender gap (W-M) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | (Per capita in hectares) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (Surface in hectares) |  |  |  |  |  |  | (in %) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Total |  |  |  |  |  | Farming |  |  |  |  |  |  | Non-farm- |  |  |  |  | Total |  |  | Farm-
ing |  | Non-
farming |  | Total |  | Farm-
ing | Non-
farm-
ing | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Wo |  | Men |  |  |  | Wo |  | Men |  |  |  | Wo |  | Men |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | men |  |  |  |  |  | men |  |  |  |  |  | men |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | National |  |  | 4.6 |  |  | 7.0 |  |  | 1.8 |  |  | 3.0 |  |  | 2.8 |  |  | 4.0 |  |  | - 2.4 |  | - 1.2 |  | - 1.2 |  | -34% |  | -40% | -30% | 
 | Apurímac |  |  | 2.3 |  |  | 3.4 |  |  | 1.9 |  |  | 2.7 |  |  | 0.4 |  |  | 0.7 |  |  | - 1.2 |  | - 0.8 |  | - 0.3 |  | -34% |  | -31% | -46% | 
Arequipa |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.7 |  |  | 2.7 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | - 3.8 |  |  | - 1.0 |  | - 2.8 |  | -18% |  | -36% | -15% | 
 |  |  |  | 17.8 |  |  | 21.6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 16.0 |  |  | 18.8 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Cusco |  |  | 4.6 |  |  | 6.7 |  |  | 1.6 |  |  | 2.2 |  |  | 3.0 |  |  | 4.5 |  |  | - 2.1 |  |  | - 0.6 |  | - 1.5 |  | -31% |  | -27% | -33% | 
Puno |  |  | 9.2 |  |  |  |  |  | 1.3 |  |  | 1.7 |  |  | 7.9 |  |  |  |  |  | - 4.1 |  |  | - 0.4 |  | - 3.7 |  | -31% |  | -26% | -32% | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 13.3 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 11.6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 177 ---
Depart-
ment

--- Table 4 on Page 177 ---
Non-
farm-
ing

--- Table 5 on Page 177 ---
Cultivated area managed by women and men by type of irrigation: In all four prioritised | 
departments, women manage between 25% and 35% of the irrigated arable area, while men, | 
in between 65% and 76% of the irrigated arable area. In rainfed land (rainfall only) the gap is | 
wider, with only 15% to 31% of women managing arable area, while men manage between | 
69% and 85% (See Table N°11). In terms of irrigated area, the gap between women and men | 
in Arequipa is similar to the national level, far exceeding Cusco, Puno and Apurímac. In the | 
rainfed gap, Apurímac and Cusco are well above Arequipa. Puno has the smallest gap. The | 
availability of irrigation water all year round is a key factor to increase the productivity of family | 
farming, particularly for families in the Andean region, that raise livestock, such as camelids | 
and small farming animals (guinea pigs, poultry). Livestock raising is an activity mostly carried | 
out by women and requires fodder in the dry season (from June to October or November) to | 
maintain the size of the herds, their productivity and income. In order to establish the baseline | 
for the RP project in selected communities and districts, in addition to quantifying the irrigated | 
and rainfed arable land available to women and men, it will be necessary to collect disaggre- | 
gated by sex information about grasslands with irrigation potential through sowing and water | 
harvesting. | 
 | 
 | Table N°11
 | Cultivated farming area managed by women and men by type of irrigation

=== PAGE 178 ===
Cultivated area by type of irrigation Percentage of cultivated area driven by women and
(Thousands of hectares) men by irrigation type
Under irrigation Rainfed Under irrigation Rainfed
Department
Gap Gap
Women Men Women Men Women Men Women Men
W- M W- M
National 369.7 1 148.9 412.5 1 859.3 24% 76% -51% 18% 82% -64%
Apurímac 27.3 50.9 10.0 55.3 35% 65% -30% 15% 85% -69%
Arequipa 23.9 71.5 0.1 0.3 25% 75% -50% 31% 69% -38%
Cusco 28.0 57.8 32.9 115.2 33% 67% -35% 22% 78% -56%
Puno 3.7 7.3 48.2 105.0 34% 66% -33% 31% 69% -37%
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/Agrarian Census 2012
Plots managed by women and men: In all four departments, women manage a lower number
of plots (2.65 hectares in average) than men (3.12 hectares) (See Table N°12). In Andean
family farming, the number of plots is related not only to the total cultivable area per person
and the volume of production, but also to risk management: the greater the number of plots
located on different ecological levels, the lower the agro-climatic risk (whether from frost, hail-
storms, drought and pests or diseases) that the farmer has to face, and the higher the produc-
tion expectation.
Table N°12
Average number of plots driven by women and men
Average number of plots Gap (W –
Department
Women Men M)
National 2.2 2.4 - 0.2
Apurímac 2.5 3.2 - 0.7
Arequipa 2.2 2.5 - 0.3
Cusco 2.4 2.8 - 0.4
Puno 3.5 4.0 - 0.5
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/ Agrarian Census 2012
Farming land tenure for women and men: Although women manage fewer plots than men
in all departments, women are more frequent owners than men in Apurímac, Cusco, Arequipa
and at the national level, with the exception of Puno. Conversely, there are more male com-
munal landowners than female communal landowners in these same regions, with the excep-
tion of Puno (Table N°13). Leasing is less common, except in Arequipa, and particularly by
men, with a significant gender gap.
Table N° 13
Farming land tenure for women and men
Tenure status of the plot of land
Owner Community owner Tenant Possessor
Department
Gap Gap Gap
Gap Wome Wome
Women Men Men W- M Men W- M Women Men W- M
W- M n n
National 76.5 71.1 5.4 11.6 15.8 -4.1 5.0 5.5 -0.5 3.5 4.5 -1.0
Apurímac 73.2 65.9 7.4 17.1 23.9 -6.8 4.6 4.2 0.3 4.0 4.9 -0.8
Arequipa 80.7 76.5 4.1 1.2 1.3 -0.1 9.2 13.3 -4.1 2.9 3.1 -0.2
Cusco 36.3 30.7 5.5 55.4 61.4 -6.1 3.0 2.5 0.5 3.6 4.0 -0.4
Puno 90.7 91.5 -0.8 5.1 4.8 0.3 2.0 1.4 0.6 0.9 1.3 -0.4
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/Agrarian Census 2012
Farming area cultivated by women and men according to the destination of production:
The largest area cultivated for commercialisation is in Cusco and Arequipa followed by Apurí-
mac, with a gap in favour of women in Apurímac and Arequipa. In Puno, self-consumption and
64

--- Table 1 on Page 178 ---
Department |  |  | Cultivated area by type of irrigation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Percentage of cultivated area driven by women and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | (Thousands of hectares) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | men by irrigation type |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Under irrigation |  |  |  |  |  | Rainfed |  |  | Under irrigation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Rainfed |  |  |  | 
 | Department |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Women |  |  | Men |  |  | Women |  | Men | Women |  |  | Men |  |  |  | Gap |  | Women |  |  | Men |  | Gap
W- M
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | W- M |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | National |  | 369.7 |  |  | 1 148.9 |  |  | 412.5 | 1 859.3 |  | 24% |  |  | 76% |  | - | 51% |  |  | 18% |  |  | 82% | -64%
 | Apurímac |  | 27.3 |  |  | 50.9 |  |  | 10.0 | 55.3 |  | 35% |  |  | 65% |  | - | 30% |  |  | 15% |  |  | 85% | -69%
 | Arequipa |  | 23.9 |  |  | 71.5 |  |  | 0.1 | 0.3 |  | 25% |  |  | 75% |  | - | 50% |  |  | 31% |  |  | 69% | -38%
 | Cusco |  | 28.0 |  |  | 57.8 |  |  | 32.9 | 115.2 |  | 33% |  |  | 67% |  | - | 35% |  |  | 22% |  |  | 78% | -56%
 | Puno |  | 3.7 |  |  | 7.3 |  |  | 48.2 | 105.0 |  | 34% |  |  | 66% |  | - | 33% |  |  | 31% |  |  | 69% | -37%
 | Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/Agrarian Census 2012 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Plots managed by women and men: In all four departments, women manage a lower number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of plots (2.65 hectares in average) than men (3.12 hectares) (See Table N°12). In Andean |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | family farming, the number of plots is related not only to the total cultivable area per person |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and the volume of production, but also to risk management: the greater the number of plots |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | located on different ecological levels, the lower the agro-climatic risk (whether from frost, hail- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | storms, drought and pests or diseases) that the farmer has to face, and the higher the produc- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | tion expectation. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 178 ---
Table N°12
Average number of plots driven by women and men

--- Table 3 on Page 178 ---
Department | Average number of plots |  | Gap (W –
 | Women | Men | M)
National | 2.2 | 2.4 | - 0.2
Apurímac | 2.5 | 3.2 | - 0.7
Arequipa | 2.2 | 2.5 | - 0.3
Cusco | 2.4 | 2.8 | - 0.4
Puno | 3.5 | 4.0 | - 0.5

--- Table 4 on Page 178 ---
 | Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/ Agrarian Census 2012
 | 

--- Table 5 on Page 178 ---
Table N° 13 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Farming land tenure for women and men |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Department |  | Tenure status of the plot of land |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Owner |  |  |  |  |  |  | Community owner |  |  |  |  | Tenant |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Possessor |  | 
 |  |  | Men |  |  | Gap
W- M |  | Wome
n |  | Men |  | Gap | Wome
n |  |  | Men |  |  | Gap |  | Women |  | Men | Gap
W- M
 |  | Women |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | W- M |  |  |  |  |  |  | W- M |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
National |  | 76.5 |  | 71.1 |  | 5.4 |  |  | 11.6 | 15.8 |  | -4.1 |  | 5.0 |  |  | 5.5 |  | -0.5 |  |  | 3.5 | 4.5 | -1.0
Apurímac |  | 73.2 |  | 65.9 |  | 7.4 |  |  | 17.1 | 23.9 |  | -6.8 |  | 4.6 |  |  | 4.2 |  | 0.3 |  |  | 4.0 | 4.9 | -0.8
Arequipa |  | 80.7 |  | 76.5 |  | 4.1 |  |  | 1.2 | 1.3 |  | -0.1 |  | 9.2 |  |  | 13.3 |  | -4.1 |  |  | 2.9 | 3.1 | -0.2
Cusco |  | 36.3 |  | 30.7 |  | 5.5 |  |  | 55.4 | 61.4 |  | -6.1 |  | 3.0 |  |  | 2.5 |  | 0.5 |  |  | 3.6 | 4.0 | -0.4
Puno |  | 90.7 |  | 91.5 |  | -0.8 |  |  | 5.1 | 4.8 |  | 0.3 |  | 2.0 |  |  | 1.4 |  | 0.6 |  |  | 0.9 | 1.3 | -0.4
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/Agrarian Census 2012 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 6 on Page 178 ---
Gap
W- M

--- Table 7 on Page 178 ---
Wome
n

--- Table 8 on Page 178 ---
Wome
n

=== PAGE 179 ===
animal feed production predominate, accounting for more than 80% of the cultivated area. For
self-consumption, women cultivate more area than men in all four regions, particularly in Apu-
rímac and Puno, but below the national average. Both results show the connection women
producers have with markets and also their greater concern than men for feeding their families.
Table N°14
Farming area cultivated by women and men by destination of production
Destination of production (%)
Sale Self-consumption Feed for their animals Self-supply
Depart-
ment Gap
Wom Wom Gap Wom Gap Wom Gap
Men W- M Men Men Men
en en W- M en W- M en W- M
National 58.1 61.2 -3.0 22.1 16.4 5.7 18.9 21.6 -2.7 0.9 0.9 0.0
Apurímac 48.3 44.4 3.9 39.0 35.2 3.8 19.9 -7.4 0.2 0.5 -0.3
12.5
Arequipa 65.6 63.9 1.8 7.0 5.6 1.3 26.9 29.9 -3.0 0.5 0.6 -0.1
Cusco 65.0 65.1 -0.1 23.6 22.8 0.8 11.0 11.1 -0.1 0.5 1.1 -0.6
0.5
Puno 12.6 15.6 -3.0 45.0 42.6 2.5 40.1 40.1 0.1 2.2 1.8
Source: INEI, Gender Indicatos/ Agrarian Census 2012
Women and men who manage plots and received training, technical assistance or busi-
ness counselling: With circa 15% of women and 25% of men receiving training, technical
assistance (TA) or entrepreneurship assistance (EA), the gap between women and men varies
between -4.4% and -10.2%, exceeding the national average in three of the four departments
(See Table N° 15). The training, technical assistance and business advice received, when they
are conducted timely and appropriate to the circumstances of producers, are key to improve
producers´ access to markets and to non-financial and financial services, resulting in higher
productivity and income.
Table N° 15
Women and men who manage plots and received training, technical assistance or business
counselling
Total agricultural pro- Received training, TA Percentage receiving Gender
Department ducers (x 1000 pp) or EA 1/ (x 1000 pp) training, TA or EA 1/ gap
Women Men Women Men Women Men (W – M)
National 691.9 1 554.8 65.8 253.5 9.5 16.3 -6.8
Apurímac 26.1 56.6 2.3 9.1 8.7 16.1 -7.4
Arequipa 19.9 37.8 3.1 9.7 15.4 25.6 -10.2
Cusco 55.3 125.4 8.1 28.9 14.6 23.0 -8.4
Puno 85.0 128.4 8.3 18.2 9.8 14.2 -4.4
1/ Includes those receiving technical assistance (TA) and business advice (EA).
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators / Agrarian Census 2012
Access to credit for women and men working on farming: Of the total number of farming
producers, only between 5% and 20% of men took out a loan; and for women it is even lower,
between 4% and 12%, with a negative gap for women and a ratio of 1 to 8 among departments
in both cases (See Table n°16). Arequipa and Apurimac are above the national average,
Cusco and Puno below. For both women and men who took out a loan, the approval rate is
high, between 89% and 95%, and the gap between the two is small, around + 1%. Unfortu-
nately, after a loan is approved, there is no available public information on payment conditions
and arrears.
65

--- Table 1 on Page 179 ---
 | 
Table N°14 | 
 | Farming area cultivated by women and men by destination of production

--- Table 2 on Page 179 ---
Depart-
ment |  |  | Destination of production (%) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Sale |  |  |  |  | Self-consumption |  |  |  |  |  |  | Feed for their animals |  |  |  |  |  | Self-supply |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Wom
en |  | Men | Gap
W- M |  | Wom
en |  | Men |  | Gap
W- M |  |  | Wom
en |  |  | Gap
W- M |  |  | Wom
en |  | Men |  | Gap
W- M | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Men |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
National |  |  | 58.1 | 61.2 | -3.0 |  |  | 22.1 |  | 16.4 |  | 5.7 |  |  | 18.9 | 21.6 |  | -2.7 |  |  | 0.9 |  | 0.9 |  | 0.0
Apurímac |  | 48.3 |  | 44.4 | 3.9 |  | 39.0 |  | 35.2 |  | 3.8 |  |  |  | 12.5 |  | -7.4 |  |  | 0.2 |  | 0.5 |  | -0.3 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 19.9 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Arequipa |  |  | 65.6 | 63.9 | 1.8 |  |  | 7.0 |  | 5.6 |  | 1.3 |  |  | 26.9 | 29.9 |  | -3.0 |  |  | 0.5 |  | 0.6 |  | -0.1
Cusco |  |  | 65.0 | 65.1 | -0.1 |  |  | 23.6 |  | 22.8 |  | 0.8 |  |  | 11.0 | 11.1 |  | -0.1 |  |  | 0.5 |  | 1.1 |  | -0.6
Puno |  | 12.6 |  | 15.6 | -3.0 |  | 45.0 |  | 42.6 |  | 2.5 |  |  | 40.1 |  |  | 0.1 |  |  | 2.2 |  | 1.8 |  |  | 0.5
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 40.1 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 179 ---
Wom
en

--- Table 4 on Page 179 ---
Wom
en

--- Table 5 on Page 179 ---
Gap
W- M

--- Table 6 on Page 179 ---
Gap
W- M

--- Table 7 on Page 179 ---
Wom
en

--- Table 8 on Page 179 ---
Source: INEI, Gender Indicatos/ Agrarian Census 2012 | 
 | 
 | 
Women and men who manage plots and received training, technical assistance or busi- | 
ness counselling: With circa 15% of women and 25% of men receiving training, technical | 
assistance (TA) or entrepreneurship assistance (EA), the gap between women and men varies | 
between -4.4% and -10.2%, exceeding the national average in three of the four departments | 
(See Table N° 15). The training, technical assistance and business advice received, when they | 
are conducted timely and appropriate to the circumstances of producers, are key to improve | 
producers´ access to markets and to non-financial and financial services, resulting in higher | 
productivity and income. | 

--- Table 9 on Page 179 ---
 | Table N° 15
Women and men who manage plots and received training, technical assistance or business | 
counselling | 

--- Table 10 on Page 179 ---
Department |  | Total agricultural pro- |  |  |  |  |  | Received training, TA |  |  |  |  | Percentage receiving |  |  |  |  |  | Gender
 |  | ducers (x 1000 pp) |  |  |  |  |  | or EA 1/ (x 1000 pp) |  |  |  |  | training, TA or EA 1/ |  |  |  |  |  | gap
 |  | Women |  |  | Men |  |  | Women |  |  | Men |  | Women |  |  | Men |  |  | (W – M)
National |  | 691.9 |  |  | 1 554.8 |  |  | 65.8 |  |  | 253.5 |  | 9.5 |  |  | 16.3 |  |  | -6.8
Apurímac |  | 26.1 |  |  | 56.6 |  |  | 2.3 |  |  | 9.1 |  | 8.7 |  |  | 16.1 |  |  | -7.4
Arequipa |  | 19.9 |  |  | 37.8 |  |  | 3.1 |  |  | 9.7 |  | 15.4 |  |  | 25.6 |  |  | -10.2
Cusco |  | 55.3 |  |  | 125.4 |  |  | 8.1 |  |  | 28.9 |  | 14.6 |  |  | 23.0 |  |  | -8.4
Puno |  | 85.0 |  |  | 128.4 |  |  | 8.3 |  |  | 18.2 |  | 9.8 |  |  | 14.2 |  |  | -4.4
1/ Includes those receiving technical assistance (TA) and business advice (EA). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators / Agrarian Census 2012 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 11 on Page 179 ---

Access to credit for women and men working on farming: Of the total number of farming
producers, only between 5% and 20% of men took out a loan; and for women it is even lower,
between 4% and 12%, with a negative gap for women and a ratio of 1 to 8 among departments
in both cases (See Table n°16). Arequipa and Apurimac are above the national average,
Cusco and Puno below. For both women and men who took out a loan, the approval rate is
high, between 89% and 95%, and the gap between the two is small, around + 1%. Unfortu-
nately, after a loan is approved, there is no available public information on payment conditions
and arrears.

=== PAGE 180 ===
The extreme shortage of capital of small producers does not allow them to invest in infrastruc-
ture (e.g. planting and harvesting water, sheds, greenhouses, road improvements), or to intro-
duce new cultivation and grazing practices (e.g. sprinkler irrigation for pasture cultivation, mo-
bile roosts to facilitate herd management) for the benefit of their families, and particularly
women.
Table N° 16
Women and men working on farming that access to credit
Total farming They managed credit They granted (him/her) a loan
producers (x Thousands Thousands of % producers who ob-
Depart- 1000 pp) of people % producers people tained a loan
ment
Wom Wom Gap Wom Wom Gap
Women Men Men Men Men Men
en en W - M en en W - M
1 -
691.9 44.2 161.2 -4.0
National 554.8 6.4 10.4 39.6 146.0 89.5 90.6 1.1
-
26.1 2.2 7.2 -4.1 2.1 6.8 93.1 94.1
Apurímac 56.6 8.6 12.7 1.0
-
2.4 7.7 -8.4 7.4 95.6
Arequipa 19.9 37.8 12.1 20.5 2.3 94.4 1.2
3.9 11.1 -1.9 9.8 88.7
Cusco 55.3 125.4 7.0 8.8 3.5 89.6 0.9
3.4 6.4 -1.0
Puno 85.0 128.4 4.0 4.9 3.0 3.6 89.6 88.6 1.0
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/Agrarian Census 2012
Reasons why women and men farmers do not apply for credit: In Apurímac, Arequipa the
main reason why women and men do not apply for credit is because they consider "not to need
it" (Table N° 17). For all reasons for not applying for credit, the gap between women and men
in the four departments is variable and less than or equal to 2%. Both, women and men, have
the same reasons for not taking out a loan. For people who "think they will not get it", there is
a positive gap in all departments, but less than 2%, which could reflect some degree of wom-
en's insecurity or fear of credit. As for "other reasons" (at least 3 very different reasons), the
gap is slightly negative in all departments and at the national level.
Table N° 17
Reasons why women and men farmers do not apply for credit
Reasons for not taking out credit (as a percentage of total who did not take out credit)
Cumbersome for- Other reasons 1/
No need High interest rates Lack of collateral Believe will not get
Department malities
Wo Gap Wo Gap Wo Gap Wome Gap Wo Gap Wo Gap
Men Men Men Men Men Men
men W- M men W- M men W- M n W- M men W- M men W- M
Apurímac 42.1 42.7 -0.5 30.1 29.5 0.7 10.5 12.2 -1.7 6.6 4.8 1.8 5.7 5.4 0.3 4.9 5.4 -0.5
Arequipa 38.2 38.3 -0.1 30.4 30.1 0.3 12.5 12.4 0.2 5.3 4.4 0.9 6.7 7.0 -0.3 6.9 7.9 -1.0
Cusco 35.4 33.4 2.0 38.2 39.3 -1.0 8.9 10.1 -1.1 5.2 4.3 0.9 7.4 7.5 -0.1 4.9 5.4 -0.6
Puno 21.1 20.7 0.4 46.0 46.2 -0.2 13.2 13.9 -0.8 8.0 6.2 1.8 6.7 6.5 0.1 5.1 6.5 -1.4
National 36.8 34.9 1.9 30.0 28.0 2.0 15.2 18.1 -2.9 6.5 5.9 0.6 5.6 5.8 -0.2 5.9 7.4 -1.5
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/Agrarian Census 2012
Farming women and men that belong to an association: With more than 72% of women
and men organised in associations, committees or cooperatives, Arequipa far exceeds the
other departments, including the national level (See Table N° 18). It is followed by Cusco and
Apurimac, with 25% or less, and lastly by Puno with less than 6% and 8%, respectively for
women and men.
Table N° 18
Farming women and men that belong to an association
If you belong to an association
committee or cooperative (in %) Gap gender
Department
(W-M)
Women Men
National 22.0 23.3 - 1.3
66

--- Table 1 on Page 180 ---
The extreme shortage of capital of small producers does not allow them to invest in infrastruc-
ture (e.g. planting and harvesting water, sheds, greenhouses, road improvements), or to intro-
duce new cultivation and grazing practices (e.g. sprinkler irrigation for pasture cultivation, mo-
bile roosts to facilitate herd management) for the benefit of their families, and particularly
women.

--- Table 2 on Page 180 ---
Depart-
ment |  | Total farming
producers (x
1000 pp) |  |  |  |  | They managed credit |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | They granted (him/her) a loan |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Thousands |  | % producers |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Thousands of |  |  |  | % producers who ob- |  | 
 | Depart-
ment |  |  |  |  |  | of people |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | people |  |  |  | tained a loan |  | 
 |  | Women |  | Men |  |  | Wom | Men |  | Wom |  | Men |  |  |  | Gap |  | Wom | Men |  |  | Wom
en | Men | Gap
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | en |  |  | en |  |  |  |  |  | W - M |  | en |  |  |  |  |  | W - M
National |  | 691.9 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 161.2 |  |  |  |  |  |  | -4.0 |  |  |  | 146.0 |  |  | 89.5 | 90.6 | -
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 44.2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | National |  |  |  | 554.8 |  |  |  |  | 6.4 |  |  | 10.4 |  |  |  |  | 39.6 |  |  |  |  |  | 1.1
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Apurímac |  | 26.1 |  |  |  |  |  | 7.2 |  |  |  |  |  |  | -4.1 |  |  |  | 6.8 |  | 93.1 |  | 94.1 | -
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2.2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2.1 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Apurímac |  |  |  | 56.6 |  |  |  |  | 8.6 |  |  | 12.7 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.0
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Arequipa |  | 19.9 |  |  |  |  |  | 7.7 |  |  |  |  |  |  | -8.4 |  |  |  | 7.4 |  |  | 94.4 | 95.6 | -
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2.4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Arequipa |  |  |  | 37.8 |  |  |  |  | 12.1 |  |  | 20.5 |  |  |  |  | 2.3 |  |  |  |  |  | 1.2
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Cusco |  | 55.3 |  |  |  |  |  | 11.1 |  |  |  |  |  |  | -1.9 |  |  |  | 9.8 |  |  | 89.6 | 88.7 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 3.9 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Cusco |  |  |  | 125.4 |  |  |  |  | 7.0 |  |  | 8.8 |  |  |  |  | 3.5 |  |  |  |  |  | 0.9
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Puno |  | 85.0 |  |  |  |  |  | 6.4 |  |  |  |  |  |  | -1.0 |  |  |  | 3.6 |  |  | 89.6 | 88.6 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 3.4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Puno |  |  |  | 128.4 |  |  |  |  | 4.0 |  |  | 4.9 |  |  |  |  | 3.0 |  |  |  |  |  | 1.0
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 180 ---
Reasons why women and men farmers do not apply for credit: In Apurímac, Arequipa the
main reason why women and men do not apply for credit is because they consider "not to need
it" (Table N° 17). For all reasons for not applying for credit, the gap between women and men
in the four departments is variable and less than or equal to 2%. Both, women and men, have
the same reasons for not taking out a loan. For people who "think they will not get it", there is
a positive gap in all departments, but less than 2%, which could reflect some degree of wom-
en's insecurity or fear of credit. As for "other reasons" (at least 3 very different reasons), the
gap is slightly negative in all departments and at the national level.
Table N° 17
Reasons why women and men farmers do not apply for credit

--- Table 4 on Page 180 ---
 | Department |  |  | Reasons for not taking out credit (as a percentage of total who did not take out credit) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | No need |  |  |  |  | High interest rates |  |  |  |  |  | Lack of collateral |  |  |  |  |  | Believe will not get |  |  |  |  |  |  | Cumbersome for- |  |  |  |  |  | Other reasons 1/ |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | malities |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Wo
men | Men | Gap
W- M |  |  | Wo | Men |  | Gap |  | Wo | Men |  |  | Gap |  |  | Wome | Men |  | Gap |  |  | Wo |  | Men |  |  | Gap | Wo
men |  | Men |  |  | Gap
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | men |  |  | W- M |  | men |  |  |  | W- M |  |  | n |  |  | W- M |  |  | men |  |  |  |  | W- M |  |  |  |  |  | W- M
 | Apurímac |  |  | 42.1 | 42.7 | -0.5 |  |  | 30.1 |  | 29.5 | 0.7 |  | 10.5 |  | 12.2 |  | -1.7 |  |  | 6.6 |  | 4.8 | 1.8 |  |  | 5.7 |  |  | 5.4 |  | 0.3 | 4.9 |  |  | 5.4 |  | -0.5
 | Arequipa |  |  | 38.2 | 38.3 | -0.1 |  |  | 30.4 |  | 30.1 | 0.3 |  | 12.5 |  | 12.4 |  | 0.2 |  |  | 5.3 |  | 4.4 | 0.9 |  |  | 6.7 |  |  | 7.0 |  | -0.3 | 6.9 |  |  | 7.9 |  | -1.0
 | Cusco |  |  | 35.4 | 33.4 | 2.0 |  |  | 38.2 |  | 39.3 | -1.0 |  | 8.9 |  | 10.1 |  | -1.1 |  |  | 5.2 |  | 4.3 | 0.9 |  |  | 7.4 |  |  | 7.5 |  | -0.1 | 4.9 |  |  | 5.4 |  | -0.6
 | Puno |  |  | 21.1 | 20.7 | 0.4 |  |  | 46.0 |  | 46.2 | -0.2 |  | 13.2 |  | 13.9 |  | -0.8 |  |  | 8.0 |  | 6.2 | 1.8 |  |  | 6.7 |  |  | 6.5 |  | 0.1 | 5.1 |  |  | 6.5 |  | -1.4
 | National |  |  | 36.8 | 34.9 | 1.9 |  |  | 30.0 |  | 28.0 | 2.0 |  | 15.2 |  | 18.1 |  | -2.9 |  |  | 6.5 |  | 5.9 | 0.6 |  |  | 5.6 |  |  | 5.8 |  | -0.2 | 5.9 |  |  | 7.4 |  | -1.5
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/Agrarian Census 2012 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Farming women and men that belong to an association: With more than 72% of women |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
and men organised in associations, committees or cooperatives, Arequipa far exceeds the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
other departments, including the national level (See Table N° 18). It is followed by Cusco and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Apurimac, with 25% or less, and lastly by Puno with less than 6% and 8%, respectively for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
women and men. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 5 on Page 180 ---
Table N° 18
Farming women and men that belong to an association

--- Table 6 on Page 180 ---
Department |  |  | If you belong to an association |  |  |  | Gap gender
(W-M) | 
 |  |  | committee or cooperative (in %) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Women |  | Men |  |  | 
National |  |  | 22.0 |  | 23.3 |  |  | - 1.3

=== PAGE 181 ===
Apurímac 19.8 23.3 - 3.5
Arequipa 72.5 72.4 0.2
Cusco 25.5 24.4 1.1
Puno 5.8 7.8 - 2.0
Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/Agrarian Census 2012
Membership in a producer´ organisation, be it an association or a cooperative, is key to enable
both women and men to adapt to climate change. This membership provides manageable
transaction costs in commodity markets, as well as non-financial and financial services to in-
crease their resilience, based on the ecosystems in which they live. For this reason, although
there is no apparent wide gap in any of the departments, this variable of women's and men's
membership in a productive organisation is central to a project baseline, as well as to the
Gender Action Plan to be implemented, in order to prevent a gap from opening up during pro-
ject implementation. Finally, in addition to their participation as members, the occupation of
leadership positions by women in the organisations will facilitate the closing of gaps, particu-
larly those related to access to assets, training, technical advice and financing to improve their
living conditions, both at the level of their families and their communities.
Conclusion 2 for the project
In general terms, women in the SHAP area face more barriers than men that hinder the
achievement of gender equity in climate change adaptation measures. Women face unequal
access to resources (use, control) and receive lower income. They also have limited access
to microfinance; less opportunities and time for education, training, and technical assis-
tance/capacity to develop and implement nature-based solutions and climate-resilient agri-
businesses. It is important not only to work to close these gender gaps but also to address
the weaknesses in institutions and regulation policies, to implement nature-based solutions
and climate resilient value chains, while also increase availability of still limited gender-deseg-
regated information (data, systematization of experiences, lessons learnt, behavioral
changes). For this, it is essential that the actions undertaken within the project do not result in
an increased workload for women who already have a double burden between productive and
reproductive work (domestic and care work). For this, the project must recognize women's
knowledge, needs and expectations to generate effective responses in terms of building social
and technical capacities, as well as opportunities for their economic autonomy, participation,
and representation in decision-making.
Chapter 4: Gender responsiveness and expertise, as well as gender equality in
the partner organisation(s)
Public Partner Organisations
Peru is one of the first countries to have a Gender and Climate Change Action Plan (PAGCC,
2015), aimed at state action to reduce gender gaps in the fight against climate change. This
Plan focuses on eight priority areas: forests, water resources, energy, food security, health,
education, risk management. Among the main scopes designed, this policy proposes the
strengthening of technical capacities, generation and management of disaggregated infor-
mation (and recognition of ancestral and local knowledge and practices), development of pol-
icies and instruments and the development of mitigation and adaptation measures with a gen-
der focus, which is also included in the Regulation of the Framework Law on Climate Change.
67

--- Table 1 on Page 181 ---
 | Apurímac |  |  | 19.8 |  |  | 23.3 |  |  | - 3.5 | 
 | Arequipa |  |  | 72.5 |  |  | 72.4 |  |  | 0.2 | 
 | Cusco |  |  | 25.5 |  |  | 24.4 |  |  | 1.1 | 
 | Puno |  |  | 5.8 |  |  | 7.8 |  |  | - 2.0 | 

--- Table 2 on Page 181 ---
 |  | Source: INEI, Gender Indicators/Agrarian Census 2012
 |  | 
 | Membership in a producer´ organisation, be it an association or a cooperative, is key to enable | 
 | both women and men to adapt to climate change. This membership provides manageable | 
 | transaction costs in commodity markets, as well as non-financial and financial services to in- | 
 | crease their resilience, based on the ecosystems in which they live. For this reason, although | 
 | there is no apparent wide gap in any of the departments, this variable of women's and men's | 
 | membership in a productive organisation is central to a project baseline, as well as to the | 
 | Gender Action Plan to be implemented, in order to prevent a gap from opening up during pro- | 
 | ject implementation. Finally, in addition to their participation as members, the occupation of | 
 | leadership positions by women in the organisations will facilitate the closing of gaps, particu- | 
 | larly those related to access to assets, training, technical advice and financing to improve their | 
 | living conditions, both at the level of their families and their communities. | 
 |  | 
 |  | 
Conclusion 2 for the project
In general terms, women in the SHAP area face more barriers than men that hinder the
achievement of gender equity in climate change adaptation measures. Women face unequal
access to resources (use, control) and receive lower income. They also have limited access
to microfinance; less opportunities and time for education, training, and technical assis-
tance/capacity to develop and implement nature-based solutions and climate-resilient agri-
businesses. It is important not only to work to close these gender gaps but also to address
the weaknesses in institutions and regulation policies, to implement nature-based solutions
and climate resilient value chains, while also increase availability of still limited gender-deseg-
regated information (data, systematization of experiences, lessons learnt, behavioral
changes). For this, it is essential that the actions undertaken within the project do not result in
an increased workload for women who already have a double burden between productive and
reproductive work (domestic and care work). For this, the project must recognize women's
knowledge, needs and expectations to generate effective responses in terms of building social
and technical capacities, as well as opportunities for their economic autonomy, participation,
and representation in decision-making. |  | 

=== PAGE 182 ===
In 2019, the National Policy on Gender Equality was approved (PNIG, 2019)10 whose objective
is to "address, from various angles, the causes and consequences of the persistence of struc-
tural discrimination against women", in accordance with the CEDAW and the Beijing Platform
for Action. Priority objective 4 of the PNIG states "Guarantee the exercise of women's eco-
nomic and social rights" and considers the guidelines 4.2. Increase women's access to and
control of natural, productive and patrimonial resources, whose related services are: 4.2.3:
Granting of rights linked to water and its associated assets in rural areas, for domestic and
productive use, and; 4.2.4: Management of the conservation, recovery and sustainable use of
ecosystems and natural resources, with the participation of women, in a context of climate
change.
In both cases, it is expected to work on the formalisation of agrarian property, women's rights
linked to water and associated goods, conservation management, recovery and sustainable
use of ecosystems and natural resources, training, technical assistance and financing for wom-
en's enterprises. Likewise, priority objective 5 of the PNIG is linked to the development of ca-
pacities for public management with a gender perspective and the elimination of institutional
and socio-cultural barriers that hinder equality; and objective 6 of the same policy, associated
with the generation and management of statistical information disaggregated by sex, and fol-
low-up information on public investment and expenditure with a gender perspective. In the
sense of the previous paragraph, through Supreme Decree 005-2017-MIMP, the Peruvian
government established a mechanism for Gender Equality in each of the entities of the Na-
tional and Regional Governments, including the attached bodies. The main purpose of these
spaces is to advance towards gender mainstreaming within State institutions and the reduction
of gender inequalities at the institutional level, as well as at the level of goods and services of
State bodies at the three levels of government, including the sectors and agencies involved in
the implementation of the Resilient Puna Project.
At national level, public agencies in Peru are required by regulation (Supreme Decree N° 005-
2017-MIMP) to establish a gender instance (Committee, Commission or Working Group) in
their institutions. Specifically, the Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations (MIMP) and
the Ministry of the Environment (MINAM), are governing bodies for national gender equality
and environmental policies, respectively. They are the main governing bodies for guidelines,
policies, norms, programmes and budgets related to women, environment and climate change
respectively.
MINAM is the ministry that has shown greater interest in incorporating the gender approach
both at the institutional level and in its public policies. In 2017, MINAM created the Working
Group for Gender Equality (Ministerial Resolution N° 225-2017-MINAM). MINAM created and
installed the first National Committee on Women and Climate Change - CONAMUCC, made
up of representatives of more than 50 organisations at the national level, whose objective is to
strengthen women's participation in climate action. This committee responds to the need to
strengthen the presence and participation of indigenous peoples and women in environmental
decision-making. This space was created in the framework of the development of the Regula-
tions of the Framework Law on Climate Change, which included a prior consultation with in-
digenous organisations in Peru (including women's organisations), highlighting the need to
work with a gender perspective and cultural and linguistic relevance between sectors and lev-
els of government, taking the PAGCC and the PNIG as a reference and considering it as a
space with emphasis on indigenous women, valuing their knowledge and promoting the edu-
cation of women and girls.
SERNANP as part of MINAM
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
10 Supreme Decree 008-2019-MIMP, April 2019. The PNIG-PEMIG Multisectoral Strategic Plan operationalises the implementa-
tion of the PNIG in the 52 services prioritised for the 21 public institutions responsible. At the same time, it also sets out the
corresponding budget allocations and the executing units in charge. As the MIMP is the lead agency on gender issues, the
sectors must report to it on their progress in implementing the PEMIG.
68

--- Table 1 on Page 182 ---
 | he Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations (MIMP) and
the Ministry of the Environment (MINAM), are governing bodies for national gender equality | 
and environmental policies, respectively. They are the main governing bodies for guidelines, | 
policies, norms, programmes and budgets related to women, environment and climate change | 
respectively. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 182 ---
Supreme Decree 008-2019-MIMP, April 2019. The PNIG-PEMIG Multisectoral Strategic Plan operationalises the implementa-
tion of the PNIG in the 52 services prioritised for the 21 public institutions responsible. At the same time, it also sets out the
corresponding budget allocations and the executing units in charge. As the MIMP is the lead agency on gender issues, the
sectors must report to it on their progress in implementing the PEMIG.

=== PAGE 183 ===
SERNANP, in 2018, launched the Working Group for Gender Equality through Presidential
Resolution N° 204-2018-SERNANP. SERNANP has recently modified its regulations to pro-
mote and guarantee the full and effective participation of women and men in the Management
Committees of each of the 70 Natural Protected Areas (NPAs), which are located in 22 depart-
ments of the country. It has also designed the tool ¿How are we doing? to analyze the pro-
cesses, progress, and priorities of these management committees. This tool promotes the di-
alogue, collaborative decision-making, and the implementation of joint actions, while integrat-
ing intergenerational, intercultural and gender approaches. Together with PROFONANPE,
these institutions have organised two contests "Entrepreneurs by nature and Entrepreneurs
by Cotahuasi”. These contests aimed at strengthening private entrepreneurships that contrib-
ute to the sustainable use of natural resources associated with PNAs. The contests also seek
to empower the role of women, promoting that 20% of the winning proposals must be led by
women.
Moreover, SERNANP's Annual Welfare and Social Development Plan 2022 includes the need
to address gender inequalities and address gaps. SERNANP has also to promote and meas-
ure women's participation in national protected areas. The organisation has a gender special-
ist responsible for reporting on the SERNANP indicators of the PNIG but has not been involved
in the elaboration of the RP project concept note. As part of the Annual Staff Welfare Plan,
training on gender, audio-visual pieces on violence, reporting and harassment and knowledge
on reporting channels have been proposed. Different contributions that women can make in
"traditionally" male activities are recognised, e.g. trail building, and work as park rangers. How-
ever, some signs, such as the internal work regulations, suggest that there is no comprehen-
sive knowledge of gender equality and that there is a need to strengthen institutional
knowledge of the institution's internal regulations and the projection of its functions. In the for-
mulation of the people development plan (2022) the diagnoses of training needs and demands
are gender neutral and do not show the differentiated needs and interests of women and men,
considering gender roles, the use of time, the reconciliation of family, personal and work life,
and aspects of the organisational climate that allow for egalitarian relationships.
MIDAGRI
MIDAGRI has a Commission for Gender Equality (Ministerial Resolution N°. 0347-2017-
MINAGRI). In 2021, it launched the Directorate for the Promotion of Farming Women to artic-
ulate, propose and promote technical and regulatory instruments and mechanisms to increase
the participation of women in agriculture interventions from the three levels of government. In
2022, MIDAGRI approved the Strategy "Entrepreneurship of Rural and Indigenous Women" to
finance enterprises formed by rural and indigenous farming women and to provide them with
technical advice in agriculture, forestry, husbandry, and handicraft. MIDAGRI intervenes in the
study area through: Agrorural, the Sierra Azul Fund and the Agroideas Programme. Agrorural
seeks to contribute to the competitiveness of agricultural production of small and medium pro-
ducers through the promotion of associativity, the adoption of agricultural technology, among
others. Interventions are mainly focused on improving cultivated pastures and sheds.
MIDAGRI has shown through different projects, its willingness to mainstream gender and/or
equal opportunities between women and men. However, there is still a need to strengthen
awareness and knowledge on the subject and to provide guidance on how the gender ap-
proach can be applied in programmes and projects throughout the entire cycle. During field-
work, it was possible to recognise that knowledge on gender issues is dispersed and hetero-
geneous within MIDAGRI and the Agrorural and Agroideas, for example. Some representa-
tives interviewed did not identify gender inequalities in their institutions. A few representatives
even considered no need for a gender perspective in the work, as "there is no discrimination
against women”. Nor Agrorural or Agroideas have gender specialists.
For Agrorural, it is still necessary to consider the gender approach as an integral part of the
work (not a separation between "technical" issues and the invisibilization of the "social" during
69

=== PAGE 184 ===
implementation). The same case is not measured for Agroideas. The projects do not include
a gender perspective, it is not introduced, it is not monitored. In the few cases where women
have been considered, at least in the narrative of the plans, no disaggregated goals or indica-
tors are considered, and the differentiated needs of men and women are not taken into con-
sideration in order to achieve equal benefits; these could not be measured either, given that,
as has been mentioned, no disaggregated indicators (or initial analysis) are considered, nor
do they include strategies that aim to change unequal power relations.
Concrete facts within the sector can strengthen/sensitise the need for gender work: Knowledge
and evidence that demonstrates the existence of gender gaps, the different ways in which men
and women can be affected by a given phenomenon, is a factor that contributes to the inter-
nalisation of gender work. For example, the case of the SODEGA system, which includes in-
formation disaggregated by sex and age, once it was identified that women are at a disad-
vantage when negotiating their products. The same case with successful experiences that
can be used as a future reference, such as the case of FORMAGRO, which is present among
the officials who learned about the case.
The creation of the Directorate for the Promotion of Women Agricultural Producers (DPMPA),
as well as the strengthening/promotion of family farming, provide an opportunity to strengthen
the work in favour of gender equality, particularly within the framework of the RP project. How-
ever, the DPMPA needs to be strongly involved in the design of the project and, in general, in
connection with the other programmes and projects of MIDAGRI, in order to ensure their artic-
ulation and the strengthening of the inclusion of the gender approach in the initiatives, in ac-
cordance with the objectives of this directorate.
The publications on social media, as well as the calls for personnel reviewed, generalise the
jobs as male, which from the invitation shows a gender bias. This demonstrates the need to
strengthen gender awareness and knowledge across the entire sector. Considering these re-
sults, it can be recommended to strengthen gender knowledge at the organisational level as a
starting point for the design of management documents and institutional policies and to over-
come the challenges identified.
Finally, despite the efforts and initiatives in the public stream, gender instances are still weak
mechanisms, characterized by high turnover and lack of resources and capacities for the op-
timal fulfillment of their functions. An evaluation conducted in 2017 of The National Plan for
Gender Equality (PLANIG), points out that no institution reaches the12 indicators proposed for
the implementation of this plan, although MINAM complied with 10 of them, being in the group
with more indicators fulfilled, while MINAGRI reached 8 indicators (Guevara, 2017).
Other Partner Organizations
PROFONANPE
PROFONANPE is responsible for mobilising, managing and channelling resources for the im-
plementation of programmes and projects linked to the country's environmental sustainability.
It coordinates and contributes to the development of proposals jointly with public and private
institutions, as in the case of its participation in the elaboration of the Concept Note and the
formulation process of the Resilient Puna Project. In this context, both in the development of
proposals and in the management and implementation of the funds obtained, Profonanpe must
ensure compliance with the administrative-financial regulations, as well as the social, environ-
mental and gender standards (including policies to prevent harassment, violence and exploi-
tation) of the donors. Profonanpe has a series of policies, strategies and tools compiled in an
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), which responds to international
standards to which the entity is accredited, such as the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the
Adaptation Fund (AF). The ESMS comprises two main elements: the Social and Environmental
70

=== PAGE 185 ===
Policies (SEP) and the Social and Environmental Safeguards Manual, which allows the SEP
to be operationalised. SEP 7 refers to the mainstreaming of the gender approach, the differ-
entiated effects on men and women in the interventions and the promotion of greater partici-
pation of women, as well as the contribution to maintaining equitable power relations. SEP 8
is linked to indigenous peoples, both SEPs linked to the RP project. Leadership positions are
distributed between men and women; in the management area, women represent 67%. As for
the Board of Directors (representatives of the public sector, NGOs, private sector/cooperation),
women represent 25%. Profonanpe has an Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Policy for the areas
of intervention of the organisation. It also has a Gender Policy and an Institutional Gender
Plan for work within the institution. Yet, Profonanpe does not have a gender specialist within
its team.
Instituto de Montaña (IdM)
IdM has expressed its willingness to mainstream gender and/or equal opportunities between
women and men and has collected some good practices that reflect this work. Yet, no policies,
plans or management instruments have been accessed in order to review the level of gender
mainstreaming in these documents and how it is carried out in practice in the organisation. IdM
counts with gender specialist to highlight the work done for women's empowerment and their
contributions to environmental conservation. In addition, IdM has good practices in the em-
powerment of women in environmental projects. An interesting fact has been the promotion
of the slogan for the Mountain Day in which IdM has participated: "Women who move moun-
tains" and the different spaces for dialogue that have taken place around this theme. There
are, however, spaces
Conclusion 3 for the project
Public institutions
Although there is a formal institutional framework for gender mainstreaming in public institu-
tions, the mechanisms to operationalise them are fragile. This is characterised by a high ro-
tation of human capital and a type of management that usually lacks resources and capaci-
ties for the fulfilment of its functions. Despite these challenges, MINAM and SERNANP has
shown a sustained interest in incorporating the gender approach in their actions that should
be strengthened and visible. In the case of MIDAGRI, some efforts have been made to pro-
mote gender equity. This is indeed an opportunity to better promote the incorporation of the
gender approach into MIDAGRI actions.
Other partner organizations
PROFONANPE has the instruments and capacities to mainstream gender in its activities. In
general, the Resilient Puna project has the potential to contribute to gender mainstreaming
both in management and planning instruments and through greater participation of women
in training, dialogue, and decision-making processes.
71

=== PAGE 186 ===
Chapter 5: Gender responsiveness and expertise in the project/ among project
staff in the country
5.1 Equal opportunities in the team
The team members have not yet been appointed, but all of them will be trained in gender equity
and interculturality approaches. Nevertheless, it is important to mention that the project will
also count with a focal point for safeguards and gender. It is recommended, that this person
should have expertise in the field of natural resources management, climate change, and a
gender expertise, with clear know-how in mainstreaming gender in projects implementation
from a cross-cutting perspective.
In addition, the project will be part of GIZ South Cone (Cono Sur), to which the offices of GIZ
in Peru belong. GIZ South Cone has an Intercultural and Gender Group (GIG). This group
follows the guidelines established by the Strategy as well as the BMZ Gender Action Plan
(2014; 2016) and the GIZ Gender Strategy (2019). Additionally, GIZ South Cone in Peru has
a Policy and Protocol against sexual harassment and gender discrimination in the workplace
in accordance with Law N° 27942, as amended by Legislative Decree N°1410, and its regula-
tion (Supreme Decree N° 014-2019-MIMP). In 2020, staff received a specialised training about
institutional instances of counselling and/or listening and action against sexual harassment,
such as the Sexual Harassment Intervention Committee (IHS). Twenty-five people partici-
pated, 18 women and 7 men from various GIZ programs and projects in Peru. Also, in 2020,
a sensitisation process of six workshops was carried out for GIZ staff in Peru, with the partici-
pation of 25 employees in average, in each one of these sessions. An analysis of the staff
shows that out of 152 employees, 56% are women (GIZ Peru, 2020). There are no differences
in remuneration between male and female staff (GIZ Peru 2019). Currently, there are five col-
leagues with national contracts in the management team, three of whom are project managers.
5.2 Gender expertise of the team members
All GIZ South Cone staff in Peru receive a training in gender topics during their induction pro-
cess. Therefore, new staff will be aware of the existence of an internal policy of zero tolerance
to discrimination and gender violence. GIZ South Cone in Peru has a gender focal point, sup-
ported by the Gender and Interculturality working group (GIG), which allows for the exchange
of experiences among colleagues from different projects and sectors, as well as collegial ad-
vice related to gender-responsive project design.
Conclusion 4 for the project
It is recommended that the team, once constituted, should have the necessary support to
strengthen its knowledge and skills in gender mainstreaming, in order to ensure that project
implementation is gender-responsive and careful not to generate negative impacts. Gender
mainstreaming with intersectionality must be considered in all the activities to be carried out
within the framework of the project.
72

=== PAGE 187 ===
6. Sources
Flora Tristán/ IEP. 2021. Encuesta sobre los impactos de la pandemia en las mujeres. Availabe at:
https://suplementos.larepublica.pe/19760-un-motivo-para-reflexionar
Last review: 30/11/2022
Guevara, S. 2017. Informe final. Servicio de consultoría para la evaluación del periodo 2012 al 2015
del Plan Nacional de Igualdad de Género 2012 – 2017.
Available: https://www.mimp.gob.pe/omep/evaluacion/resumen%20evaluacion/Evaluacion_PLA-
NIG.pdf
INEI. 2021a. Perú: Feminicidio y Violencia contra la Mujer, 2015 – 2019. Lima: INEI.
INEI. 2021b. Pobreza monetaria alcanzó al 30,1% de la población del país durante el año 2020.
Available at: Instituto Nacional de Estadistica e Informatica (inei.gob.pe)
Last review: 23/11/2023
INEI. 2020a. Perú: Brechas de género al 2020. Avance hacia la igualdad de mujeres y hombres.
Lima: INEI.
INEI. 2020b. Estado de la población peruana 2020. Lima: INEI.
INEI. 2020c. Encuesta Nacional de Hogares – ENAHO. Lima: INEI.
INEI, 2019. 1 Encuesta Nacional de Relaciones Sociales – ENARES 2019. Lima: INEI.
Available at: Encuesta Nacional sobre Relaciones Sociales (ENARES) – Observatorio Nacional de la
Violencia contra las Mujeres y los Integrantes del Grupo Familiar. observatorioviolencia.pe)
Last review: 30/11/2022
INEI. 2018. Encuesta Demográfica y de Salud Familiar – ENDES. Lima: INEI.
INEI. 2017. Censo Nacional de Población y Vivienda. Lima: INEI.
INEI. 2016. Encuesta Nacional de Hogares. Lima: INEI.
Jurado Nacional de Elecciones (2021). Observaigualdad: Plataforma para la participación política en
democracia.
Available at: https://observaigualdad.jne.gob.pe/mujeres.html
Last review: 30/11/2022
Ministerio de la Mujer y Poblaciones Vulnerables [MIMP]. 2020a. Encuesta sobre percepciones y acti-
tudes de mujeres y hombres frente al aislamiento social obligatorio a consecuencia del covid-19.
Available at: https://www.mimp.gob.pe/files/Encuesta_sobre_percepciones_y_actitudes_COVID-
19.pdf
Last review; 23/11/2022
Ministerio de la Mujer y Poblaciones Vulnerables [MIMP]. 2020b. Plan Estratégico Multisectorial de
Igualdad de Género – PEMIG. MIMP: Lima.
Ministerio de la Mujer y Poblaciones Vulnerables [MIMP]. MIMP. 2016. Plan de Acción de Género y
Cambio Climático – PAGCC. MIMP: Lima.
Ministerio de Cultura. 2022. Base de datos de Pueblos Indígenas.
Available at: https://bdpi.cultura.gob.pe/pueblos-indigenas
Last review: 30/11/2022
UNDP. 2022. Human development Index for Peru.
Available at: Specific country data | Human Development Reports (undp.org)
Last review: 30/11/2022

--- Table 1 on Page 187 ---

INEI. 2021b. Pobreza monetaria alcanzó al 30,1% de la población del país durante el año 2020.
Available at: Instituto Nacional de Estadistica e Informatica (inei.gob.pe)

--- Table 2 on Page 187 ---
tudes de mujeres y hombres frente al aislamiento social obligatorio a consecuencia del covid-19.
Available at:

--- Table 3 on Page 187 ---
UNDP. 2022. Human development Index for Peru.
Available at:

=== PAGE 188 ===
UNFPA.2018. Desafíos y prioridades: política de adolescentes y jóvenes en el Perú. Lima: Naciones
Unidas.
74

=== PAGE 189 ===
Gender Action Plan
GCF Funding Proposal
Resilient Puna Project
Resilient Puna: Ecosystem based Adaptation for sustainable
High Andean communities and ecosystems in Peru
14.12.23, v.04
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit – GIZ GmbH
The preparation of this document has been made possible thanks to the valuable support of Global Affairs
Canada

=== PAGE 190 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
Enquiries regarding the present document can be directed to:
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH
Dag Hammarskjöld Weg 1-5
65760 Eschborn
Germany
www.giz.de
2

=== PAGE 191 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
Table of Contents
1. INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................ 4
1. PRIORITY AREAS FOR GENDER MAINSTREAMING .................................................................................... 7
3. GENDER ACTION PLAN AND INDICATORS TABLE .................................................................................... 11
3

=== PAGE 192 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
1. Introduction
The “Resilient Puna: Ecosystem-based approaches for sustainable High Andean communities and
ecosystems in Peru” "Resilient Puna" project (hereafter “Resilient Puna”) aims to increase the
resilience of Andean communities in the departments of Arequipa, Cusco, Puno, Lima (Yauyos) and
Apurimac, through the management, conservation and restoration of high Andean ecosystems; to
also promote an increased access to public and private financing and a stronger territorial planning
towards Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA). It is organised into three components: (i) Puna
ecosystems are restored, conserved and better managed to support climate resilient livelihoods,
through the implementation of EbAs measures; (ii) Public and private financing for EbA measures and
climate resilient livelihoods are in place and accessible for vulnerable communities in the Puna
Ecosystem; and, (iii) EbA and climate resilience are mainstreamed into multilevel landscape
governance instruments. The project will invest in EbA measures and Climate Resilient Value Chains,
providing technical support to communities, producer associations and cooperatives to achieve
sustainable value chains; directly benefiting the conservation and restoration of 23,914 hectares of
high Andean ecosystems.
According to the GCF gender guidelines, one of the aims of combating climate change is to promote
mechanisms to increase capacity for effective climate change planning and management in
developing countries. This also includes a focus on women living in vulnerable communities.
Specifically, the GCF proposes the need to develop a Gender Action Plan (GAP) that details the
actions and measures for the empowerment of women, from the design of the intervention, the
implementation and evaluation of the project, respecting and valuing the contribution of women and
men. Climate change and adaptation requires the intersection of approaches that allow for the
sustainable improvement of living conditions of people in coexistence with the ecosystem, especially
women and girls who have been "left behind" in the attention of the main economic, climate and
development policies. Therefore, key elements across this GAP are:
- (a) Supporting innovations and measures to combat climate change through a comprehensive
gender perspective,
- (b) Stimulate climate investments that:
✓ (i) Promote gender equality through climate change mitigation and adaptation
measures.
✓ (ii) Minimise social, gender and climate-related risks in all climate change action.
- (c) Contribute to reducing the gender gap in situations of social, economic and environmental
vulnerability and exclusion, exacerbated by climate change, through GCF climate investments
that mainstream gender equality issues.
The central objective of the GAP is to propose measures to break down barriers and reduce
asymmetrical situations in the care, exploitation and use of natural resources, as well as the rights of
people, especially women, within a natural ecosystem based on the Gender Analysis (see Annex 8a)
conducted for the project. The design of gender measures and indicators are oriented towards
developing and implementing gender-responsive1 approach in order to increase women's well-being
1 Please note that the GIZ working definition for gender responsive follows the OECD Gender Equality Continuum (2022): A gender-
responsive approach not only considers gender differences, inequalities, ratios and aspects, e.g., by targeting and including a certain
number of women in project activities but goes a step further in responding to gender specific needs and/or requirements, or by collecting
gender-disaggregated data for monitoring purposes. Gender responsiveness aims to ensure that all people can engage in and/or benefit
from certain measures regardless of their gender (e.g., trainings or strategies are developed that consider gendered needs, preferences,
and constraints).
4

=== PAGE 193 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
by taking into account gender-specific needs, preferences and overcome gaps to ensure that
women's rights are advanced and that they will benefit from programme activities.
In Peru, although progress has been made, especially in the formal regulatory sphere, gender
inequality persists, which can be clearly seen in the gender gaps and barriers to the full enjoyment of
the human rights of women. These gaps are aggravated in the case of Peruvian women who face
multiple factors of discrimination and exclusion (ethnic origin, disability, religion, class, sexual
orientation, gender identity, place of residence, etc.). The persistence of gender gaps at all levels and
in all social spheres constitutes one of the main obstacles to sustainable development that leaves no
one behind. In the context post Covid pandemic, it is urgent to work on gender gaps that have been
reinforced, partly because of women's increasing burden of domestic and unpaid care work.
Women, due to their socially constructed roles and responsibilities, and the persistence of
conceptions of male superiority in the Peruvian society, are in an inferior position with regard to access
to and control of natural resources and decisions about land, water, production and sale of agricultural
products. Therefore, as they are not considered as relevant actors, their needs are invisible, and their
contributions are not taken into account. Equally, the fulfilment of roles in the reproductive sphere
(domestic chores and family care) as almost exclusive responsibilities, overloads their daily workday,
limiting the availability of time resources and access to opportunities for education, training, paid
employment, and participation in decision-making spaces, which translates into under-representation
in community organisations, in water users' organisations, and in decision-making spaces. This
discrimination is rooted in norms and an institutional culture that reinforce women's inferior or
subordinate status, as well as in the unequal assignment of hierarchical roles. In this context, violence
against women is one of the main instruments to keep women in a situation of subordination, and as
a means of disciplining them to prevent their access to rights, as occurs in cases where they try to
access decision-making positions. This not only prevents them from participating in social, political,
economic and cultural decision-making processes and bodies, but also makes it difficult and hard to
transform these spaces that reproduce patriarchal structures of domination.
This project “Resilient Puna” will address existing gender gaps, especially since women are more
vulnerable than men to the effects of climate change. Indeed, rural women are often in charge of
collecting water for cooking and cleaning, using the land for livestock grazing, fetching firewood,
among others. Women use and interact with natural resources and ecosystems on a daily basis. They
are also the first to feel the effects of climate change when they have to travel longer distances to find
resources to look after their families. Gender inequality and social exclusion only increase the
negative effects of unsustainable and destructive environmental management on women and girls.
Considering the gender gaps, the ongoing discrimination and violence against women in Peru, this
Gender Action Plan (GAP) proposes interventions in all phases of the Resilient Puna Project cycle.
The project will also conduct a monitoring strategy to evaluate and verify that no negative results are
produced (under the principle of do no harm).
Gender impact and related risks
Considering that in the Andean region women play an important role in small-scale agriculture and
water harvest but are still unrepresented in local level decision making. Women are exposed to a very
high workload and a high degree of domestic violence. The project will promote women's active
participation in the development of value chains and income-generating measures and their
involvement in decision-making and territorial planning processes and therefore enhance living
conditions and economic opportunities of Andean women.
5

=== PAGE 194 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
Unintentional negative impacts could be that active participation of women might not be welcome by
their partners/husbands/sons and might lead to conflicts within families and/or communities and in
some cases lead to domestic violence. Another risk might be that decision making bodies in traditional
communities and/or governmental entities allow women's participation but don respect women's
opinion and side-line them, which could lead to frustration and finally resignation of women. Similarly,
women lead businesses could not thrive due to resistance by men lead business partners.
Methodology
The methodology of this Gender Action Plan involved a desk review and analysis of available
secondary data sources such as national policies and work of national mechanisms, as well as a
comprehensive review of secondary literature that includes various research reports, articles and
papers on the subject from both national and international organisations. It is also based on fieldwork
in Andean districts that are potential users of the project, conducted between August and November
2022. Other gender analyses carried out for projects implemented in Peru and Ecuador were also
utilised in carrying out this study.
6

=== PAGE 195 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
2. Priority areas for Gender Mainstreaming
2.1 Gender dimensions in country/ region/ sector
Gender institutional framework
Peru is a state that prohibits discrimination and has committed to close gender gaps by signing
international agreements and treaties and launching different mechanisms nationally for
mainstreaming the gender approach in public policy. At the international level, Peru is part of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW, 2010) and the
Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against
Women (Convention of Belém do Pará); the Beijing Declaration and World Platform (1995); and the
2030 Agenda. In terms of climate change, Peru is also member of the Commission on the Status of
Women (CSW) that declares that gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls are key
aspects of climate change and disasters ´reduction (CSW66). It reaffirms the leadership of women
and girls as main agents of change in safeguarding the environment and addressing the adverse
effects of climate change. Peru has also signed the Lima Work Programme on Gender to promote
gender balance and gender-responsive climate policy, launched in 2014, during the 20th UNFCCC
Conference of the Parties (COP) in Lima.
At the national level, in 2015, Peru launched a Gender and Climate Change Action Plan (PAGCC) to
reduce gender gaps in the fight against climate change. Moreover, the National Gender Equality
Policy (PNIG) launched in 2019, identifies structural discrimination against women as a public
problem. It includes priority objectives to increase women's access to and control over natural
resources, capacity building and the elimination of institutional and socio-cultural barriers, information
management and monitoring of information on investment and public spending with a gender
perspective. To promote the gender approach in the fight against climate change with the civil society,
in 2019, the MINAM installed the National Committee of Women and Climate Change (CONAMUCC)
as an open space for the informed, effective, timely and continuous participation of women in Peru's
comprehensive climate management. CONAMUCC hosts more than 50 women's organizations and
NGOs at the national level to work on gender and climate change issues.
Despite these institutional efforts, there is structural discrimination against women which limits the
state capacity at the local and subnational levels to actually implement these policies. As a
consequence, women lack opportunities to fulfil their autonomy (physical, economic and decision-
making), increasing gender gaps in different dimensions such as education, reproductive health,
empowerment, labour market, political participation, use of time, among others. This situation worsens
especially in rural settings including the south high Andes of Peru (SHAP area).
Gender barriers in the rural Andes and opportunities for gender mainstreaming
According to the conclusions drawn from the Gender Analysis conducted for the project (see Annex 8a)
following Gender barriers are faced in the rural Andes:
Barrier 1: Economic and financial barriers based on conclusion 2
Women and men in de Andes have inequal access to loans. In 2012 only between 5% and 20% of
men farmers took out a loan; and for women farmers it is even lower, between 4% and 12% (INEI
2012). Moreover, income generation is also unequal among Andean women and men. According to
the National Agricultural Census (2012), there are more women with no income of their own. For
example, in Apurimac 32.8% of women no have income in their own compared to only 12.1% of men.
In the case of Arequipa women without income of their own (38.1%) while men (22.3%). In Cusco
7

=== PAGE 196 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
women (30.5%) and men (18.2%). Finally in Puno, women 25.1% while men 17.4%. In the case of
women in agricultural occupations, 37.6% are unpaid family workers and only 46.3% of women in
agricultural occupations received cash income.
Although women's participation in farming production has increased in the Andes, this growth has not
necessarily translated into improvement in women's living conditions. When men leave communities
looking for better jobs, women have to take care of the household and the farm, with limited access
to resources and prospects for better income due to lack of time, access to water, linkage to markets,
and capital (workforce). Rural women raise domestic animals, process primary products or sell their
small surpluses in local markets, while men's participation in productive activities is more closely
linked to more competitive and profitable value chains2. In addition, another important gender gap in
the project’s region is related to the limited access and control over natural resources due to socially
constructed gender roles and male superiority. On average, women manage between 30%-34% less
farming land than men in the SHAP area.
Barrier 2: Technical barriers based on conclusion 2
Women have limited opportunities for education, training, paid employment, and participation in
decision-making spaces, perpetuating gender gaps. Despite this, women actively participate in
managing key natural resources such as water and land. The availability of safe water in rural
households in the Andes is less than 50%, with women being the main carriers of water for human
and animal consumption, and while irrigation tasks are considered masculine, families can easily
access water from springs. Regarding the family economy in rural households, breeding and selling
guinea pigs is the most important economic activity for women, while men tend to control the income
from livestock and by-products and show little or no participation in the commercialization of textile
products.
Rural women also face other barriers (lower levels of education (indicated by a 23% illiteracy rate
compared to 8% among men), speaking a language other than Spanish (as over 35% of women use
Quechua as their mother tongue), low empowerment and leadership and the burden of domestic and
productive work, among others) that prevent them from having equal access to communal
government positions compared to men, leading to a significant gap in women's participation in
decision-making inside the communities, but as well as in decision-making spaces local, regional, and
national levels.
Finally, the incorporation of the gender approach in the territorial planification processes and
investment projects (including measures acknowledging women’s knowledge, needs, responsibilities
and domestic burden) development is a pending and necessary task. It is necessary to include
conceptual frameworks and formal tools of the Peruvian State that incorporate the needs and
women's visions from the formulation, implementation and evaluation of projects.
Barrier 3: Knowledge and information barriers based on conclusion 2
Women tend not to participate in briefings outside their homes and also receive less training, technical
assistance, and entrepreneurship assistance, which limits them on the one the one hand to have an
informed decision in case they participate in decision-making platforms and on the other hand their
prospects for increasing their income, and emphasizes the importance of providing timely and
appropriate training to improve access to markets and financial services. There are also low loan
rates among farming producers, particularly women. Women and men tend to be organised in
associations, committees, or cooperatives in the same rate in Arequipa, Apurimac, Cusco but show
poor association in Puno (less than 8%). In addition, gender traditional norms in the Andes often
prevent women from achieving the same level of visibility as men, or benefit from the same
opportunities and recognition, despite their deep knowledge of agriculture, water and ecosystems.
2 retos y oportunidades de la agricultura familiar en perú : care perú
8

=== PAGE 197 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
Barrier 4: Institutional barriers based on conclusion 1 and 3
In general terms, in Peru there is a fairly advanced regulatory framework at different levels of government
requiring the mainstreaming of a gender perspective in public policies, however, there is still no adequate
guarantee for the full realisation of the right to equality. There is a formal institutional framework for gender
mainstreaming in public institutions, but the mechanisms to operationalise them are fragile. This is
characterised by a high rotation of human capital and a type of management that usually lacks resources
and capacities for the fulfilment of its functions.
Opportunities for gender mainstreaming
Based on the identified barriers in the Gender Analysis (as described above) the Resilient Puna with
the project activities and measures (please see chapter 3) proposed has the potential to contribute to
women empowerment and gender mainstreaming both in financial instruments and in territorial
planning processes at community and regional levels to strengthen women’s economic and
adaptative capacity to climate change. This only could be achieved through greater access to financial
resources and participation of women in training, dialogue, and decision-making processes. For this
project, working with political partners, public staff, agriculture and water stakeholders and users’
providers is an opportunity to contribute to closing the gaps and tackle the barriers through gender
mainstreaming, making visible the need to carry out actions that, in the long term, collaborate in
achieving a social and institutional transformation towards greater equality in highly masculinised
sectors and in a post-pandemic context.
9

=== PAGE 198 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
2.2. Gender expertise, gender responsiveness, and equal opportunities in the
partner organizations
Although there is a formal institutional framework for gender mainstreaming in public institutions, the
mechanisms to operationalise them are fragile. This is characterised by a high rotation of human
capital and a type of management that usually lacks resources and capacities for the fulfilment of its
functions. Despite these challenges, SERNANP have shown a sustained interest in incorporating the
gender approach in their actions that should be strengthened and visibilized. In the case of MIDAGRI,
some efforts have been made to promote gender equity. This is indeed an opportunity to better
promote the incorporation of the gender approach into MIDAGRI actions. Profonanpe has a Gender
Policy3 place to mainstream gender in its activities. In general, the Resilient Puna project has the
potential to contribute to gender mainstreaming both in management and planning instruments and
through greater participation of women in training, dialogue, and decision-making processes.
2.3. Gender expertise and responsiveness in the project team
All team members will be trained in gender equity and interculturality approaches. It is important to
mention that some project members already have intermediate knowledge on gender and
interculturality approaches based on previous academic and professional experience. The project will
also count with a focal point for safeguards and gender. GIZ South Cone staff in Peru has been
trained in gender topics during their induction process. Moreover, it has a gender focal point which
allows for the exchange of experiences among colleagues from different projects and sectors, as well
as collegial advice related to gender-responsive project design.
3 https://profonanpe.org.pe/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Politica-de-Genero.pdfin
10

=== PAGE 199 ===
3. Gender Action Plan and Indicators table
Guiding principle of this Gender Action Plan is as follows: Considering that in the Andean region women play an important role in small-scale agriculture and
water harvest but are still unrepresented in local level decision making. Women are exposed to a very high workload and a high degree of domestic violence.
The project will promote women's active participation in the development of value chains and income-generating measures and their involvement in decision-
making and territorial planning processes and therefore enhance living conditions and economic opportunities of Andean women.
Unintentional negative impacts could be that active participation of women might not be welcome by their partners/husbands/sons and might lead to conflicts
within families and/or communities and in some cases lead to domestic violence. Another risk might be that decision making bodies in traditional communities
and/or governmental entities allow women's participation but don respect women's opinion and side-line them, which could lead to frustration and finally
resignation of women. Similarly, women lead businesses could not thrive due to resistance by men lead business partners.
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
M&E system
All (Core R co is ll k e c o t f i n n g o t G M e & n E d e sy r- s s t e e n m s i t t o iv e M&E system 1 Gender- M fo & ca E l p sy o s in te t m of s a a ll nd GIZ- M&E 250,000
1 Indicator 2) d
d
i
a
s
t
a
a
g gregated t
m
ra
a
c
le
k f
b
e
e
m
n
a
ef
le
ic i
a
a
n
ri
d
e s
e
o
l
p
a
e
b
r
o
a
r
t
a
in
te
g
d
.
and 0 s
s
e
ys
n
t
s
e
it
m
iv
.
e M&E Y: 1 E Es s
G
p
IZ
ec
-
ialist G
sp
IZ
ec
-
i
M
ali
&
s
E
t
and ensure gender- Safeguards 954,940

--- Table 1 on Page 199 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
1 | All (Core
Indicator 2) | Risk of not
collecting
disaggregated
data | Gender-sensitive
M&E system to
track female and
male beneficiaries
and ensure gender- | M&E system
elaborated and
operating. | 0 | 1 Gender-
sensitive M&E
system. |  |  | Y: 1 | M&E systems and
focal point of all
EEs | GIZ- M&E
specialist
GIZ-
Safeguards | M&E system
250,000
GIZ- M&E
specialist
954,940

--- Table 2 on Page 199 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 199 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 199 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 199 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 199 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 199 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 199 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 200 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
responsive project and Gender
management. advisor
Profonanpe-
Social and
Gender
Safeguard
specialists
Establish
GIZ-
Failure to cooperation Safeguards GIZ-
design between gender All project 100% of the Safeguards and and Gender Safeguard and
communication advisor and communication project Gender advisor advisor Gender
materials and communication materials and communication advisor
guidelines team to ensure that guidelines materials and Communications GIZ- 144,000
2 A c r u 2 ll t t ( i c n r g o ) s /B s- arrie p a i g a n a c e n c t c n d l i u v k d s d i a e t o y e g r c e w e a ia s q h l u p ic a e h l r i ty a c m g a o l u l a g m i p d t e e r m e n o r l d i i j u a n e e n l e c s r i t s c e a a i q n n t u i d c o a l n u li d ty e p a g a in a c e n c t c n d l i u v k d s s i a e t o i y g o r c e n i e i n a s q c l u p lu a e d l r i e ty a 0 g p a g a u a c e n t i c n d i d v k d e s i a e t l o y i g r n c e i e e i n a s q s c l u p lu a e d l r i e ty a Y: 2-6 a P G Id d r e M o v n f i - s o d G o n e r a r e n s n p p d e e e - c r ialist C n P G sp s r o e o e m n a f c o d d i m a n e v l i a u r i s s n n o t p i r c e a - t io G C n 3 0 o I a Z 0 m d - , v 3 m i 0 s u 0 o n r i catio
inclusion and social inclusion approach. inclusion specialist Profonanpe-
approach. (GESI) perspective. approach. IdM- Gender Social and
Including, when specialist Gender
necessary, training
12

--- Table 1 on Page 200 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | responsive project
management. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and Gender
advisor
Profonanpe-
Social and
Gender
Safeguard
specialists | 
2 | All (cross-
cutting)/Barrie
r 2 | Failure to
design
communication
materials and
guidelines
packages per
activity which
include a
gender equality
and social
inclusion
approach. | Establish
cooperation
between gender
advisor and
communication
team to ensure that
all project
communication
materials and
guidelines include
a gender equality
and social inclusion
(GESI) perspective.
Including, when
necessary, training | All project
communication
materials and
guidelines
packages per
activity include a
gender equality
and social
inclusion
approach. | 0 | 100% of the
project
communication
materials and
guidelines
packages per
activity include a
gender equality
and social
inclusion
approach. |  |  | Y: 2-6 | Safeguards and
Gender advisor
Communications
advisor
Profonanpe-
Gender specialist
IdM- Gender
specialist | GIZ-
Safeguards
and Gender
advisor
GIZ-
Communicatio
ns advisor
Profonanpe-
Gender
specialist
IdM- Gender
specialist | GIZ-
Safeguard and
Gender
advisor
144,000
GIZ-
Communicatio
n advisor
300,300
Profonanpe-
Social and
Gender

--- Table 2 on Page 200 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 200 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 200 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 200 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 200 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 200 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 200 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 201 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
on GESI for the specialist
communications 197,813
team.
IdM- Gender
specialist
32,176
Communicatio
n material
60,000
GESI training
6,0004
Capacity
Building
Strategy with a
Gender Focus
37,519
All (Cross- Beneficiaries Operative 2 Operative
3 cutting) not using the Gender based gender- and 0 gender- and Y:1-6 GIZ- M&E System G sp IZ ec -M ia & lis E t GRM 25,00
Grievance Violence (GbV) and culturally culturally
4 At least 1 training per year. Costs per training approx. EUR 1,000.
13

--- Table 1 on Page 201 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | on GESI for the
communications
team. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | specialist
197,813
IdM- Gender
specialist
32,176
Communicatio
n material
60,000
GESI training
6,0004
Capacity
Building
Strategy with a
Gender Focus
37,519
3 | All (Cross-
cutting) | Beneficiaries
not using the
Grievance | Gender based
Violence (GbV) and | Operative
gender- and
culturally | 0 | 2 Operative
gender- and
culturally |  |  | Y:1-6 | GIZ- M&E System | GIZ-M&E
specialist | GRM 25,00

--- Table 2 on Page 201 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 201 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 201 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 201 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 201 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 201 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 201 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 202 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
Redress Sexual Exploitation sensitive GRMs sensitive GRMs Profonanpe- M&E GIZ- Trainings and
Mechanism Abuse and which includes which includes System Safeguards workshops
(GRM) for fear Harassment GbV and SEAH GbV and SEAH and Gender 6,0005
(SEAH) aspects aspects. Grievance advisor
of harassment. aspects.
are included in the Redress Profonanpe-
Grievance Redress Mechanisms Monitoring
Mechanisms GIZ-Staff in
specialists
(GRM) of the the regions
232,840
project and
Trainings and Profonanpe-
financial Profonanpe-
mechanism (Puna workshops with Monitoring
Social and
Facility) which are local CSOs specialists
Gender (see
gender and
Profonanpe- ID 2)
culturally sensitive
to ensure Social and
Communication Profonanpe-
anonymity of Gender and
materials Environmental
protection of Safeguard
Safeguard
complaint. specialists
specialists
Profonanpe- 197,813
Technical
Profonanpe-
monitors in the
Technical
regions
monitors in the
5 At least 1 training per year.
14

--- Table 1 on Page 202 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Redress
Mechanism
(GRM) for fear
of harassment. | Sexual Exploitation
Abuse and
Harassment
(SEAH) aspects
are included in the
Grievance Redress
Mechanisms
(GRM) of the
project and
financial
mechanism (Puna
Facility) which are
gender and
culturally sensitive
to ensure
anonymity of
protection of
complaint. | sensitive GRMs
which includes
GbV and SEAH
aspects. |  | sensitive GRMs
which includes
GbV and SEAH
aspects. |  |  |  | Profonanpe- M&E
System
Grievance
Redress
Mechanisms
Trainings and
workshops with
local CSOs
Communication
materials | GIZ-
Safeguards
and Gender
advisor
GIZ-Staff in
the regions
Profonanpe-
Monitoring
specialists
Profonanpe-
Social and
Gender and
Safeguard
specialists
Profonanpe-
Technical
monitors in the
regions | Trainings and
workshops
6,0005
Profonanpe-
Monitoring
specialists
232,840
Profonanpe-
Social and
Gender (see
ID 2)
Profonanpe-
Environmental
Safeguard
specialists
197,813
Profonanpe-
Technical
monitors in the

--- Table 2 on Page 202 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 202 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 202 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 202 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 202 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 202 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 202 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 203 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
regions (4)
381,517
Failure to
design gender-
responsive
territorial local
plans due to
Activity 1.1.1 poor
Promoters
participation of
Setting up the Local CSOs
basis for women in the Promoting a N° of gender- At least 100 supporting Included within
5 f i E m in b a p A n le c m in e g n a tin n g d d t e t e h e it r e h s r y i i e t g o d r n r o b i a o e n l f c o p a t la u n se s, g t p C e r e l r o i n r m c i d t e o a e s r t r e i s a - r R l e f o p s e r l p s a o i n li n n e s i n n i t v g e r t p e e la r s r n p it s o o n r f i o s a r i l v l e o cal 0 g r t p e e l e a r s n r n p i d t s o o e n r f r i o s a - r i l v l e o cal Y: 2-4 c p a o r s o m s d o m u c c i u a e n t r i i o s ti n ’ e s s , G I M c n o I s o Z o t n i r t a t d u a i n t n ñ o d a a d t in e g t a 2 h , c 1 e ti 9 v b 9 i u t , y 8 d 1 5 g 3 e .1 t . o 1 f .
measures have the time, Value Chains investing in investing in and/or with MIDAGRI IdM- Gender
a R n e d s i li C en lim t ate t c p h a a e p r y t a i c d b ip o le a n o ti o n f t g f e o e r l i m nv e e a s s t u in re g s i . n EbA c a l d im ap a t t a e t i c o h n a . n ge c a l d im ap a t t a e t i c o h n a . n ge c T o ra o i p n e in ra gs tiv f e o s r local a S n E d R NANP s 3 p 2 e ,1 c 7 ia 6 l ist
Value Chains
because it
promoters
/Barrier 2
generates
family conflicts
o because men
capture main
leadership
roles.
15

--- Table 1 on Page 203 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | regions (4)
381,517
5 | Activity 1.1.1
Setting up the
basis for
financing and
implementing
EbA
measures
and Climate
Resilient
Value Chains
/Barrier 2 | Failure to
design gender-
responsive
territorial local
plans due to
poor
participation of
women in the
design of
territorial plans,
either because
they do not
have the time,
they do not feel
capable of
participating or
because it
generates
family conflicts
o because men
capture main
leadership
roles. | Promoting a
gender-responsive
territorial planning
process for
Climate Resilient
Value Chains
investing in EbA
measures. | N° of gender-
responsive
territorial local
plans for
investing in
climate change
adaptation. | 0 | At least 100
gender-
responsive
territorial local
plans for
investing in
climate change
adaptation. |  |  | Y: 2-4 | Promoters
Local CSOs
supporting
communities,
producers’
associations
and/or
cooperatives
Trainings for local
promoters | GIZ and
Instituto de
Montaña
coordinating
with MIDAGRI
and
SERNANP | Included within
the budget of
activity 1.1.1.
2,199,853
IdM- Gender
specialist
32,176

--- Table 2 on Page 203 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 203 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 203 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 203 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 203 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 203 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 203 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 204 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
Failure to Collect information
collect, monitor for baseline related Secondary and Monitoring &
and analyse to the number of 1 Baseline primary Evaluation
6 d d i a s t a a g d g u re e g t a o t e la d c k women producers Baseline report 0 r d e e p v o e r l t o ped I P n h c a e s p e ti on i s n u fo rv r e m y a s t , i o d n e s (e k . g. GIZ surveys
and for women led EUR 59,000
of baseline review)
information. initiatives
Technical experts
Promoters
Activity 1.1.2 GIZ-
Designing EbA
Financing and Designed and N° of innovative 127 innovative Safeguards
implementing measures implement of Local initiatives Local initiatives Trainings and Gender Included within
of EbA without innovative Local (including EbA (with EbA and advisor the budget of
measures considering initiatives (including and CRVC) with CRVC) with a Local CSOs EbA Experts activity 1.1.1
7 and Climate women’s EbA and CRVC) a gender- 0 gender- Y: 2-6 supporting see ID 5, 1.1.3
Resilient knowledge, with a gender- responsive responsive communities, 9,461,507 and
needs, Profonanpe-
Value Chains responsive approach approach producers’ activity 1.2.2
(Co-benefit r a e n s d p d on o s m ib e i s li t t i i c e s, approach. implemented. implemented. associations Technical 2,955,526
5)/Barrier 2 assistance
burden. and/or
providers
cooperatives
Profonanpe
technical
16

--- Table 1 on Page 204 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
6 |  | Failure to
collect, monitor
and analyse
disaggregated
data due to lack
of baseline
information. | Collect information
for baseline related
to the number of
women producers
and for women led
initiatives | Baseline report | 0 | 1 Baseline
report
developed |  |  | Inception
Phase | Secondary and
primary
information (e.g.
surveys, desk
review) | GIZ | Monitoring &
Evaluation
surveys
EUR 59,000
7 | Activity 1.1.2
Financing and
implementing
of EbA
measures
and Climate
Resilient
Value Chains
(Co-benefit
5)/Barrier 2 | Designing EbA
measures
without
considering
women’s
knowledge,
needs,
responsibilities,
and domestic
burden. | Designed and
implement of
innovative Local
initiatives (including
EbA and CRVC)
with a gender-
responsive
approach. | N° of innovative
Local initiatives
(including EbA
and CRVC) with
a gender-
responsive
approach
implemented. | 0 | 127 innovative
Local initiatives
(with EbA and
CRVC) with a
gender-
responsive
approach
implemented. |  |  | Y: 2-6 | Technical experts
Promoters
Trainings
Local CSOs
supporting
communities,
producers’
associations
and/or
cooperatives
Profonanpe
technical | GIZ-
Safeguards
and Gender
advisor
EbA Experts
Profonanpe-
Technical
assistance
providers | Included within
the budget of
activity 1.1.1
see ID 5, 1.1.3
9,461,507 and
activity 1.2.2
2,955,526

--- Table 2 on Page 204 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 204 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 204 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 204 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 204 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 204 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 204 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 205 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
assistance
providers
Community
monitoring
50% of female
Profonanpe
Insufficient N° of female members of the
technical
participation of beneficiaries of
members of the assistance
Activity 1.1.3 women in the Puna Facility
beneficiaries of providers
Technical technical receive technical
the Puna Facility
Assistance for trainings Ensure women’s assistance for
implementing provided access to technical that receive implementing Gender
EbA through the assistance technical EbA measures responsive Included within
trainings schemes
measures project due to including financial assistance for and Climate Profonanpe the budget of
8 0 Y: 2-4 (e.g., provide
and Climate the family education, access implementing Resilient Value childcare, respect activity 1.1.3
Resilient burden e.g., to markets, EbA measures Chains, certain see ID 6.
Value Chains traditional implementation of including
and Climate timeframes,
at local gender roles Local initiatives financial
landscape which limit Resilient Value education and provide assistance
for travel or
level/Barrier 3 women to Chains, access to
organize training
participate in including markets.
in proximity to
trainings. financial
women homes)
education and
17

--- Table 1 on Page 205 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | assistance
providers
Community
monitoring |  | 
8 | Activity 1.1.3
Technical
Assistance for
implementing
EbA
measures
and Climate
Resilient
Value Chains
at local
landscape
level/Barrier 3 | Insufficient
participation of
women in
technical
trainings
provided
through the
project due to
the family
burden e.g.,
traditional
gender roles
which limit
women to
participate in
trainings. | Ensure women’s
access to technical
assistance
including financial
education, access
to markets,
implementation of
Local initiatives | N° of female
members of the
beneficiaries of
the Puna Facility
that receive
technical
assistance for
implementing
EbA measures
and Climate
Resilient Value
Chains,
including
financial
education and | 0 | 50% of female
members of the
beneficiaries of
the Puna Facility
receive technical
assistance for
implementing
EbA measures
and Climate
Resilient Value
Chains,
including
financial
education and
access to
markets. |  |  | Y: 2-4 | Profonanpe
technical
assistance
providers
Gender
responsive
trainings schemes
(e.g., provide
childcare, respect
certain
timeframes,
provide assistance
for travel or
organize training
in proximity to
women homes) | Profonanpe | Included within
the budget of
activity 1.1.3
see ID 6.

--- Table 2 on Page 205 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 205 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 205 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 205 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 205 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 205 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 205 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 206 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
access to
markets.
Innovative people
centred approach
for example
through storytelling
for systematization N° of best At least 6 best
of best practices of practices in EbA practices in EbA
9 A R i s a k
a
p
n c n n
r
n
c e n
a
a o c
d
t c o i
c
l e w v e o v
t
i s
i
v l a t
c
e u y t e r t
e
d p e a r 1
s
g , l .
/
a e 2
B
n .
a
1 d
r
:
r
W d a k t w
k
h n
n
i n o s e o o
o
c c m m e w
w
d lo e s i e l
l
s s e
e
t n n m r i d
d
’ a n s g
g
a i g l s e
e
v s o e
b
t i o d d
y
w k r p w i
d
p
n e n r
e
u
o o v p o o
v
b
m m o l j w
e
i e
l
l c
i
v
c
e e
l
c l a
o
e e
a
n n t t
p
d m
t
i ’ ’ w o
i
s s
m
o
g e n il
n
e
e
l n .
s
n
p f t o T
t
r i o n r h
o
m e
f
t h o e te a R C i w s n y n e h o it s d s a m ia t / e i i o l t n e i i m e r v s n n e C a t s t l i i V z m le e a a d d lu t . e b e y 0 a R C i w s n y n e h o it s d s a m ia t / e i i o l t n e i i m e r v s n n e C a t s t l i i V z m le e a a d d lu t . e b e y Y: 4-6 W F I S n i y e t o e s l r d r t k e v s t i m r e h ip w a o s t p s i z s a tion I M ns o t n it t u a t ñ o a d ( e Id M) I t a 2 n h c ,7 c e ti l 0 u v b 7 i d u t , y e 7 d d 1 1 g 3 e . w 2 t . i o 1 th f i n
men.
ier 2 & 3 together with
universities/public
institutions, etc.
Dissemination of N° of best At least 66 best Publications IdM-
10 best practices of practices and 0 practices and Y: 6 Dissemination Communicatio Included within
women’s lessons learned lessons learned event n specialist the budget of
knowledge for in EbA and/or in EbA and/or
6 The target of 6 best practices led by women in EbA and/or CRVC were chosen by estimating an approximately 50% of the total eligible EbA measures and CRVA (i.e., 10 EbA measures and 2 CRVC) .
18

--- Table 1 on Page 206 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | access to
markets. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
9 | Activity 1.2.1:
Recover,
innovate and
scale up
ancestral
knowledge
and
practices/Barr
ier 2 & 3 | Women avoid
disclosing
ancestral
knowledge to
the dismissed
women’s
knowledge by
men. | Innovative people
centred approach
for example
through storytelling
for systematization
of best practices of
women’s
knowledge for
replication. The
project will promote
women’s
involvement in the
development of
publications
together with
universities/public
institutions, etc. | N° of best
practices in EbA
and/or Climate
Resilient Value
Chains
initiatives led by
women
systematized. | 0 | At least 6 best
practices in EbA
and/or Climate
Resilient Value
Chains
initiatives led by
women
systematized. |  |  | Y: 4-6 | Workshops
Field trips
Interviews
Systematization | Instituto de
Montaña (IdM) | Included within
the budget of
activity 1.2.1
2,707,713
10 |  |  | Dissemination of
best practices of
women’s
knowledge for | N° of best
practices and
lessons learned
in EbA and/or | 0 | At least 66 best
practices and
lessons learned
in EbA and/or |  |  | Y: 6 | Publications
Dissemination
event | IdM-
Communicatio
n specialist | Included within
the budget of

--- Table 2 on Page 206 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 206 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 206 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 206 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 206 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 206 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 206 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 207 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
replication. The Climate Climate GIZ- activity 1.2.1
project will promote Resilient Value Resilient Value Communicatio see ID 8
the development of Chains Chains ns advisor
publications initiatives led by initiatives led by
together with women are women
universities/public included in disseminated in
institutions, etc. publications for Quechua
dissemination. through
publications
such as
brochures,
pamphlets,
plans,
handbooks,
radio spots and
videos.
Activity1.2.2. Failure to Ensure the
Implement promote participation of N° women that At least 2 Monitoring Included within
11 c m a o s o y b n o s m s d n t e e m it r m o v u r a s n in t i i t o t g o y n w p c m s o y a o o s m r m n t t i e m c i e t m o ip n u r s ’ a n i s n , t i i t g o y n in w o r d in e b i o s f g o s m s i e r s e m e t r m r v n a a a i t t n i t i i n o i o a o n n t t n i h , o , i e n a n n t o h d f e p c m c o o a o m m r n ti m m c ito ip u it r t a n i e n t i e t e g y s in . 0 w t t i m n h h o e a o c m t n o 6 i p m e t o m a n m r r i e t o n i u m c u g n i t p b i t o a e y f t r e s Y: 2-5 t C b P r e a r o o t i n w n fo t i r e n n a e g a c n s t n s p e and I P d r M of onanpe t a s 1 h e c .1 e t e i . v b 2 I i D u t y d 6 1 g e . 2 a t . n o 2 d f
measure the because they environmental committees. beneficiaries of 39,429,820
the Puna Facility
impact of EbA do not have the community
measures time, they do monitoring
19

--- Table 1 on Page 207 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | replication. The
project will promote
the development of
publications
together with
universities/public
institutions, etc. | Climate
Resilient Value
Chains
initiatives led by
women are
included in
publications for
dissemination. |  | Climate
Resilient Value
Chains
initiatives led by
women
disseminated in
Quechua
through
publications
such as
brochures,
pamphlets,
plans,
handbooks,
radio spots and
videos. |  |  |  |  | GIZ-
Communicatio
ns advisor | activity 1.2.1
see ID 8
11 | Activity1.2.2.
Implement
community
monitoring
and
observation
systems to
measure the
impact of EbA
measures | Failure to
promote
women’s
participation in
community
monitoring
systems,
because they
do not have the
time, they do | Ensure the
participation of
women in the
observation,
registration, and
dissemination of
information in the
environmental
community
monitoring | N° women that
participate in
community
monitoring
committees. | 0 | At least 2
women out of
the 6 members
that participate
in community
monitoring
committees. |  |  | Y: 2-5 | Monitoring
trainings
Contracts
between
Profonanpe and
beneficiaries of
the Puna Facility | IdM
Profonanpe | Included within
the budget of
activity 1.2.2
see ID 6 and
1.1.2
39,429,820

--- Table 2 on Page 207 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 207 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 207 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 207 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 207 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 207 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 207 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 208 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
and provide not feel capable committees under
feedback on of participating the approaches
regional and or because it promoted by the
national generates project.
policies/Barrie family conflicts.
r 2
Activity 2.1.1. Inability to find
At least 30% of At least 30%
Establish the women-led
Ensure the the selected Local initiatives
Puna Facility associations,
approval of Local Local initiatives approved should
for the long- communities,
term financing initiatives proposed should either either support a
cooperatives Included in the
of EbA by women led support a women’s Facility
12 and/or 0 Y: 2-5 Profonanpe activity 2.1.1
measures associations, women’s association, Management Unit
organizations 4,203,150
and Climate communities, association, cooperatives,
Resilient that accomplish
cooperatives and/or cooperatives organizations
Value Chains formal
organizations. and/or and/or a women
/Barrier 1 requirements to
organizations. led enterprise.
apply.
2.1.2 Inability to find Train water utility N° of water 30 water utility GIZ- Include in the
13 Strengthen 25% of female officers of utility officers 0 officers (at least Y: 2-5 T C r o a n in s i u n l g ta s n ts Safeguards activity 2.1.2
capacities to water utility PES/MERESE to trained to 25% women) and Gender 938,756
develop and promote the promote the trained to advisor
20

--- Table 1 on Page 208 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
 | and provide
feedback on
regional and
national
policies/Barrie
r 2 | not feel capable
of participating
or because it
generates
family conflicts. | committees under
the approaches
promoted by the
project. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
12 | Activity 2.1.1.
Establish the
Puna Facility
for the long-
term financing
of EbA
measures
and Climate
Resilient
Value Chains
/Barrier 1 | Inability to find
women-led
associations,
communities,
cooperatives
and/or
organizations
that accomplish
formal
requirements to
apply. | Ensure the
approval of Local
initiatives proposed
by women led
associations,
communities,
cooperatives and/or
organizations. | At least 30% of
the selected
Local initiatives
should either
support a
women’s
association,
cooperatives
and/or
organizations. | 0 | At least 30%
Local initiatives
approved should
either support a
women’s
association,
cooperatives,
organizations
and/or a women
led enterprise. |  |  | Y: 2-5 | Facility
Management Unit | Profonanpe | Included in the
activity 2.1.1
4,203,150
13 | 2.1.2
Strengthen
capacities to
develop and | Inability to find
25% of female
water utility | Train water utility
officers of
PES/MERESE to
promote the | N° of water
utility officers
trained to
promote the | 0 | 30 water utility
officers (at least
25% women)
trained to |  |  | Y: 2-5 | Trainings
Consultants | GIZ-
Safeguards
and Gender
advisor | Include in the
activity 2.1.2
938,756

--- Table 2 on Page 208 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 208 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 208 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 208 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 208 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 208 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 208 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 209 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
implement officers willing inclusion of gender inclusion of promote the
innovative to participate. aspects into the gender aspects inclusion of GIZ-MERESE
advisor
mechanisms MERESE´s into the gender aspects
for EbA in processes MERESE´s into the
high Andean (agreements, processes MERESE´s
ecosystems/B governance processes.
arrier 2 platforms, project
development,
monitoring)
Included in the
Support the design
activity 2.1.3
2.1.3 Support and/or adjustment At least 2 1,295,103
the greening Failure to of gender- N° of gender- gender- GIZ-
o m f icrocredits promote new r p e r s o p d o u n c s ts iv t e o financial r fi e n s a p n o c n ia s l i ve responsive T G r I a Z i - n M ing ic s r o finance M ad ic v r is o o fi r n a nce G M I i Z cr - ofinance
to promote and/or adjusted
promote EbA and products
financial advisor advisor
14 E C R V b a l e im A l s u i a e l a ie t n e C n d t h a ins f p m in r e o a e d n t u c in c ia g ts l C V de a li s m lu ig a e n t e C w h R i a ll e i i n s n s i c li . e l u T n d h t e e t a p a n r r o d g d e y u t o i c n u e g n r s g w . oman 0 p d a r e d o s ju d ig s u n t c e e t d s d t a h n a d t /or Y: 3-5 G a a n d IZ d vi - s g S o e a r n f e d g e u r ards G S an a IZ d fe - G gu e a n r d d e s r 2 G S 2 a IZ 8 fe - ,0 g 0 u 0 a rds
/Barrier 1 women’s needs. a diagnostic include women advisor and Gender
needs.
identifying gender advisor (see
ID 3)
gaps and needs.
21

--- Table 1 on Page 209 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
 | implement
innovative
mechanisms
for EbA in
high Andean
ecosystems/B
arrier 2 | officers willing
to participate. | inclusion of gender
aspects into the
MERESE´s
processes
(agreements,
governance
platforms, project
development,
monitoring) | inclusion of
gender aspects
into the
MERESE´s
processes |  | promote the
inclusion of
gender aspects
into the
MERESE´s
processes. |  |  |  |  | GIZ-MERESE
advisor | 
14 | 2.1.3 Support
the greening
of
microcredits
to promote
EbA and
Climate
Resilient
Value Chains
/Barrier 1 | Failure to
promote new
and/or adjusted
financial
products
meeting
women’s needs. | Support the design
and/or adjustment
of gender-
responsive financial
products to
promote EbA and
Climate Resilient
Value Chains. The
design will include
a diagnostic
identifying gender
gaps and needs. | N° of gender-
responsive
financial
products
targeting woman
and young
producers. | 0 | At least 2
gender-
responsive
financial
products
designed and/or
adjusted that
include women
needs. |  |  | Y: 3-5 | Trainings
GIZ- Microfinance
advisor
GIZ-Safeguards
and gender
advisor | GIZ-
Microfinance
advisor
GIZ-
Safeguards
and Gender
advisor | Included in the
activity 2.1.3
1,295,103
GIZ-
Microfinance
advisor
228,000
GIZ-
Safeguards
and Gender
advisor (see
ID 3)

--- Table 2 on Page 209 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 209 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 209 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 209 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 209 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 209 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 209 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 210 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
Failure to
promote
planning
processes with
gender N° state officials
perspective due
involved within
to the refusal of the project
Activity 3.1.1. GIZ- Team
S th t e re c n a g p th a e ci n ti es p a u cc b e lic p t o a f n fi c c e ia , ls t r a e r c g e e iv t i a n r g e as X state officials GIZ- Team l c e o a m d p e o r nent
for territorial even though trainings for the (X men and X leader 376,920
planning and there is a fairly E pe n r s s u p r e e c g ti e ve n d d e u r r ing incorporation of women) trained GIZ-Safeguards c omponent 3
15 governance advanced the planning EbA and 0 using existing Y: 2-6 and Gender GIZ- GIZ-
processes regulatory processes training Climate state training advisor Safeguards Safeguards
i E n b te A g a ra n t d in g framework that public officials. Resilient Value programs. and Gender a a n d d vi s G o e r n (s d e e e r
climate obliges all Chains advisor ID 3)
resilience/Bar sectors of the measures with
rier 3 State and all gender
levels of perspective in
government to their planning
mainstream a processes.
gender
perspective in
public policies
22

--- Table 1 on Page 210 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
15 |  | Failure to
promote
planning
processes with
gender
perspective due
to the refusal of
public officials
acceptance,
even though
there is a fairly
advanced
regulatory
framework that
obliges all
sectors of the
State and all
levels of
government to
mainstream a
gender
perspective in
public policies | Ensure gender
perspective during
the planning
processes training
public officials. | N° state officials
involved within
the project
target areas
receiving
trainings for the
incorporation of
EbA and
Climate
Resilient Value
Chains
measures with
gender
perspective in
their planning
processes. | 0 | X state officials
(X men and X
women) trained
using existing
state training
programs. |  |  | Y: 2-6 | GIZ-Safeguards
and Gender
advisor | GIZ- Team
leader
component 3
GIZ-
Safeguards
and Gender
advisor | GIZ- Team
leader
component
376,920
GIZ-
Safeguards
and Gender
advisor (see
ID 3)

--- Table 2 on Page 210 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 210 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 210 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 210 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 210 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 210 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 210 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 211 ===
Project –Gender Action Plan – v.04
ID Component/ Risks and Description of the Indicators Baseline Target and Timeframe Resources Responsible Cost
Output/ potentials Measure/Action: Evaluation needed for entity for the Estimation in
activity/barri concerning Criteria Implementation implementati EUR
(=mitigation
er gender equality (human and on
measures for risks (=indicators for
material
(=derived from successful
=promotion resources)
the barriers implementation,
measures for
above) quantitative and
potentials)
qualitative
indicators are
possible, where
applicable sex
aggregated)
At least 5% of
Women have % of female female project GIZ-
Facilitation of
difficulties in project beneficiaries Safeguards
Promote and women
participation in beneficiaries take part in local and Gender Included within
support the participation
16 p
p
l
r
a
o
n
c
n
e
i
s
n
s
g
e s due
p
w
a
o
r
m
tic
e
ip
n
a
in
tio
d
n
e
o
ci
f
s ion
t
a
a
n
k
d
e
r
p
e
a
g
r
i
t
o
i
n
n
a
l
l
o cal 0 a
d
n
e
d
ci s
re
io
g
n
io
-m
na
a
l
k ing
Y: 3-6 through provision a dvisor t
a
h
c
e
ti v
b
i
u
ty
d
3
ge
.1
t
.
o
1
f
of transport GIZ-Local and
to the long making planning decision- planning 2,975,216
regional
distances and processes. making planning processes. Family orientated advisors for
family burden processes. information and
component 3
training sessions
Failure to
Activity 3.1.2 collect, monitor
Strengthening the At least 3 M&E GIZ-
Strengthen and analyse M&E systems of N° of M&E systems include Safeguards
regulatory disaggregated systems with and Gender Included within
frameworks MIDAGRIs disaggregated
data at national disaggregated Trainings advisor the budget of
17 and M&E programs7 within 1 data (gender Y: 3-5
level to be used (gender and Technical activity 3.1.2
systems at the project to and EbA Assistance GIZ-M&E
national afterwards for ensure the EbA approach) approach) Specialist 1,928,804
level/Barrier 3 gender equal information.
disaggregation of information.
policy
data. MIDAGRI
development.
7 AGROIDEAS, SSE, SENASA, AGORURAL, SIERRA AZUL, INIA, DSFFA, PSI and SERFOR
23

--- Table 1 on Page 211 ---
ID | Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er | Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above) | Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials) | Indicators | Baseline |  | Target and |  | Timeframe | Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources) | Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on | Cost
Estimation in
EUR
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Criteria |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (=indicators for |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | successful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | quantitative and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | qualitative |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | possible, where |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | applicable sex |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | aggregated) |  |  |  |  | 
16 |  | Women have
difficulties in
participation in
planning
processes due
to the long
distances and
family burden | Promote and
support the
participation of
women in decision
making planning
processes. | % of female
project
beneficiaries
take part in local
and regional
decision-
making planning
processes. | 0 | At least 5% of
female project
beneficiaries
take part in local
and regional
decision-making
planning
processes. |  |  | Y: 3-6 | Facilitation of
women
participation
through provision
of transport
Family orientated
information and
training sessions | GIZ-
Safeguards
and Gender
advisor
GIZ-Local and
regional
advisors for
component 3 | Included within
the budget of
activity 3.1.1
2,975,216
17 | Activity 3.1.2
Strengthen
regulatory
frameworks
and M&E
systems at
national
level/Barrier 3 | Failure to
collect, monitor
and analyse
disaggregated
data at national
level to be used
afterwards for
gender equal
policy
development. | Strengthening the
M&E systems of
MIDAGRIs
programs7 within
the project to
ensure the
disaggregation of
data. | N° of M&E
systems with
disaggregated
(gender and
EbA approach)
information. | 1 | At least 3 M&E
systems include
disaggregated
data (gender
and EbA
approach)
information. |  |  | Y: 3-5 | Trainings
Technical
Assistance | GIZ-
Safeguards
and Gender
advisor
GIZ-M&E
Specialist
MIDAGRI | Included within
the budget of
activity 3.1.2
1,928,804

--- Table 2 on Page 211 ---
Component/
Output/
activity/barri
er

--- Table 3 on Page 211 ---
Risks and
potentials
concerning
gender equality
(=derived from
the barriers
above)


--- Table 4 on Page 211 ---
Description of the
Measure/Action:
(=mitigation
measures for risks
=promotion
measures for
potentials)


--- Table 5 on Page 211 ---
Timeframe


--- Table 6 on Page 211 ---
Resources
needed for
Implementation
(human and
material
resources)

--- Table 7 on Page 211 ---
Responsible
entity for the
implementati
on


--- Table 8 on Page 211 ---
Cost
Estimation in
EUR



=== PAGE 212 ===
References
GCF. (2019). Gender Policy GCF. Gender Analysis/Assessment and Gender and Social
Inclusion Action Plan Templates. Available here :
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-and-action-plan-annex-8-funding-
proposals
GIZ (2019). GIZ Standard outline for the preparation of Gender Analyses: Template and User
Guide.
GIZ. (2021). General User Guide, Safeguards and Gender Management System, August 2021.
INEI. 2020a. Perú: Brechas de género al 2020. Avance hacia la igualdad de mujeres y hombres.
Lima: INEI.
__________
