=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sunny Kim
CreationDate: D:20221016114834+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 22.3.20258
ModDate: D:20221016173233+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 22.3.20258
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
17 - 20 October 2022
Incheon, Republic of Korea
16 October 2022
Provisional Agenda Item 13
Consideration of funding
proposals – Addendum VII
Funding proposal package for FP197
Summary
This addendum contains the following fix parts:
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Green Guarantee Company ("GGC")” submitted by MUFG
Bank Ltd.;
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s);
c) Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure;
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s
assessment; and
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled “Green Guarantee Company ("GGC")” by MUFG
Bank Ltd. is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate
Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially
sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 1
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s) 72
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure 84
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 88
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 114
assessment
Gender documentation 116

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: Green Guarantee Company (“GGC”)
Africa: Gabon, Rwanda
Asia: India, Indonesia, Lao, Philippines,
Country(ies):
Latin America and the Caribbean: Brazil, Trinidad & Tobago
MUFG Bank, Ltd. (“MUFG”)
Accredited Entity:
Date of first submission: 2022/02/08
Date of current submission 2022/10/14
Version number V.9

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 0
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to annexes such as
feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in the funding
proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60. Proposals
exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the
GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information that
may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in
section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to annexes such as
feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in the funding
proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60. Proposals
exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the
GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information that
may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in
section G.4.

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 1
A
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.2. Public or private
A.1. Project or programme Programme Private
sector
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals,
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the
A.3. Request for Proposals
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.
(RFP)
Not applicable Not applicable
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively.
GCF Co-financers’
contribution contribution1
Mitigation total 80 % 80%
☒ Energy generation and access 30 % 30 %
☒ Low-emission transport 20 % 20 %
A.4. Result area(s)
☒ Buildings, cities, industries, and appliances 30 % 30 %
☐ Forestry and land use Enter number % Enter number %
Adaptation total 20 % 20 %
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities Enter number % Enter number %
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security 10 % 10 %
☒ Infrastructure and built environment 10 % 10 %
☐ Ecosystems and ecosystem services Enter number % Enter number %
17 million people direct and 19.9
million people indirect (at % of GCF)
A.5. Expected mitigation A.6. Expected 16 999 962 (of 19 906 811 (of
outcome 74.6 million tCO₂e over the adaptation outcome 36 906 773) 36 906 773)
20-year lifetime of GGC
(Core indicator 1: GHG (based on the indicative (Core indicator 2:
emissions reduced, avoided, portfolio countries) direct and indirect 8.81% of 8.81% of
or removed / sequestered) beneficiaries reached) population of population of
countries with countries with
adaptation adaptation
investments investments
A.7. Total financing (GCF +
405 million USD
co-finance2)
82.5 million USD A.9. Project size Large (Over USD 250 million)
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested For multi-country proposals,
please fill out annex 17.
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF contribution (i.e., GCF
financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the funding proposal.
2 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or programme | Programme | A.2. Public or private
sector | Private | 
A.3. Request for Proposals
(RFP) | If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals,
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.
Not applicable Not applicable |  |  | 
A.4. Result area(s) | Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. |  |  | 
 |  |  | GCF
contribution | Co-financers’
contribution1
 | Mitigation total |  | 80 % | 80%
 | ☒ Energy generation and access |  | 30 % | 30 %
 | ☒ Low-emission transport |  | 20 % | 20 %
 | ☒ Buildings, cities, industries, and appliances |  | 30 % | 30 %
 | ☐ Forestry and land use |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 | Adaptation total |  | 20 % | 20 %
 | ☐ Most vulnerable people and communities |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 | ☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security |  | 10 % | 10 %
 | ☒ Infrastructure and built environment |  | 10 % | 10 %
 | ☐ Ecosystems and ecosystem services |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome
(Core indicator 1: GHG
emissions reduced, avoided,
or removed / sequestered) | 74.6 million tCO₂e over the
20-year lifetime of GGC
(based on the indicative
portfolio countries) | A.6. Expected
adaptation outcome
(Core indicator 2:
direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached) | 17 million people direct and 19.9
million people indirect (at % of GCF) | 
 |  |  | 16 999 962 (of
36 906 773) | 19 906 811 (of
36 906 773)
 |  |  | 8.81% of
population of
countries with
adaptation
investments | 8.81% of
population of
countries with
adaptation
investments
A.7. Total financing (GCF +
co-finance2) | 405 million USD | A.9. Project size |  | 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested | 82.5 million USD
For multi-country proposals,
please fill out annex 17. |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 5 ---
A.2. Public or private
sector

--- Table 3 on Page 5 ---
A.3. Request for Proposals
(RFP)

--- Table 4 on Page 5 ---
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome

(Core indicator 1: GHG
emissions reduced, avoided,
or removed / sequestered)

--- Table 5 on Page 5 ---
A.6. Expected
adaptation outcome

(Core indicator 2:
direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached)

--- Table 6 on Page 5 ---
A.7. Total financing (GCF +
co-finance2)

--- Table 7 on Page 5 ---
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 2
A
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8.
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested for ☐ Grant Enter number
☒ Equity 82.5 million USD
the GCF funding ☐ Loan Enter number
☐ Results-based payment Enter number
☐ Guarantee Enter number
10 years (may be extended
A.11. Implementation period pursuant to the terms to be A.12. Total lifespan 20 years
agreed in the FAA)
This is the date that the
Accredited Entity obtained/will
Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy
obtain its own approval to
and GCF ESS Standards to assess
A.13. Expected date of AE implement the project/
A.14. ESS category your FP category.
internal approval programme, if available.
I-2
5/18/2022
A.16. Has Readiness
A.15. Has this FP been or PPF support been
Yes ☒ No ☐ Yes ☒ No ☐
submitted as a CN before? used to prepare this
FP?
A.18. Is this FP
A.17. Is this FP included in
Yes ☒ No ☐ included in the Yes ☐ No ☒
the entity work programme?
country programme?
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g., GEF, AF, CIF,
A.19. Complementarity and etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
coherence
Yes ☐ No ☒
Executing Entities (“EE”)
1. Green Guarantee Company (“GGC”), registered in the United Kingdom
2. The Development Guarantee Group Limited (“DGG”), registered in the United Kingdom
3. GCF Holdings, a special purpose vehicle incorporated solely for the GCF’s investment in GGC
4. GCF Holdings Manager
A.20. Executing Entity GGC will be the Executing Entity that receives GCF proceeds and uses them for the Funded
information Activity of providing guarantees. GGC is incorporated in the United Kingdom as a limited liability
company and will be owned by institutional shareholders, including GCF.
The day-to-day operations of GGC will be managed by DGG, which is also incorporated in the
United Kingdom as a limited liability company and is owned by its management and Cardano
Development (www.cardanodevelopment.com), a Netherlands based foundation focused on
financial markets innovation in developing countries.
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
The Climate Change Problem We Want to Solve
1.1 At the 2009 Climate Summit (COP15) in Copenhagen, developed countries made a commitment to increase climate finance
to developing countries (defined for the purposes of this document as countries that are eligible for Overseas Development
Assistance (“ODA”)) to USD 100 billion per annum by 2020.
1.2 It’s generally agreed that the COP15 target to provide USD 100 billion of climate finance a year by 2020 has been missed.
In October, the UK COP presidency suggested it will be met by 2023, but even this delayed milestone would be insufficient.

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested for
the GCF funding | Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8.
☐ Grant Enter number
☒ Equity 82.5 million USD
☐ Loan Enter number
☐ Results-based payment Enter number
☐ Guarantee Enter number |  |  |  | 
A.11. Implementation period | 10 years (may be extended
pursuant to the terms to be
agreed in the FAA) |  |  | A.12. Total lifespan | 20 years
A.13. Expected date of AE
internal approval |  | This is the date that the |  | A.14. ESS category | Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy
and GCF ESS Standards to assess
your FP category.
I-2
 |  | Accredited Entity obtained/will |  |  | 
 |  | obtain its own approval to |  |  | 
 |  | implement the project/ |  |  | 
 |  | programme, if available. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 5/18/2022 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN before? | Yes ☒ No ☐ |  |  | A.16. Has Readiness
or PPF support been
used to prepare this
FP? | Yes ☒ No ☐
A.17. Is this FP included in
the entity work programme? | Yes ☒ No ☐ |  |  | A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country programme? | Yes ☐ No ☒
A.19. Complementarity and
coherence | Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g., GEF, AF, CIF,
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
Yes ☐ No ☒ |  |  |  | 
A.20. Executing Entity
information | Executing Entities (“EE”)
1. Green Guarantee Company (“GGC”), registered in the United Kingdom
2. The Development Guarantee Group Limited (“DGG”), registered in the United Kingdom
3. GCF Holdings, a special purpose vehicle incorporated solely for the GCF’s investment in GGC
4. GCF Holdings Manager
GGC will be the Executing Entity that receives GCF proceeds and uses them for the Funded
Activity of providing guarantees. GGC is incorporated in the United Kingdom as a limited liability
company and will be owned by institutional shareholders, including GCF.
The day-to-day operations of GGC will be managed by DGG, which is also incorporated in the
United Kingdom as a limited liability company and is owned by its management and Cardano
Development (www.cardanodevelopment.com), a Netherlands based foundation focused on
financial markets innovation in developing countries. |  |  |  | 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) |  |  |  |  | 
The Climate Change Problem We Want to Solve
1.1 At the 2009 Climate Summit (COP15) in Copenhagen, developed countries made a commitment to increase climate finance
to developing countries (defined for the purposes of this document as countries that are eligible for Overseas Development
Assistance (“ODA”)) to USD 100 billion per annum by 2020.
1.2 It’s generally agreed that the COP15 target to provide USD 100 billion of climate finance a year by 2020 has been missed.
In October, the UK COP presidency suggested it will be met by 2023, but even this delayed milestone would be insufficient. |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 6 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested for
the GCF funding

--- Table 3 on Page 6 ---
10 years (may be extended
pursuant to the terms to be
agreed in the FAA)

--- Table 4 on Page 6 ---
Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy
and GCF ESS Standards to assess
your FP category.

I-2

--- Table 5 on Page 6 ---
A.13. Expected date of AE
internal approval

--- Table 6 on Page 6 ---
A.16. Has Readiness
or PPF support been
used to prepare this
FP?

--- Table 7 on Page 6 ---
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN before?

--- Table 8 on Page 6 ---
A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country programme?

--- Table 9 on Page 6 ---
A.17. Is this FP included in
the entity work programme?

--- Table 10 on Page 6 ---
A.19. Complementarity and
coherence

--- Table 11 on Page 6 ---
A.20. Executing Entity
information

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 3
A
There is an urgent need for additional international financial support requested by developing countries to reach their
country-specific greenhouse gas (“GHG”) savings targets and to move to more resilient pathways based on their country
specific Nationally Determined Contributions (“NDC”) under the Paris Agreement.
1.3 One of the most prominent financial innovations and revolutions in the area of climate finance over the past ten years has
been the development and the exponential growth of the global green finance market as exemplified by the green bond
market, demonstrated in Figure 1 below.
Figure 1: Global Green Bond Issuance, USD billion
1.4 International Capital Markets Association (“ICMA”) defines a “green” bond or loan as any type of bond or loan instrument
where the proceeds will be exclusively applied to finance new and/or existing eligible “green” projects including those
focused on addressing the impact of climate change.
1.5 Despite the unprecedented challenges for the global economy and financial markets in 2020, the global green bond market
proved resilient, achieving the key milestone of USD 1 trillion in cumulative issuance since 2007, with issuance of USD 295
billion in 20203. Of the 2020 green bond issuance approximately USD 40 billion was from developing countries – noting,
however, once volume from China is excluded the balance is just USD 8.9 billion (or just 3%) from the rest of the developing
world. Furthermore, as can be seen in Figure 1, the percentage of the total global volume of green bonds issuance from
developing countries has been reducing over the past three years. This trend is partly due to the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic but if one looks at overall volumes between 2016 and 2019 (before the pandemic began), in value terms green
bond issuance from developing countries has been static reflecting a lower level of momentum for this segment of the
market than can be seen for green bond issuance from developed countries over the same period. Consequently, increasing
green bond and loan issuance from developing countries represents a significant market opportunity for global investors
seeking to align their investment strategies with environmental considerations. This market opportunity is however not being
exploited, with the World Bank estimating that global investors allocate less than 2% of their asset base to infrastructure
investment in developing countries, insufficient to meet the climate finance gap.
Proposed Interventions: Guarantees as A Solution
1.6 The OECD defines guarantees as “a type of insurance policy protecting banks and investors from the risks of non-payment”.
More technically, a guarantee is a legally binding agreement under which the guarantor agrees to pay part or all an amount
due on a loan, equity, or other instrument in the event of non-payment by the obligor (or loss of value, in the case of
investment).
1.7 According to OECD data on amounts mobilised from the private sector by official development finance interventions
between 2012 and 2018, guarantees mobilised more private capital than direct lending or equity investments. The amount
of private finance mobilised by guarantees increased from USD 8 billion to over USD 18 billion in 2018, equivalent to an
annualised growth rate of 14%. Guarantees have mobilised more private finance than any other financial instrument,
representing 39% of total private finance mobilised for development over the period covered by the data. The OECD
concludes that guarantees have been the most effective tool to mobilise capital in every year for which data is available.
This is despite guarantees not being widely available for bonds with no hard currency guarantor focused on global capital
markets to help developing country borrowers. A key reason for this significant mobilisation effect is that guarantees can
help address the information asymmetry (i.e., investor perception of risk is actually greater than the actual level of risk) that
typically discourages investors to invest in developing countries. By doing so guarantees can encourage replication of
further transactions without credit enhancement once guarantees build the capacity of investors to the point that they are
able to invest in green bonds from developing countries without any credit enhancement. This level of market transformation
3 IFC, Amundi Asset Management, Environmental Finance Bond Database

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 4
A
can lead to green bond issuance from developing countries scaling up to the USD hundreds of billions, closing the climate
finance gap.
1.8 The necessity of developing countries being able to access global credit and capital markets for climate finance is
exacerbated by the lack of depth in their own local capital markets. The evolution of local capital markets in developing
countries is not happening at a pace that will enable them to finance their immediate climate financing needs and
consequently being able to access long-term climate finance from global credit and capital markets is necessary. Ideally,
developing countries would be able to borrow from global credit and capital markets in their own currencies, thereby placing
the currency risk with investors, however the current status quo where global investors have yet to be convinced to lend to
developing countries in hard currencies means that a transition to lending in local currencies needs to be a longer-term
ambition.
Climate Results / Benefits
1.9 DGG believes that guarantees can help developing countries access more climate finance from the global green financing
(both bonds and loans) market and is therefore seeking to design, build and operate the Green Guarantee Company
(“GGC”) to act as a market champion and mobilise greater private sector climate finance into developing countries. GGC
will be the first ever guarantee company to exist in the global credit and capital markets with this specific objective making
it a highly innovative and ground-breaking initiative.
1.10 Guarantees are a credit enhancement product, meaning they can improve the credit rating of a project (see Figure 2 below).
Most investors in global credit and capital markets can only invest in investment grade rated debt instruments which means
that climate projects in developing countries, most of which are rated below investment grade, are not available for
consideration by investors in global credit and capital markets.
F igure 2: How GGC will support climate projects in developing countries
1.11 GGC will seek to guarantee global investors to catalyse their investments into green bonds and green loans that are issued
from developing countries in global credit and capital markets. GGC will not be providing guarantees in local capital markets
in recognition that there are existing guarantors who already play that role. GGC is focusing on global credit and capital
markets where no other dedicated guarantor exists (please see Section 1.38 for additional information) and thus GGC is
additional in its presence.
1.12 To ensure speed of implementation the GGC proposition is based on working with existing global credit and capital market
participants, infrastructure, and standards to deliver a proven solution, thereby reducing execution risk and increasing the
opportunity to scale at speed. Initial legal advice has confirmed that there are no legal or regulatory obstacles to GGC being
incorporated and operationalised in London within a three-month timescale once the required equity capital has been raised
and an investment grade credit rating has been obtained from at least one of the three major rating agencies.
1.13 GGC will guarantee green bonds and loans from developing countries listed on the London Stock Exchange (“LSE”) and
other global credit and capital markets then seek to syndicate (or share) some of its guarantee exposure with the private
credit insurance market (i.e., Lloyd’s of London) thereby crowding-in multiple pools of capital and building an ecosystem to
mobilise greater climate finance into developing countries.
1.14 GGC’s Guarantee Policy (see Annex 23) will focus on guaranteeing green bonds and loans which enable developing
countries to meet their climate adaptation and mitigation targets.

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 5
A
1.15 GGC will focus on supporting new capital expenditure in relation to climate projects but may consider a refinancing subject
to two conditions being met: (1) the refinancing is a component of a larger financing that includes new capital expenditure
or where the refinancing is a pre-agreed component of a shorter term financing to bridge a construction period (e.g. Bridge-
to-Bond) and (2) the refinancing is mobilising global institutional investors that would otherwise not have invested in a
climate project in a developing country. This flexibility is needed as in developing countries the limited availability of climate
finance and high execution risk means that climate projects are frequently built-in stages, and - where the terms of financing
of the first stage negatively impacts on the viability of the subsequent phases - it would make sense for GGC to support a
refinancing.
1.16 Guarantees are in their simplest form “a promise to pay” and consequently are unfunded at the outset with funds only
flowing from the guarantor if a guarantee (or promise to pay) is called. Consequently, as the capital base of a guarantor is
not used unless a guarantee is called it is possible to write guarantees greater than (i.e., “leverage”) the amount of capital
that the guarantor has (in the belief that only a few guarantees will be called during their lifetime and even fewer will be
called at the same time). The ability of a guarantor to pay under a guarantee is analysed by a credit rating agency that then
assigns a credit rating to the guarantor’s guarantees which confirms the rating agency’s view on the ability of the guarantor
to honour payments under its guarantees. Typically, these credit ratings cap the ability of the guarantor to leverage its
capital.
1.17 GGC’s business plan envisages leveraging USD 405 million of capital (split between USD 270 million of cash equity to be
raised initially with a further USD 135 million of callable capital to be raised later) to provide guarantees to mobilise USD 4
billion of green bonds and loans from global credit and capital markets for climate finance in developing countries over a
10-year period.
1.18 For GGC it has been established that a 10x leverage multiple will allow it to maintain an investment grade credit rating and
so 10 x USD 405 million of capital = USD 4 billion of guarantee capacity.
1.19 GGC’s Transaction Selection Process (TSP), which is summarised in Figure 3 below (see Annex 24A for a more detailed
version of the TSP), guided by a Transaction Scorecard (see Annex 24B), which screens a transaction against impact
criteria, and Guarantee Policy (see Annex 23) which screens a transaction against eligibility criteria (e.g. sector), will enable
it to select climate mitigation projects which help deliver a net zero carbon economy and climate adaptation projects which
deliver environmental and social sustainability, ensuring that climate change response is at the heart of all of GGC’s
guarantees.
1.20 GGC assuring positive climate impact is as important to investors that look to GGC’s guarantees for comfort as is its ability
to provide protection against financial loss. Therefore, GGC makes use of multidisciplinary ‘lines of defence’ through its
TSP (see Annex 24A) to reduce the risk of being exposed to low climate impact on the transactions that it chooses to
guarantee. These lines of defence are professional specialists and/or experts in the fields of climate and climate bond
certifications. Importantly, the GGC will liaise with the GCF on the appointment of these specialists and/or experts. In terms
of the climate elements, these lines of defence are as follows:
1. DGG Impact Team: The DGG Impact Team will be led by the Head of Impact who will be a senior executive
climate expert with at least 10 to 15 years of experience working in their respective fields with a focus on emerging
markets. The Head of Impact will be supported by a team of mid-senior managerial level climate specialists, who
will specialise in climate adaptation and climate mitigation.
2. GGC Impact Committee: As part of the governance structure of GGC, GGC will a five-member Board of which
three members will have climate expertise and will be voting members of the GGC Impact Committee. The GGC
Board members elected to sit on the GGC Impact Committee will have extensive climate adaptation and mitigation
experience as well as significant E&S and gender experience and will play an essential role as a member of this
committee, providing independent advice and challenge and ensuring that both DGG and GGC has access to
expert climate, gender and E&S advice and are successful in delivering GGC’s climate impact and gender KPIs
and objectives. The committee members will challenge the analysis and assumptions made by the DGG Impact
Team to ensure there has been sufficient rigour in the various assessments’ methods, calculations, and findings.
Once satisfied the GGC Impact Committee will approve the transaction to move through the formal due diligence
and remediation strategy phases. GCF will also have the right to have an observer join the GGC Impact Committee
to provide additional advice and support to the GGC Impact Committee in respect of the latest thinking on specific
climate impact issues.
3. In-Country Climate Consultant: The in-country climate consultant is expected to be a reputable local or regional
climate consultancy firm that has a credible track record of at least 5 years of working with climate mitigation and/or
adaptation projects in the target country. The in-country climate consultant will be able to provide on-the-ground
support to the DGG Impact Team to assess and subsequently monitor the climate impact of a guarantee project.
1.21 While GGC’s Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B) and Guarantee Policy (Annex 23) which together govern and underpin
GGC’s TSP and provide internal assurance of climate impact, a third and final layer of assurance will be provided by external
certification of the guaranteed green bond or loan by the Climate Bonds Standards and Certification Scheme
(https://www.climatebonds.net/certification). This annual certification process will provide an external validation for investors
of the transaction’s climate impact whilst the robust TSP will provide GGC’s shareholders, including GCF, of the same.
1.22 The development of a bankable project is typically a lengthy process, particularly if the infrastructure asset or intervention
is sizable. As a guarantor, it is envisaged that GGC will be introduced to a transaction at a later stage of a project’s

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 6
A
development, often to assist the project achieve financial close by providing a credit guarantee to senior debt capital
providers.
1.23 Therefore, GGC will likely not have the opportunity to influence the environment and social (“E&S”), gender, climate, and
bond/loan certification of a climate project at an early stage in the project development cycle. Instead, GGC relies on having
a robust TSP which will review and carry out strategic due diligence on the borrower’s existing documentation, processes,
and systems to determine if they are compliant with the requirements of GGC’s Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B). It is
against this backdrop that GGC’s robust TSP has been developed and is summarised in seven (7) strategic steps (see
Figure 3 below) that GGC will follow in determining whether a project meets the requisite standards. Furthermore, the TSP
is a unique process that seeks to inform the selection of impactful climate projects in the absence of GGC being the project
developer or sponsor. A simple illustration of the TSP and explanation of the steps is provided below (for the more detailed
TSP please see Annex 24A):
Figure 3: Transaction Selection Process
1.24 Step 1: Transaction Origination (1-2 weeks): Transactions will be originated by GGC’s Origination Partners. GGC’s
Origination Partners liaise with the project transaction’s borrowers to garner the latest information and documents for the
project transaction.
1.25 Step 2: Initial Screening (1-3 weeks): Once an Origination Partner has introduced a transaction to DGG, as the Manager
of GGC, then DGG’s Impact Team will undergo an initial screening using the screening tabs on the Transaction Selection
Scorecard.
1.26 Step 3: Review and Challenge (1-3 weeks): Following a professional review of the available information and
documentation, the Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B) will be completed by DGG Impact Team. The draft Transaction
Scorecard (Annex 24B) is then presented for review to the GGC Impact Committee. As set out above, three members of
the GGC Board will be voting members of the GGC Impact Committee and collectively will have significant experience in
climate adaptation, climate mitigation, gender and E&S. The Impact Committee will challenge the analysis and assumptions
made by the DGG Impact Team to ensure there has been sufficient rigour in the various assessments’ methods,
calculations, and findings. Once satisfied, the GGC Impact Committee approve the transaction to move through the formal
due diligence and remediation strategy phases. GCF will also have the right to have an observer join the GGC Impact
Committee to provide additional advice and support to the GGC Impact Committee in respect of the latest thinking on
specific climate impact issues.
1.27 Step 4: Due Diligence (2-5 weeks): The due diligence step begins with DGG engaging an independent in-country
consultant to undertake a site visit with DGG’s Impact Team and the borrower. In parallel with a physical site visit, they
collectively conduct interviews with stakeholders to determine whether the submitted information provided is accurate and
commensurate with aspirations and claims made in the documents. The outcome of the due diligence step will be an
updated Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B) and a detailed transaction DD report from the investment team. The report
provides evidence to validate the various transaction assessments, analyses, and their underlying assumptions. Critically,
it also highlights any gaps and/or meaningful deviations that have been uncovered during due diligence, which will need to
be addressed by the borrower.

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 7
A
1.28 Step 5: Remediation & Disclosure (2-5 weeks): Where gaps and/or deviations exist, the transaction will be rejected and
the borrower will be required to develop a remediation strategy that satisfactorily addresses the identified gaps/deviations.
Where required, the DGG Impact Team will work with the in-country specialist consultant to assist the borrower in
developing the remediation strategy. Once the remediation strategy has been developed, the borrower is required to commit
to delivering on the strategy, within a pre-agreed timeframe. Where a borrower does not commit or expresses a clear
reluctance to developing and/or delivering a remediation strategy, the transaction will be rejected by the DGG Impact Team.
To progress, a remediation strategy must be delivered to the satisfaction of the DGG Impact Team, alongside a firm
commitment by the borrower to undertake the strategy.
1.29 Step 6: Monitoring & Evaluation Strategy (2-5 weeks): The M&E Strategy must receive a clear commitment by the
borrower, before it is tabled alongside the Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B), the detailed transaction DD report, and the
remediation strategy, for the GGC Impact Committee’s consideration. As with the remediation strategy, where a borrower
does not commit or expresses a clear reluctance to developing and/or delivering the M&E Strategy, the transaction will be
rejected by the GGC investment team before it is tabled with GGC Impact Committee for consideration.
1.30 Step 7: Approval (1-2 weeks): The GGC Impact Committee, which comprises independent experts (see Section 1.26),
will review the updated Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B), detailed transaction DD report, remediation strategy and M&E
Strategy provided by the DGG Impact Team. Once satisfied that the transaction is compliant with GGC’s Frameworks, the
GGC Impact Committee will be asked to provide its approval for the transaction to progress to the determination of a
guarantee issuance. However, if the GGC Impact Committee has residual concerns regarding the elements of the
transaction, then the GGC Impact Committee will be required to rewind to Step 5 (Remediation & Disclosure) and work
closely with the borrower to address the concerns of GGC Impact Committee. Once the GGC Impact Committee has
approved the transaction it will progress to the GGC Credit Committee that will opine on the material, financial and
commercial aspects of the transaction.
1.31 Importantly, the GGC Credit Committee will only approve transactions that have first been approved by the GGC
Impact Committee. This means that the GGC Board members who are elected to the GGC Impact Committee (and
Credit Committee), have a veto over transactions and can ensure that climate impact of the GGC’s transactions,
alongside gender and E&S impact, are maximised.
1.32 If the GGC Credit Committee is satisfied with the financial and commercial aspects of the transaction, it will issue a formal
approval to provide a guarantee on behalf of the borrower.

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 8
B
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Climate Change Problem
The climate change problem GGC addresses is mobilising climate financing from developed countries to developing
countries to support more mitigation and adaptation projects and programmes, particularly by way of private sector
investment.
1.33 The global scientific community is in agreement that human influence on the earth’s climate is clear, and that it is
unequivocal that such human influence has warmed the atmosphere, ocean, and land.4 The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (“IPCC”), the international standard-bearer for credible climate science, has emphasized that scale of
recent changes across the climate system as a whole and the present state of many aspects of the climate system are
unprecedented over many centuries to many thousands of years.5 According to the IPCC, global surface temperature will
continue to increase until at least the mid-century under all emissions scenarios considered, and global warming of 1.5°C
and 2°C will be exceeded during the 21st century unless deep reductions in carbon dioxide (“CO2”) and other greenhouse
gas emissions occur in the coming decades.6
1.34 Thus, if countries are to heed the IPCC’s warning that climate change will cause further and “long-lasting changes in all
components of the climate system, increasing the likelihood of severe, pervasive, and irreversible impacts for people and
ecosystems,”7 all communities and nations must limit climate change through substantial and sustained reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions, which – together with adaptation and strengthening of resilience – is necessary to curtail and
manage climate change risks.
Baseline
1.35 Actions to limit or reduce greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions (mitigation) and to better prepare for and respond to climate
risks (adaptation) demand resources, especially financial. Estimates vary regarding what the world needs to spend to meet
the Paris Agreement’s 1.5C target and what the costs of adaptation may be, ranging from USD 500 billion to a trillion
annually by 2050.8 According to the International Renewable Energy Agency (“IRENA”), the energy transition alone needed
to secure a 1.5C future pathway could cost USD 131 trillion from the present to 2050.9 The United Nations Environment
Programme (“UNEP”) estimates that developing countries may require between USD 155 – 330 billion a year to spend on
adaptation by 2030,10 and even USD 500 billion annually by 2050.11 If opportunities for investment in climate change
response (both mitigation and adaptation) are optimised, this could represent an opportunity at the scale of USD 23 trillion
in climate-smart investments between 2016 and 2030.12
1.36 In recognition of the pressing need to equip developing countries with the financial capacity required to address the threat
of climate change, developed country parties to the UNFCCC pledged in 2009 to collectively mobilize at least USD 100
billion annually by 2020 to support developing member-states. To date, however, this target has remained unmet.13
1.37 All developing countries have expressed the need for additional international financial support to reach their country-specific
GHG mitigation targets and to move to more resilient pathways based on their country specific Nationally Determined
Contribution (“NDC”) submissions under the Paris Agreement – as there are limited public resources to do so. As such,
many have made additional commitments conditional on the availability of international funding being made available. This
suggests a key role for the private sector in developed countries in making investments to help these countries meet the
ambitions they set forth in their NDCs. This is particularly true of local private sector and sub-sovereign climate change
efforts.
4 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC), Sixth Assessment Report (AR6), Working Group I – The Physical Science Basis: Headline Statements
(2021). Available at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Headline_Statements.pdf (last accessed February 2022).
5 IPCC (2021), ibid.
6 IPCC (2021), ibid.
7 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) - Synthesis Report (2014). Available at
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/ (last accessed February 2022).
8 UN News, The Trillion Dollar Climate Finance Challenge (and Opportunity), 27 June 2021. Available at https://news.un.org/en/story/2021/06/1094762 (last
accessed February 2022).
9 IRENA, World Energy Transitions Outlook: 1.5C Pathway (2021). Available at https://irena.org/publications/2021/Jun/-
/media/E39E2962B96D489BBBB65DB5112DA1F2.ashx (last accessed February 2022).
10 UNEP, Adaptation Gap Report, 2021. Available at https://www.unep.org/resources/adaptation-gap-report-2021(last accessed February 2022).
11 UN News, The Trillion Dollar Climate Finance Challenge (and Opportunity), 27 June 2021. Available at https://news.un.org/en/story/2021/06/1094762 (last
accessed February 2022).
12 IFC, Climate Investment Opportunities in Emerging Markets (2016). Available at https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/59260145-ec2e-40de-97e6-
3aa78b82b3c9/3503-IFC-Climate_Investment_Opportunity-Report-Dec-FINAL.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=lBLd6Xq (last accessed February 2022).
13 World Resources Institute, A Breakdown of Developed Countries’ Public Climate Finance Contributions Towards the $100 Billion Goal (October 2021).
Available at https://files.wri.org/d8/s3fs-public/2021-10/breakdown-developed-countries-public-climate-finance-contributions-towards-100-
billion.pdf?VersionId=0luvOD5zVLLxxfRpWad_DyFC3Qh4sjd0 (last accessed February 2022).

--- Table 1 on Page 12 ---
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Climate Change Problem
The climate change problem GGC addresses is mobilising climate financing from developed countries to developing
countries to support more mitigation and adaptation projects and programmes, particularly by way of private sector
investment.
1.33 The global scientific community is in agreement that human influence on the earth’s climate is clear, and that it is
unequivocal that such human influence has warmed the atmosphere, ocean, and land.4 The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (“IPCC”), the international standard-bearer for credible climate science, has emphasized that scale of
recent changes across the climate system as a whole and the present state of many aspects of the climate system are
unprecedented over many centuries to many thousands of years.5 According to the IPCC, global surface temperature will
continue to increase until at least the mid-century under all emissions scenarios considered, and global warming of 1.5°C
and 2°C will be exceeded during the 21st century unless deep reductions in carbon dioxide (“CO2”) and other greenhouse
gas emissions occur in the coming decades.6
1.34 Thus, if countries are to heed the IPCC’s warning that climate change will cause further and “long-lasting changes in all
components of the climate system, increasing the likelihood of severe, pervasive, and irreversible impacts for people and
ecosystems,”7 all communities and nations must limit climate change through substantial and sustained reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions, which – together with adaptation and strengthening of resilience – is necessary to curtail and
manage climate change risks.
Baseline
1.35 Actions to limit or reduce greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions (mitigation) and to better prepare for and respond to climate
risks (adaptation) demand resources, especially financial. Estimates vary regarding what the world needs to spend to meet
the Paris Agreement’s 1.5C target and what the costs of adaptation may be, ranging from USD 500 billion to a trillion
annually by 2050.8 According to the International Renewable Energy Agency (“IRENA”), the energy transition alone needed
to secure a 1.5C future pathway could cost USD 131 trillion from the present to 2050.9 The United Nations Environment
Programme (“UNEP”) estimates that developing countries may require between USD 155 – 330 billion a year to spend on
adaptation by 2030,10 and even USD 500 billion annually by 2050.11 If opportunities for investment in climate change
response (both mitigation and adaptation) are optimised, this could represent an opportunity at the scale of USD 23 trillion
in climate-smart investments between 2016 and 2030.12
1.36 In recognition of the pressing need to equip developing countries with the financial capacity required to address the threat
of climate change, developed country parties to the UNFCCC pledged in 2009 to collectively mobilize at least USD 100
billion annually by 2020 to support developing member-states. To date, however, this target has remained unmet.13
1.37 All developing countries have expressed the need for additional international financial support to reach their country-specific
GHG mitigation targets and to move to more resilient pathways based on their country specific Nationally Determined
Contribution (“NDC”) submissions under the Paris Agreement – as there are limited public resources to do so. As such,
many have made additional commitments conditional on the availability of international funding being made available. This
suggests a key role for the private sector in developed countries in making investments to help these countries meet the
ambitions they set forth in their NDCs. This is particularly true of local private sector and sub-sovereign climate change
efforts.

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 9
B
Proposed Intervention
1.38 In December 2020, the Global Financial Markets Association (“GFMA”), which represents the common interests of the
world’s leading financial and capital market participants to provide a collective voice on matters that support global capital
markets, commissioned and published “Climate Finance Markets and Real Economy”, a paper that focuses on providing
“a roadmap for how to accelerate the evolution of climate finance”. The paper outlines a number of recommendations
including that “multilaterals and development financial institutions should scale up vehicles to aggregate and deploy
concessional capital in pursuit of climate-related objectives (i.e., facilities that deploy risk guarantees, concessionary
equity or mezzanine capital, PPAs, and other mechanisms)”.
1.39 The GGC is a solution to this market failure and will deploy the under-used financial instrument of credit guarantees (for
bonds and loans) in developing countries that face considerable shortfall of climate mitigation and adaptation finance. The
GGC’s guarantees will de-risk climate change investments that would otherwise not achieve financial close, unlocking and
expanding levels of private capital that are yet untapped for climate change projects and programmes in beneficiary
countries.
1.40 As can be seen below in Figure 4, the existing dedicated guarantee providers are focused on local currency and are
regional in focus. Consequently, GGC will be the first ever guarantee company to exist in the hard currency global
capital markets focused on developing countries.
Figure 4: Market mapping of existing guarantee providers
1.41 Envisioned as a self-sustaining programme with no defined lifespan14 (but an exit horizon for GCF within 20 years as
discussed in Section B6), GGC will, at the outset, provide guarantees to investments in sectors congruent with the Green
Climate Fund’s (“GCF’s”) following mitigation results areas (“MRAs”) and adaptation results areas (“ARAs”): MRA1 – energy
generation and access; MRA2 – low-emission transport; MRA3 – buildings, cities, industries, and appliances; ARA2 –
health, well-being, food, and water security; and ARA3 – infrastructure and built environment.
1.42 As such, the focus or targeting considerations for sectors, countries, types of projects (mitigation or adaptation) and project
priorities should and must be broad-based, to allow for any vulnerability to be pointed to GGC to address via the issuance
of green bonds or loans that deliver long term debt funding from developed countries to developing countries.
Nevertheless, GGC’s limited guarantee capacity of USD 4 billion compels it to have a framework to prioritise projects that
deliver significant climate impact in the relevant sectors. Hence the TSP will be guided by a Transaction Scorecard (Annex
24B), which explicitly embeds the GCF’s own investment framework into the eligibility criteria.
1.43 As the GGC is a global programme without specific sub-projects identified yet, detailed studies demonstrating the most
likely scenario (prevailing conditions or other alternative) that would remain or continue in the absence of the proposed
intervention, including baseline information and the corresponding methodologies used to derive such information, will be
required for the respective feasibility studies before GGC considers supporting the sub-project. These should be aligned
with GGC’s objectives as described in its Guarantee Policy (Annex 23) and with the criteria reflected in the Transaction
Scorecard (Annex 24B).
1.44 As of October 11, 2022, we received 8 NOLs from Gabon, India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Brazil, Lao, Rwanda and
Trinidad and Tobago. MUFG is in advanced discussions with several other countries, including (without limitation)
Bangladesh, Egypt, Pakistan, South Africa, and Uganda. These countries, amongst others, all expressed significant interest
in the GGC programme but have not been able to complete their internal sign-off processes due to COVID-19 and other
14 Note that for the purposes of some calculations underpinning the funding proposal, the timeframe for the GGC’s operation was assumed, provisionally, to be
20 years. However, since the estimation of climate benefits (mitigation and adaptation) was based on indicative projects, and since the calculations are linked to
the typology of the project and sector rather than a prescribed timeframe, the lifespan of the GGC is not critical to the estimations.

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 10
B
reasons. Nevertheless, we expect to receive NOLs from most, if not all, of these countries before the publication deadline.
Additional countries may be added to the programme after initial Board approval, provided they submit an NOL, and the
addition is approved by the Board.
1.45 As a starting point, the GGC has developed country-specific climate change analyses as part of its market studies, which
identify priority sectors for climate change mitigation and adaptation interventions in each country. These are sectors and
sub-sectors highlighted in the countries’ most recent NDCs, and that align with the high-level status-quo review of GHG
emissions and climate risks, and vulnerabilities captured in the reports. Illustratively, for a sample sub-set of beneficiary
countries, the climate change context underpinning the GGC’s approach can be summarised as follows, for mitigation and
adaptation respectively:
Country Hazard Impact (on Potential Programme’s Programme’ Potential Range of Gender-related
(Through the relevant Programme Prioritized s High Interventions (indicative) 18
2039/2040)15 ARA and Interventions High-Risk Priority
implicated (Indicative) Hazards16 Adaptation Devel Improvi Ena Develo Provisio
(please also sectors) (including Interventions oping ng bling pment n of
refer to the full- (please also historic (from inclusi access mor of CSA
ve to e gender skills
length, refer to incidence)17 country
buildin climate inclu - upliftme
individual adaptation NDC, linked g infrastr sive inform nt for
country climate transaction to ARA most codes ucture and ed women,
change report scorecard and distinctly and and effici transp and
for each the Annex with emphasized stand early ent ort unlockin
country, the preferred in the NDC) ards, warnin city policie g
submitted as list of and g and deci s, bottlene
buildin disaste sion- strateg cks for
annexes; each adaptation
g r maki ies and women’
report provides investments by
gende manag ng. regulat s
detail on sector) r- ement ions. participa
observed and sensiti strategi tion in
projected ve es & rural
climate change shelte system value
trends and rs for s. chains.
the
hazards)
comm
unity.
Trinidad Increasing Greater Water storage Floods (urban Urban flood
and trend in rising pressure on infrastructure; and riverine); control and
Tobago temperatures; limited water supply cyclones; management
longer heat freshwater and landslides; systems and
waves; resources, reticulation wildfires structures;
increasing creating risk systems; flood cyclone early
rainfall of water and drought warning
variability; stress and control and systems and
decrease in scarcity; management climate
rainfall levels; greater loss systems; services.
Storms
sea-level rise; and damage cyclone early represent ✓ ✓ ✓
increasing of warning
30.77% of the
frequency and infrastructure systems and
country’s (with
intensity of from floods, climate
average geographic
tropical droughts, services; water
annual natural prioritization
cyclones. cyclones, and re-use and
occurrence of areas
extreme heat. recycling
hazard for identified by
mechanisms;
1980-2020, Trinidad and
climate-
and floods Tobago’s
responsive
represent Office of
urban
23.08%. Disaster
infrastructure;
15 For all countries, peer-reviewed literature synthesized includes:
- The World Bank Group’s Country Climate Risk Profiles (2020 / 2021) https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country-profiles
- USAID’s Country Climate Risk Profiles https://www.climatelinks.org/climate-risk-management/regional-country-risk-profiles#countries-i
- ThinkHazard’s Country Risk Profiles https://thinkhazard.org/en/
- The EU’s INFORM Country Risk Index https://drmkc.jrc.ec.europa.eu/inform-index/INFORM-Risk/Country-Risk-Profile
- For countries that are covered by such reports, DRR/DRM profiles by UNDRR http://riskprofilesundrr.org/riskprofiles/countries.html and GFDRR
https://www.gfdrr.org/en/disaster-risk-country-profiles
- Official national government publications such as latest National Communications to the UNFCCC and updated NDCs.
16 Focus is on the three top climate-driven (non geological) hazards with hazard levels identified as “very high” and/or “high” for the country by ThinkHazard (a
World Bank and GFDRR resource)
17 For all countries, historic disaster incidence data is sources from the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal’s ‘Vulnerability’ section
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org
18 See Table 6 in Annex 8.1 for a more detailed framework for identifying gender interventions per sector, per country.

--- Table 1 on Page 14 ---
reasons. Nevertheless, we expect to receive NOLs from most, if not all, of these countries before the publication deadline.
Additional countries may be added to the programme after initial Board approval, provided they submit an NOL, and the
addition is approved by the Board.
1.45 As a starting point, the GGC has developed country-specific climate change analyses as part of its market studies, which
identify priority sectors for climate change mitigation and adaptation interventions in each country. These are sectors and
sub-sectors highlighted in the countries’ most recent NDCs, and that align with the high-level status-quo review of GHG
emissions and climate risks, and vulnerabilities captured in the reports. Illustratively, for a sample sub-set of beneficiary
countries, the climate change context underpinning the GGC’s approach can be summarised as follows, for mitigation and
adaptation respectively:
Country Hazard Impact (on Potential Programme’s Programme’ Potential Range of Gender-related
(Through the relevant Programme Prioritized s High Interventions (indicative) 18
2039/2040)15 ARA and Interventions High-Risk Priority
implicated (Indicative) Hazards16 Adaptation Devel Improvi Ena Develo Provisio
(please also sectors) (including Interventions oping ng bling pment n of
refer to the full- (please also historic (from inclusi access mor of CSA
ve to e gender skills
length, refer to incidence)17 country
buildin climate inclu - upliftme
individual adaptation NDC, linked g infrastr sive inform nt for
country climate transaction to ARA most codes ucture and ed women,
change report scorecard and distinctly and and effici transp and
for each the Annex with emphasized stand early ent ort unlockin
country, the preferred in the NDC) ards, warnin city policie g
submitted as list of and g and deci s, bottlene
buildin disaste sion- strateg cks for
annexes; each adaptation
g r maki ies and women’
report provides investments by
gende manag ng. regulat s
detail on sector) r- ement ions. participa
observed and sensiti strategi tion in
projected ve es & rural
climate change shelte system value
trends and rs for s. chains.
the
hazards)
comm
unity.
Trinidad Increasing Greater Water storage Floods (urban Urban flood
and trend in rising pressure on infrastructure; and riverine); control and
Tobago temperatures; limited water supply cyclones; management
longer heat freshwater and landslides; systems and
waves; resources, reticulation wildfires structures;
increasing creating risk systems; flood cyclone early
rainfall of water and drought warning
variability; stress and control and systems and
decrease in scarcity; management climate
rainfall levels; greater loss systems; services.
Storms
sea-level rise; and damage cyclone early represent ✓ ✓ ✓
increasing of warning
30.77% of the
frequency and infrastructure systems and
country’s (with
intensity of from floods, climate
average geographic
tropical droughts, services; water
annual natural prioritization
cyclones. cyclones, and re-use and
occurrence of areas
extreme heat. recycling
hazard for identified by
mechanisms;
1980-2020, Trinidad and
climate-
and floods Tobago’s
responsive
represent Office of
urban
23.08%. Disaster
infrastructure; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Country | Hazard
(Through
2039/2040)15
(please also
refer to the full-
length,
individual
country climate
change report
for each
country,
submitted as
annexes; each
report provides
detail on
observed and
projected
climate change
trends and
hazards) | Impact (on
the relevant
ARA and
implicated
sectors) | Potential
Programme
Interventions
(Indicative)
(please also
refer to
adaptation
transaction
scorecard and
the Annex with
the preferred
list of
adaptation
investments by
sector) | Programme’s
Prioritized
High-Risk
Hazards16
(including
historic
incidence)17 | Programme’
s High
Priority
Adaptation
Interventions
(from
country
NDC, linked
to ARA most
distinctly
emphasized
in the NDC) | Potential Range of Gender-related
Interventions (indicative) 18 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Devel
oping
inclusi
ve
buildin
g
codes
and
stand
ards,
and
buildin
g
gende
r-
sensiti
ve
shelte
rs for
the
comm
unity. | Improvi
ng
access
to
climate
infrastr
ucture
and
early
warnin
g and
disaste
r
manag
ement
strategi
es &
system
s. | Ena
bling
mor
e
inclu
sive
and
effici
ent
city
deci
sion-
maki
ng. | Develo
pment
of
gender
-
inform
ed
transp
ort
policie
s,
strateg
ies and
regulat
ions. | Provisio
n of
CSA
skills
upliftme
nt for
women,
and
unlockin
g
bottlene
cks for
women’
s
participa
tion in
rural
value
chains.
 | Trinidad
and
Tobago | Increasing
trend in rising
temperatures;
longer heat
waves;
increasing
rainfall
variability;
decrease in
rainfall levels;
sea-level rise;
increasing
frequency and
intensity of
tropical
cyclones. | Greater
pressure on
limited
freshwater
resources,
creating risk
of water
stress and
scarcity;
greater loss
and damage
of
infrastructure
from floods,
droughts,
cyclones, and
extreme heat. | Water storage
infrastructure;
water supply
and
reticulation
systems; flood
and drought
control and
management
systems;
cyclone early
warning
systems and
climate
services; water
re-use and
recycling
mechanisms;
climate-
responsive
urban
infrastructure; | Floods (urban
and riverine);
cyclones;
landslides;
wildfires
Storms
represent
30.77% of the
country’s
average
annual natural
occurrence
hazard for
1980-2020,
and floods
represent
23.08%. | Urban flood
control and
management
systems and
structures;
cyclone early
warning
systems and
climate
services.
(with
geographic
prioritization
of areas
identified by
Trinidad and
Tobago’s
Office of
Disaster | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |  | 

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 11
B
institutional Preparedness
strengthening. and
In 2018 (the Management
year with the as being at
highest high risk and
number of susceptibility
disaster- of floods and
affected cyclones)
population
figures), an
estimated
150,000
persons were
affected by
floods.
Rwanda Increasing Significantly Flood and Floods (urban Urban flood
trend in rising increased risk drought control and riverine); control and
temperatures; of flooding as and cyclones; management
increasing well as management landslides; systems and
rainfall erosion, systems; wildfires structures
variability with landslides, resilient urban (including
wetter wet and landslips; stormwater stormwater
seasons, and more frequent management management
Floods
an overall and prolonged and drainage and
represent
slight increase droughts, infrastructure; drainage);
47.83% of the
in precipitation; particularly in Expanded landscape-
country’s
rise in heavy the East; early warning based erosion
average
rainfall events damage to systems and control
annual natural
and intense infrastructure climate measures;
occurrence
downpours. due to services; water expanded
hazard for
flooding and storage early warning
1980-2020,
disasters; infrastructure; systems and
and landslides
greater water supply climate
represent
pressure on and services.
10.87%. ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
limited reticulation
freshwater systems; water
resources, re-use and
(with
creating risk recycling In 2020 (the
geographic
of water mechanisms; year with one
prioritization
stress and climate- of the highest
of areas
scarcity in responsive number of
identified by
certain areas, urban disaster-
Rwanda’s
especially in infrastructure affected
Ministry in
dry season. for transport population
charge of
and mobility. figures), an
Emergency
estimated
Management,
22,000
or MINEMA,
persons were
as being at
affected by
high risk and
floods. In
susceptibility
2016, 30,000
of floods and
were affected
landslides)
by landslides.
Laos Increasing Increased risk Drought and Floods (urban Urban flood
trend in rising of severe flood control and riverine); control and
temperatures; droughts; and cyclones; management
increased increased risk management landslides; systems and
frequency and of river systems; wildfires structures;
intensity of flooding along climate- cyclone early
heavy the Mekong, responsive warning
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
precipitation as well as urban systems and
Floods
events; sea- urban flooding infrastructure climate
represent
level rise; from heavy for transport services.
47.92% of the
increasing downpours, and mobility;
intensity of and coastal resilient urban
country’s
average
tropical flooding from stormwater
annual natural
cyclones. storm surges; management
occurrence
greater loss and drainage

--- Table 1 on Page 15 ---
 |  |  |  | institutional
strengthening. | In 2018 (the
year with the
highest
number of
disaster-
affected
population
figures), an
estimated
150,000
persons were
affected by
floods. | Preparedness
and
Management
as being at
high risk and
susceptibility
of floods and
cyclones) |  |  |  |  | 
 | Rwanda | Increasing
trend in rising
temperatures;
increasing
rainfall
variability with
wetter wet
seasons, and
an overall
slight increase
in precipitation;
rise in heavy
rainfall events
and intense
downpours. | Significantly
increased risk
of flooding as
well as
erosion,
landslides,
and landslips;
more frequent
and prolonged
droughts,
particularly in
the East;
damage to
infrastructure
due to
flooding and
disasters;
greater
pressure on
limited
freshwater
resources,
creating risk
of water
stress and
scarcity in
certain areas,
especially in
dry season. | Flood and
drought control
and
management
systems;
resilient urban
stormwater
management
and drainage
infrastructure;
Expanded
early warning
systems and
climate
services; water
storage
infrastructure;
water supply
and
reticulation
systems; water
re-use and
recycling
mechanisms;
climate-
responsive
urban
infrastructure
for transport
and mobility. | Floods (urban
and riverine);
cyclones;
landslides;
wildfires
Floods
represent
47.83% of the
country’s
average
annual natural
occurrence
hazard for
1980-2020,
and landslides
represent
10.87%.
In 2020 (the
year with one
of the highest
number of
disaster-
affected
population
figures), an
estimated
22,000
persons were
affected by
floods. In
2016, 30,000
were affected
by landslides. | Urban flood
control and
management
systems and
structures
(including
stormwater
management
and
drainage);
landscape-
based erosion
control
measures;
expanded
early warning
systems and
climate
services.
(with
geographic
prioritization
of areas
identified by
Rwanda’s
Ministry in
charge of
Emergency
Management,
or MINEMA,
as being at
high risk and
susceptibility
of floods and
landslides) | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | 
 | Laos | Increasing
trend in rising
temperatures;
increased
frequency and
intensity of
heavy
precipitation
events; sea-
level rise;
increasing
intensity of
tropical
cyclones. | Increased risk
of severe
droughts;
increased risk
of river
flooding along
the Mekong,
as well as
urban flooding
from heavy
downpours,
and coastal
flooding from
storm surges;
greater loss | Drought and
flood control
and
management
systems;
climate-
responsive
urban
infrastructure
for transport
and mobility;
resilient urban
stormwater
management
and drainage | Floods (urban
and riverine);
cyclones;
landslides;
wildfires
Floods
represent
47.92% of the
country’s
average
annual natural
occurrence | Urban flood
control and
management
systems and
structures;
cyclone early
warning
systems and
climate
services. | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | 

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 12
B
and damage infrastructure; hazard for (with
of expanded 1980-2020; geographic
infrastructure early warning storms prioritization
from droughts, systems and represent of areas
floods, climate 5.61% identified by
cyclones, services; (including Laos’
storm surges, cyclone those caused National
wildfires, and shelters; by cyclonic Disaster
extreme heat; institutional activity in the Management
increased strengthening. region) Office and
cyclone risks. National
Disaster
Management
In 2019 (the
Committee as
recent year
being at high
with the
risk and
highest
susceptibility
number of
of floods and
disaster-
storms)
affected
population
figures), an
estimated 2
million
persons were
affected by
storms. In
2020, 65,000
were affected
by floods.
Gabon Increasing Increased risk Flood and Floods Coastal storm
trend in rising of flooding in control and (coastal, surge
temperatures; both coastal management urban, and protection
longer heat and urban measures; riverine); and
waves; areas, plus early warning storms, embankment
increasing river flooding; systems and extreme heat; resilience;
rainfall greater loss climate wildfires coastal and
variability with and damage services; urban flood
projected of operational control
increase; sea- infrastructure capacity- management
Storms
level rise and from floods, building and systems and
represent
coastal storm coastal storm institutional structures
23.08% of the
surges; surges, and strengthening. (including
country’s
increasing extreme heat; stormwater
average
frequency and more damage management
annual natural
intensity of to and
occurrence
wildfires. populations, drainage).
hazard for
landscapes,
and
1980-2020;
floods
settlements
represent (with
from wildfires
15.38%. geographic
prioritization
of areas
identified by
In 2012 (the
Gabon’s
recent year
National
with the
Platform for
highest
Disaster Risk
number of
Reduction as
disaster-
being at high
affected
risk and
population
susceptibility
figures), an
of floods)
estimated
77,000
persons were
affected by
floods.

--- Table 1 on Page 16 ---
 |  |  | and damage
of
infrastructure
from droughts,
floods,
cyclones,
storm surges,
wildfires, and
extreme heat;
increased
cyclone risks. | infrastructure;
expanded
early warning
systems and
climate
services;
cyclone
shelters;
institutional
strengthening. | hazard for
1980-2020;
storms
represent
5.61%
(including
those caused
by cyclonic
activity in the
region)
In 2019 (the
recent year
with the
highest
number of
disaster-
affected
population
figures), an
estimated 2
million
persons were
affected by
storms. In
2020, 65,000
were affected
by floods. | (with
geographic
prioritization
of areas
identified by
Laos’
National
Disaster
Management
Office and
National
Disaster
Management
Committee as
being at high
risk and
susceptibility
of floods and
storms) |  |  |  |  | 
 | Gabon | Increasing
trend in rising
temperatures;
longer heat
waves;
increasing
rainfall
variability with
projected
increase; sea-
level rise and
coastal storm
surges;
increasing
frequency and
intensity of
wildfires. | Increased risk
of flooding in
both coastal
and urban
areas, plus
river flooding;
greater loss
and damage
of
infrastructure
from floods,
coastal storm
surges, and
extreme heat;
more damage
to
populations,
landscapes,
and
settlements
from wildfires | Flood and
control and
management
measures;
early warning
systems and
climate
services;
operational
capacity-
building and
institutional
strengthening. | Floods
(coastal,
urban, and
riverine);
storms,
extreme heat;
wildfires
Storms
represent
23.08% of the
country’s
average
annual natural
occurrence
hazard for
1980-2020;
floods
represent
15.38%.
In 2012 (the
recent year
with the
highest
number of
disaster-
affected
population
figures), an
estimated
77,000
persons were
affected by
floods. | Coastal storm
surge
protection
and
embankment
resilience;
coastal and
urban flood
control
management
systems and
structures
(including
stormwater
management
and
drainage).
(with
geographic
prioritization
of areas
identified by
Gabon’s
National
Platform for
Disaster Risk
Reduction as
being at high
risk and
susceptibility
of floods) |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 13
B
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)
Present the theory of change (ToC) that contains a goal statement and describes how the proposed project/programme will
contribute towards the goal statement by using results chain links from activities, outputs, to outcomes. By referring to the sample
ToC diagram template available in the guidance note, present a ToC diagram (approximately 1 page) which visually represents the
same logic in the narrative description. The ToC diagram and narrative may include a wide range of co-benefits19 as applicable in
the context of the project/programme. Note all co-benefits will need to be further elaborated in section D.3 (sustainable
development potential) and correspondent co-benefit indicators should be provided under section E.5 (project/programme specific
indicators). The theory of change should also include any relevant barriers (social, gender, fiscal, regulatory, technological,
financial, ecological, institutional, etc.) that need to be addressed as well as risks and assumptions. Note that the assumptions can
be elaborated further in sections E.3 (GCF outcome level: reduced emissions and increased resilience) and E.5
(project/programme specific indicators) for each relevant indicator, as appropriate.
How GGC will issue their Guarantees:
1.46 Guarantees are a credit enhancement product. More technically, a guarantee is a legally binding agreement under which
the guarantor agrees to pay part or all of an amount due on a loan, equity, or other instrument in the event of non-
payment by the project borrower (or loss of value, in the case of investment) to an investor (also known as an issuer).
1.47 As such, a typical guarantee transaction is formed via a tri-partite relationship as shown in the diagram below:
1.48 To demonstrate how this works in practice, assume there is a company who wants to raise financing for a climate project
that requires long-term debt from an institutional investor (such as a pension fund). The institutional investor may be
concerned about the ability of the company to repay the debt due to its perception of the riskiness of the climate project or
country in which the company is present. Consequently, the institutional investor is inclined to decline providing the long-
term debt to the climate project unless it can be more certain that the debt will be repaid. This is where a guarantee from
a reputable institution can be useful and help to address the concerns of the institutional investor by assuring them of
repayment if the company and/or climate project is unable to pay.
1.49 Typically, the agreements that are signed when issuing a guarantee include 1) a guarantee agreement; and 2) a recourse
agreement. The guarantee agreement is signed between the institutional investor and the guarantee company whilst the
recourse agreement is signed between guarantee company and the borrower (being either the climate project or the
company developing it). The recourse agreement ensures that if the guarantor has to pay part or all of an amount due on
the debt in the event of non-payment by the borrower, the guarantor has the right to recover these amounts from the
borrower.
1.50 Once the guarantee is issued (and the recourse agreement signed), the borrower will pay the guarantor an ongoing
guarantee fee which is payable throughout the life of the guarantee, typically on a quarterly basis in advance.
1.51 In addition to paying a guarantee fee, the borrower may also need to adhere to financial covenants and provide relevant
and up to date reports to the guarantor. This enables the guarantor to assess the likelihood of a call on the guarantee.
The guarantee would be monitored by the portfolio team in the guarantee company and they will be responsible for
managing the relationship with the beneficiaries of the guarantee and the borrowers.
What happens in the event of a call? [this section covers at a high level what would happen in the event of a call on a
guarantee to pay part or all of an amount due on a loan]
1.52 A guarantor would ensure (as part of its terms and conditions) that it is given as much notice as possible before a call
under a guarantee is made. The call on a guarantee is initiated by the institutional investor (or an agent if there is a
consortium of lenders) or bond trustees (in the event the guarantor guaranteed a bond). From an institutional investor’s
19 GCF categorizes co-benefits into six areas which are: environmental, social, economic, gender, adaptation (relevant for pure mitigation projects) and
mitigation (relevant for pure adaptation projects). Further guidance is available in the funding proposal (FP) guidance note.

--- Table 1 on Page 17 ---
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)
Present the theory of change (ToC) that contains a goal statement and describes how the proposed project/programme will
contribute towards the goal statement by using results chain links from activities, outputs, to outcomes. By referring to the sample
ToC diagram template available in the guidance note, present a ToC diagram (approximately 1 page) which visually represents the
same logic in the narrative description. The ToC diagram and narrative may include a wide range of co-benefits19 as applicable in
the context of the project/programme. Note all co-benefits will need to be further elaborated in section D.3 (sustainable
development potential) and correspondent co-benefit indicators should be provided under section E.5 (project/programme specific
indicators). The theory of change should also include any relevant barriers (social, gender, fiscal, regulatory, technological,
financial, ecological, institutional, etc.) that need to be addressed as well as risks and assumptions. Note that the assumptions can
be elaborated further in sections E.3 (GCF outcome level: reduced emissions and increased resilience) and E.5
(project/programme specific indicators) for each relevant indicator, as appropriate.
How GGC will issue their Guarantees:
1.46 Guarantees are a credit enhancement product. More technically, a guarantee is a legally binding agreement under which
the guarantor agrees to pay part or all of an amount due on a loan, equity, or other instrument in the event of non-
payment by the project borrower (or loss of value, in the case of investment) to an investor (also known as an issuer).
1.47 As such, a typical guarantee transaction is formed via a tri-partite relationship as shown in the diagram below:
1.48 To demonstrate how this works in practice, assume there is a company who wants to raise financing for a climate project
that requires long-term debt from an institutional investor (such as a pension fund). The institutional investor may be
concerned about the ability of the company to repay the debt due to its perception of the riskiness of the climate project or
country in which the company is present. Consequently, the institutional investor is inclined to decline providing the long-
term debt to the climate project unless it can be more certain that the debt will be repaid. This is where a guarantee from
a reputable institution can be useful and help to address the concerns of the institutional investor by assuring them of
repayment if the company and/or climate project is unable to pay.
1.49 Typically, the agreements that are signed when issuing a guarantee include 1) a guarantee agreement; and 2) a recourse
agreement. The guarantee agreement is signed between the institutional investor and the guarantee company whilst the
recourse agreement is signed between guarantee company and the borrower (being either the climate project or the
company developing it). The recourse agreement ensures that if the guarantor has to pay part or all of an amount due on
the debt in the event of non-payment by the borrower, the guarantor has the right to recover these amounts from the
borrower.
1.50 Once the guarantee is issued (and the recourse agreement signed), the borrower will pay the guarantor an ongoing
guarantee fee which is payable throughout the life of the guarantee, typically on a quarterly basis in advance.
1.51 In addition to paying a guarantee fee, the borrower may also need to adhere to financial covenants and provide relevant
and up to date reports to the guarantor. This enables the guarantor to assess the likelihood of a call on the guarantee.
The guarantee would be monitored by the portfolio team in the guarantee company and they will be responsible for
managing the relationship with the beneficiaries of the guarantee and the borrowers.
What happens in the event of a call? [this section covers at a high level what would happen in the event of a call on a
guarantee to pay part or all of an amount due on a loan]
1.52 A guarantor would ensure (as part of its terms and conditions) that it is given as much notice as possible before a call
under a guarantee is made. The call on a guarantee is initiated by the institutional investor (or an agent if there is a
consortium of lenders) or bond trustees (in the event the guarantor guaranteed a bond). From an institutional investor’s

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 14
B
perspective, they would typically want to ensure that the underlying borrowing does not turn into a non-performing loan
and therefore they would want to be paid on demand.
1.53 Guarantees that are on demand and irrevocable are typically paid by a guarantor as soon as they receive a demand for
payment. When payments are made, however, would depend on what had been agreed at the outset. The guarantor
would ask for as much notice as possible and there may be other processes to work through (e.g., remedial periods etc.)
before a payment is made.
1.54 Through this process there is a strong investment case for private sector participation in adaptation projects and
mitigation projects, as private sector actors can be incentivised to invest in adaptation activities by, inter alia, the
avoidance of climate risks and the opportunities to develop new products/services and to reach new markets. The use of
guarantees is one mechanism to de-risk climate investments for the private sector, thereby encouraging the
entrance of new market actors.
The Theory of Change is then built off of this concept:
1.55 A Theory of Change is thus based on the above and encapsulates mobilising private debt capital towards climate change
mitigation and adaptation projects that deliver climate change solutions and environmental benefits. The Theory of
Change has been developed to stage the various outcomes the GGC aim to achieve through issuing guarantees.
Three mechanisms the equity will be enabled: The equity capital received from the GCF will be enabled through three
mechanisms provided by the GGC:
1.55.1 1) credit guarantees and associated risk management (such as active portfolio management, restructuring and recovery
of paid claims);
1.55.2 2) financial structuring (e.g. problem-solving to bridge differing requirements of investors and borrowers); and
1.55.3 3) impact reporting. GGC will also seek technical assistance grants from third-parties or potentially seek to raise its own
grant funded technical assistance facility to support the delivery of these mechanisms on the ground in developing
countries.
Climate and mitigation potential
1.56 It is important to note that a guarantee does not in itself make an unviable project a good one. As such GGC’s focus will
be to identify viable climate adaptation and mitigation projects in developing countries which are not perceived as being
viable by global credit and capital markets due to some level of information asymmetry. Using the three mechanisms
described above, GGC’s guarantee will seek to crowd-in investors and shift their understanding of the true level of risk
associated with the climate project with the expectation that as investors become more educated about the risks, they will
gain the confidence to invest in future climate projects in developing countries without the need for guarantees. As
mentioned earlier, it is expected that the annual climate finance need in developing countries will be USD 500 billion by
2050, as such starting to educate investors in global credit and capital markets today is paramount to meeting the climate
finance needs of tomorrow.
1.57 Indeed, a guarantee also has the potential to deliver on both direct and indirect climate outcomes for the participating
countries adaptation/mitigation goals as outlined in the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC). If GGC receives
equity to operationalise and issue guarantees, participating countries will have reduced barriers (including investors’ low
risk appetite, investors’ interest in large-scale projects only, and a lack of policy incentives (Climate Policy Initiative, 2021)
to invest in climate mitigation and adaptation interventions. With decreased barriers to receive investment for the
interventions, participating countries will have access to cost-efficient technologies, projects/programmes geared to
increase resilience and the adaptative capacity of communities in the project region and mitigation interventions tailored
to reduced GHG emissions. While there are facilities providing guarantees, they aim to mobilise finance from local capital
markets whereas GGC’s novel approach intends to unlock finance from global capital markets. There is thus a growing
demand for climate finance guarantees, GGC aims to fill this significant to scale the private sector investment needed to
prepare and implement much needed climate related project/programmes.
1.58 Through its guarantee, GGC indirectly aims to reduce climate vulnerabilities for beneficiaries by guaranteeing projects
with an adaptation or mitigation impact potential that will amount to a paradigm shift in the participating countries. An
example project which illustrates such benefits is shown below:

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 15
B
# Project Example & Climate Adaptation GGC Guarantee Additional Co-
Sector or Mitigation Additionality Benefits
Potential or benefit Potential
1 INDONESIA: The The project will GGC would support Contribution to Market
example project aims contribute to the the development of a Creation Inclusiveness
to improve access to overall reduction in the climate smart finance
finance to finance GHG emission in the market in Indonesia The project would
climate-smart projects transport sector support improvement
geared to improving Knowledge sharing of access to finance
access to transport. In the transport sector, and capacity building for women owned
Building on IFC's support for clean fuels through technical SME and expected to
successful effort on and improved public assistance provided demonstrate to other
investing in transport market participants the
Indonesia's first non- Unlock funding to viability of
sovereign green bond, Decarbonizing global capital market differentiated financial
the Project is expected transport into urban that couldn’t be products for the
to further deepen the areas by switching to secured through the benefit.
climate finance market lower-carbon fuels and local market
and encourage other improving vehicle Technological
financial institutions to efficiency In addition, GGC and innovation
replicate the issuance the issuer would also
of green financing Reducing pollutants support the structuring Transition to a low
instruments. Further, and CO2 emissions of the privately placed carbon economy
the Program is caused by burning debt instrument to
expected to reinforce fossil fuels finance projects that Demonstratable new
market standards in are in compliance with business model for
line with international Reducing major air Global Green Bond mitigating negative
green lending pollutants like NOx, Principles and Social environment impacts
principles. SO2, PM2.5, and other Bond Framework, a by applying
pollutants, providing new financial renewables into the
health benefits instrument auto industry
Reducing reliance on Opportunity to reduce
imported fossil fuels, the running cost of
thereby improving vehicles, improving
energy security the accessibility of
transport
Capacity building, training, and knowledge generation:
1.59 GGC will work with Origination Partners (see Annex 23 for key characteristics/capabilities) to identify and build a pipeline
of transactions that are aligned with the eligibility criteria in the GGC Guarantee Policy (Annex 23) and using the TSP
(Annex 24A) and Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B) to ensure that climate impact is both prioritised and maximised.
1.60 GGC will also be able to support Origination Partners and Borrowers in developing countries with its own internal
expertise in climate impact and financial structuring (i.e., problem-solving to bring the requirements of investors and
Borrowers closer together) and use its global nature to share best practice in terms of overcoming the challenges that are
experienced by climate projects between different countries and global capital markets. Indeed, GGC’s unique global
nature positions it well to become in time a centre of expertise for climate finance solutions across developing countries.
Certainly, it is core to GGC’s mission to become an advocate and voice for developing countries seeking a more
equitable share of the climate finance available in global credit and capital markets. The fact that GGC can also “put its
money where its mouth is” by risk-sharing with investors through its guarantees will bestow credibility with global credit
and capital markets.
1.61 The main activities of GGC will include working with Origination Partners (see Annex 23 for key characteristics/
capabilities) to identify and build a pipeline of transactions that are aligned with the eligibility criteria in the GGC
Guarantee Policy (Annex 23) and using the TSP (Annex 24A) and Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B) to ensure that
climate impact is both prioritised and maximised. GGC will invest in the capacity building for the Origination Partners
which will emphasise key components of GGC’s Guarantee Policy and Transaction Scorecard.

--- Table 1 on Page 19 ---
# | Project Example &
Sector |  | Climate Adaptation |  |  | GGC Guarantee |  | Additional Co-
Benefits
 |  |  | or Mitigation |  |  | Additionality |  | 
 |  |  | Potential or benefit |  |  | Potential |  | 
1 | INDONESIA: The
example project aims
to improve access to
finance to finance
climate-smart projects
geared to improving
access to transport.
Building on IFC's
successful effort on
investing in
Indonesia's first non-
sovereign green bond,
the Project is expected
to further deepen the
climate finance market
and encourage other
financial institutions to
replicate the issuance
of green financing
instruments. Further,
the Program is
expected to reinforce
market standards in
line with international
green lending
principles. |  | The project will |  | GGC would support
the development of a
climate smart finance
market in Indonesia
Knowledge sharing
and capacity building
through technical
assistance provided
Unlock funding to
global capital market
that couldn’t be
secured through the
local market
In addition, GGC and
the issuer would also
support the structuring
of the privately placed
debt instrument to
finance projects that
are in compliance with
Global Green Bond
Principles and Social
Bond Framework, a
new financial
instrument | GGC would support |  | Contribution to Market
Creation Inclusiveness
The project would
support improvement
of access to finance
for women owned
SME and expected to
demonstrate to other
market participants the
viability of
differentiated financial
products for the
benefit.
Technological
innovation
Transition to a low
carbon economy
Demonstratable new
business model for
mitigating negative
environment impacts
by applying
renewables into the
auto industry
Opportunity to reduce
the running cost of
vehicles, improving
the accessibility of
transport
 |  |  | contribute to the |  |  | the development of a |  | 
 |  |  | overall reduction in the |  |  | climate smart finance |  | 
 |  |  | GHG emission in the |  |  | market in Indonesia |  | 
 |  |  | transport sector |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Knowledge sharing |  | 
 |  |  | In the transport sector, |  |  | and capacity building |  | 
 |  |  | support for clean fuels |  |  | through technical |  | 
 |  |  | and improved public |  |  | assistance provided |  | 
 |  |  | transport |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Unlock funding to |  | 
 |  |  | Decarbonizing |  |  | global capital market |  | 
 |  |  | transport into urban |  |  | that couldn’t be |  | 
 |  |  | areas by switching to |  |  | secured through the |  | 
 |  |  | lower-carbon fuels and |  |  | local market |  | 
 |  |  | improving vehicle |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | efficiency |  |  | In addition, GGC and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | the issuer would also |  | 
 |  |  | Reducing pollutants |  |  | support the structuring |  | 
 |  |  | and CO2 emissions |  |  | of the privately placed |  | 
 |  |  | caused by burning |  |  | debt instrument to |  | 
 |  |  | fossil fuels |  |  | finance projects that |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | are in compliance with |  | 
 |  |  | Reducing major air |  |  | Global Green Bond |  | 
 |  |  | pollutants like NOx, |  |  | Principles and Social |  | 
 |  |  | SO2, PM2.5, and other |  |  | Bond Framework, a |  | 
 |  |  | pollutants, providing |  |  | new financial |  | 
 |  |  | health benefits |  |  | instrument |  | 
 |  |  | Reducing reliance on |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | imported fossil fuels, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | thereby improving |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | energy security |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 19 ---
Project Example &
Sector

--- Table 3 on Page 19 ---
Additional Co-
Benefits

--- Table 4 on Page 19 ---
INDONESIA: The
example project aims
to improve access to
finance to finance
climate-smart projects
geared to improving
access to transport.
Building on IFC's
successful effort on
investing in
Indonesia's first non-
sovereign green bond,
the Project is expected
to further deepen the
climate finance market
and encourage other
financial institutions to
replicate the issuance
of green financing
instruments. Further,
the Program is
expected to reinforce
market standards in
line with international
green lending
principles.

--- Table 5 on Page 19 ---
Contribution to Market
Creation Inclusiveness
The project would
support improvement
of access to finance
for women owned
SME and expected to
demonstrate to other
market participants the
viability of
differentiated financial
products for the
benefit.
Technological
innovation
Transition to a low
carbon economy
Demonstratable new
business model for
mitigating negative
environment impacts
by applying
renewables into the
auto industry
Opportunity to reduce
the running cost of
vehicles, improving
the accessibility of
transport


=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 16
B
1.62 As mentioned above, knowledge generation and education of investors in global credit and capital markets is the
overarching sustainable impact that GGC expects to deliver through its activities. Thus, a key element of GGC’s value
proposition (but not funded out of GCF’s equity which will be used solely for supporting the creation of a portfolio of
guarantees) will be the use of a digital platform (e.g., www.esgbook.com) that will help borrowers and investors
communicate more transparently about the performance of both the borrower and the underlying projects supported. This
database of climate projects in developing countries will expand the body of data available for global investors to be
better informed about their performance shift their risk appetite.
1.63 GGC will also require that all the bonds and loans it guarantees are certified by the Climate Bonds Standard and
Certification Scheme (“Scheme”). The Scheme has a two-stage certification process with a pre- and post-issuance step
that involves an independent Approved Verifier that has been accredited by the Climate Bonds Initiative, the owner of the
Scheme. A comparative analysis of the Scheme versus other standards available in the global green finance market is
provided in Annex 28.
1.64 Recognising that borrowers may be willing to meet the reporting requirements of GGC but simply lack the capacity to do
so, GGC will seek to work with borrowers, using in-country consultants where necessary, to help them implement the
necessary gender, environmental and social, and climate assessments, action plans and reporting frameworks. The data
generated by these monitoring and reporting tools will also be aggregated on the digital platform thereby allowing GGC to
track its own performance in respect to building a portfolio which promotes clear gender, environmental and social and
climate parameters. This information then feeds into the annual review of GGC’s Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B) and
Guarantee Policy (Annex 23) enabling a process of continuous incremental improvement.

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 17
B
Figure 5: Theory of Change

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 18
B
1.65 Research by the International Finance Corporation and Amundi Asset Management identifies the following as being the
key barriers to greater investment being mobilised from the global green finance market into developing countries.
Table 1: Key Barriers to green bond and loan issuance from developing countries
Market barrier Description
Transparency The limited capacity of borrowers in developing countries to provide reporting to identify, measure, and
track green investment which meet global market standards.
Supply constraints Limited availability of labelled green assets and a pipeline of green projects of scale.
Capacity Lack of awareness and know-how of developing country borrowers and investors about issuing and
investing in green products.
Stability Negative perception of investors in global credit and capital markets of the overall macroeconomic and
policy instability of developing countries
Liquidity In combination the above four barriers create information asymmetry between borrowers and investors
which reduce market appetite and thus liquidity for green bonds and loans issued from developing
countries. This consequently impacts the issuance frequency of such bonds and loans curtailing their
potential to be an asset class within investors’ portfolios.
Source: IFC, Bloomberg, Environmental, Finance, Climate Bonds Initiative
1.66 The market barriers identified above combine to erode confidence and disincentivise investors in global credit and capital
markets, diminishing their consideration of developing countries a viable investment destination. Confidence is an
essential ingredient for building and transforming markets and in its absence a void form between the institutional capital
in global credit and capital markets and developing countries. A proven solution to address this absence of confidence is
to use credit enhancement to help investors in global credit and capital markets to overcome the barriers and bridge the
void that keeps institutional capital from reaching the developing world. Credit enhancement refers to the use of credit
enhancement products (e.g., guarantees) or credit enhancement techniques (e.g., over-collateralisation) which results in
the improvement of the credit rating of a capital markets instrument (e.g., a bond). In simple words, if a bond was issued
by an entity with a BB credit rating, it can use credit enhancement products and/or techniques to increase its credit rating
to BBB- (the threshold investment grade credit rating) or better. The link below provides an example of how Assured
Guaranty, a guarantor of bonds issued in developed countries, has provided credit enhancement to a solar project in
Spain taking its project credit rating from BBB to AA by providing a guarantee for its bond.
1.67 Table 2 below provides an overview of how GGC will help address the market barriers identified in Section 1.65.
Table 2: How GGC will address market barriers between global credit and capital markets and developing countries
Market Barrier: Transparency
Description
GGC Solution GGC will become a risk-sharing partner for investors by providing them with a total investment
proposition better suited to their investment appetite and drive quality reporting on the financial
performance and impact of the borrower or the underlying projects to help address information
asymmetry and build confidence.
Additionally, a key element of GGC’s value proposition will be the use of a digital platform that will help
borrowers and investors communicate more transparently about performance of both the borrower and
the underlying projects supported. This database of climate projects in developing countries will
expand the body of data available for performance and shift their risk appetite.

--- Table 1 on Page 22 ---
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Table 1: Key Barriers to green bond and loan issuance from developing countries |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Market barrier |  |  | Description | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
Transparency |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Supply constraints |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
Capacity |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
Stability |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
Liquidity |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 22 ---
 | Market Barrier: |  |  | Transparency | 

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 19
B
Market Barrier: Supply Constraints
Description Limited availability of labelled green assets and a pipeline of green projects of scale.
GGC Solution Just by existing GGC creates an incentive for strong borrowers to consider developing green projects
in their countries which they may have not previously thought they could access funding for. Section 4
of this document provides an indicative pipeline sourced from arrangers of transactions in developing
countries which highlights USD 2 billion of immediate guarantee opportunity for GGC. Once GGC is
operational and creating demonstration effect by closing transactions it is expected that this will
generate confidence amongst developers of green projects to build more pipeline. The sponsors of
DGG have seen this effect occur in local capital markets through their past work via GuarantCo and
CGIF.
Using guarantees to mitigate barriers (risk appetite and pricing) to financial close of an issuance in
developed markets, GGC can build and deliver a pipeline of guaranteed transactions to turn green
bonds from developing country borrowers into a commoditised asset class leading to scale as opposed
to ad-hoc opportunistic issuances. GGC will also work with arrangers to guarantee warehouses of
green loans to smaller projects which might not have the scale to issue green bonds and once a critical
mass has been achieved to refinance these portfolios via the global capital markets through green
securitisations.
Market Barrier: Capacity
Description Lack of awareness and know-how of developing country borrowers and investors about issuing and
investing in green products.
GGC Solution GGC will work with borrowers in developing countries to help them build the necessary assessment
and reporting frameworks and their capacity to engage constructively with investors in global capital
markets.
Additionally, GGC will use its guarantee to help investors in the City of London to better understand
the risk profile of borrowers so that they better understand the risk profile of a borrower and thereby
adjust their risk vs reward perception of investing in developing countries over time. The presence of
frequency of primary issuance combined with scale will allow for secondary trading activity which
results in propagation of capacity amongst a wider pool of investors in global capital markets.
Market Barrier: Stability
Description Negative perception of Green Bond investors in developed markets of the overall macroeconomic and
policy instability of developing countries.
GGC Solution GGC will obtain an international credit rating from at least one of the international credit rating agencies
and use its guarantees to provide investors with greater confidence that they will be protected from the
perceived greater risk and volatility associated with borrowers from developing countries.
Market Barrier: Liquidity
Description In combination the above four barriers create information asymmetry between borrowers and investors
which reduce market appetite and thus liquidity for Green Bonds issued from developing countries.
This consequently impacts the issuance frequency of such bonds curtailing their potential to be an
asset class within Green Bond investors’ portfolios.
GGC Solution GGC will provide guarantees of up to USD 200 million per issuance and build a USD 4 billion portfolio
to help create more investment opportunities of scale for investors in the global capital markets. The
presence of frequency of primary issuance combined with scale will allow for secondary trading activity
which results in propagation of capacity amongst a wider pool of investors in the City of London thereby
leading to increased issuance from developing countries and creating a virtuous circle from a liquidity
perspective.
The additionality of guarantees lies in their unparalleled ability to build the capacity of global investors to overcome information
asymmetry and for them to invest in future green bonds from developing countries without the need for credit enhancement.

--- Table 1 on Page 23 ---
 | Market Barrier: |  |  | Supply Constraints | 

--- Table 2 on Page 23 ---
 | Market Barrier: |  |  | Capacity | 

--- Table 3 on Page 23 ---
 | Market Barrier: |  |  | Stability | 

--- Table 4 on Page 23 ---
 | Market Barrier: |  |  | Liquidity | 

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 20
B
1.68 An example of this additionality is seen in the case of InfraCredit Nigeria who guaranteed three infrastructure bonds in the
energy sector in Nigeria between 2017 and 2019. These bonds had been guaranteed 100% to achieve the AAA rating that
initially risk averse Nigerian institutional investors required to invest. In 2020 an energy company issued an infrastructure
bond without any guarantee from InfraCredit, and which was consequently rated BBB, significantly lower than AAA. The bond
was over-subscribed by 25% including many of the same institutional investors in the first three guaranteed energy
infrastructure bonds. These investors now had the confidence to take more risk and receive a higher coupon. In 2021 one of
the borrowers who had used InfraCredit to wrap their first bond issued a second bond without a guarantee, also rated BBB,
and also achieved an oversubscription. This level of market transformation was achieved in just three years, and it is the
ambition of GGC to achieve similar market transformation in global credit and capital markets.
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
Outcome
Energy Low-emission Building, Forestry and Most Health, well- Infrastructure Ecosystems
number
generation transport citiies, land use vulnerable being, food and built and
and access industries, people and and water environment ecosystem
appliances communities security services
Outcome 1:
☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
Mitigation
Outcome 2:
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐
Adaptation
Outcome 3:
Enabling
environment ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐
(market
transformation)
Outcome 4:
Enabling
☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐
environment
(knowledge)
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note.
Co-benefit number Co-benefit
Environmental
Co-benefit 1: reduction in air pollution ☒
Co-benefit 2: reduction in exposure to natural resources to threats and health impacts ☒
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)
Define the project/programme.
Describe the proposed set of components, outputs and activities that lead to the expected Fund-level impact and outcome results.
Components should reflect the project/programme level outcomes.
This should be consistent with the financing by component in section C.2, the results and performance indicators provided in
section E.5, and the implementation timetable in annex 5.
1.69 To address the climate financing gap explained above, GGC will be established as the world’s first specialist green
guarantor to deliver private sector climate financing from developed countries to climate projects in developing countries.

--- Table 1 on Page 24 ---
1.68 An example of this additionality is seen in the case of InfraCredit Nigeria who guaranteed three infrastructure bonds in the
energy sector in Nigeria between 2017 and 2019. These bonds had been guaranteed 100% to achieve the AAA rating that
initially risk averse Nigerian institutional investors required to invest. In 2020 an energy company issued an infrastructure
bond without any guarantee from InfraCredit, and which was consequently rated BBB, significantly lower than AAA. The bond
was over-subscribed by 25% including many of the same institutional investors in the first three guaranteed energy
infrastructure bonds. These investors now had the confidence to take more risk and receive a higher coupon. In 2021 one of
the borrowers who had used InfraCredit to wrap their first bond issued a second bond without a guarantee, also rated BBB,
and also achieved an oversubscription. This level of market transformation was achieved in just three years, and it is the
ambition of GGC to achieve similar market transformation in global credit and capital markets.
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
Outcome
Energy Low-emission Building, Forestry and Most Health, well- Infrastructure Ecosystems
number
generation transport citiies, land use vulnerable being, food and built and
and access industries, people and and water environment ecosystem
appliances communities security services
Outcome 1:
☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
Mitigation
Outcome 2:
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐
Adaptation
Outcome 3:
Enabling
environment ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐
(market
transformation)
Outcome 4:
Enabling
☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐
environment
(knowledge)
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note.
Co-benefit number Co-benefit
Environmental
Co-benefit 1: reduction in air pollution ☒
Co-benefit 2: reduction in exposure to natural resources to threats and health impacts ☒
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)
Define the project/programme.
Describe the proposed set of components, outputs and activities that lead to the expected Fund-level impact and outcome results.
Components should reflect the project/programme level outcomes.
This should be consistent with the financing by component in section C.2, the results and performance indicators provided in
section E.5, and the implementation timetable in annex 5.
1.69 To address the climate financing gap explained above, GGC will be established as the world’s first specialist green
guarantor to deliver private sector climate financing from developed countries to climate projects in developing countries.

--- Table 2 on Page 24 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) |  |  |  | GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | MRA 1 | MRA 2 | MRA 3 | MRA 4 | ARA 1 | ARA 2 | ARA 3 | ARA 4
Outcome |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Energy | Low-emission | Building, | Forestry and | Most | Health, well- | Infrastructure | Ecosystems
number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | generation | transport | citiies, | land use | vulnerable | being, food | and built | and
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and access |  | industries, |  | people and | and water | environment | ecosystem
 |  |  | appliances |  | communities | security |  | services
Outcome 1:
Mitigation | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐
Outcome 2:
Adaptation | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐
Outcome 3:
Enabling
environment
(market
transformation) | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐
Outcome 4:
Enabling
environment
(knowledge) | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐

--- Table 3 on Page 24 ---
Co-benefit number | Co-benefit
 | Environmental
Co-benefit 1: reduction in air pollution | ☒
Co-benefit 2: reduction in exposure to natural resources to threats and health impacts | ☒

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 21
B
Table 4: GGC will be established based on the following design principles
Design Principle Description
Cross-cutting support Instead of focusing on a limited number or certain types of projects, GGC is designed to support various
as a programme with types of projects for both mitigation and adaptation purposes on a global basis and once established can
scale deliver sizable scale to build a portfolio of USD 4 billion.
Multi-jurisdictional and GGC to support the highest of the respective countries’ climate priorities (with NDA inputs) with the
anticipated wide greatest climate impact by selecting from a large pool of projects seeking offshore funding assistance.
coverage of countries
Improved financing Delivery of lower “all in” interest costs at fixed rates for long term funding of 10 to 20 years unmatched by
terms other financing modalities or sources for most projects in developing countries.
Seeking to make Combining project and credit structuring capabilities to make projects viable for guarantee GGC aims to be
projects bankable seen as a credible partner, capable of delivering high additionality to the climate financing space, in both
instead searching for developing countries and global capital markets.
bankable projects
Support capacity to GGC aims to drive the standards and quality of assessment and reporting of KPIs via a digital platform,
implement, monitor supporting developing country borrowers meet developed market investors’ standards.
and report on Climate
Impact
Inclusive support for GGC will look to support smaller countries (including Small Island Nations) to access global credit and
smaller projects of capital markets by exploring aggregation structures and vehicles that can help create the scale required.
high priority
Component 1 – Equity Investment
1.70 Activity 1.1 – Formation and capitalisation of Green Guarantee Company Limited
GGC has been incorporated as a legal entity which can provide guarantees to institutional investors in global credit and
capital markets. GGC has been formed as a private limited company in England and will be eventually capitalised with USD
270 million of equity. The equity will be raised in two tranches with an initial tranche of USD 100 million raised to enable
GGC to commence operations and the second tranche of USD 170 million raised within 36 months to support GGC’s
growth. DGG will be the manager of GGC (running the day-to-day operations of GGC) and there will be a management
agreement between GGC and DGG which outlines the services that will be provided by the latter party and on what terms
(the “GGC Management Agreement”).
1.71 Sub-Activities:
1.1.1 Ensure GGC is compliant with all necessary legal and tax filings
1.1.2 Procure legal services
1.1.3 Develop and negotiate GGC equity documentation and management agreement with DGG.
1.1.4 Close GCF, Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (“FCDO”) into first tranche of equity for GGC.
1.1.5 Close management agreement between GGC and DGG.
1.72 Indicators:
1.1.1 GGC incorporated
1.1.2 Number of proposals for legal services received
1.1.3 GGC incorporated and investment ready.
1.1.4 Financial close achieved with GCF and FCDO funding the first tranche of equity for GGC.
1.1.5 Execute management agreement between GGC and DGG.

--- Table 1 on Page 25 ---
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Table 4: GGC will be established based on the following design principles |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Design Principle |  |  | Description | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
Cross-cutting support
as a programme with
scale |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Multi-jurisdictional and |  |  |  | 
 | anticipated wide |  |  |  | 
 | coverage of countries |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Improved financing |  |  |  | 
 | terms |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Seeking to make |  |  |  | 
 | projects bankable |  |  |  | 
 | instead searching for |  |  |  | 
 | bankable projects |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Support capacity to |  |  |  | 
 | implement, monitor |  |  |  | 
 | and report on Climate |  |  |  | 
 | Impact |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Inclusive support for |  |  |  | 
 | smaller projects of |  |  |  | 
 | high priority |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 25 ---
Cross-cutting support
as a programme with
scale

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 22
B
1.73 Activity 1.2 – Secure investment grade credit rating for Green Guarantee Company Limited
To be able to play its role as a guarantor and to credit enhance the debt instruments issued by Borrowers from developing
countries it will be necessary for GGC to have obtained an investment grade credit rating from one of the three international
credit rating agencies, Fitch, Moody’s or Standard and Poor’s. This investment grade credit rating will provide institutional
investors in global credit and capital markets with the assurance that GGC is a creditworthy counterparty on whose
guarantees they can rely.
1.74 Sub-Activities:
1.2.1 Procure (annually) credit rating service from one or more of the international credit rating agencies.
1.75 Indicators:
1.2.1 Secure investment grade credit rating.
1.76 Activity 1.3 – Identify, execute and financially structure guarantees that mobilise institutional capital in global
credit and capital markets to fund climate mitigation and adaptation projects in developing countries.
GGC expects to leverage (as explained earlier in section 1.13) the first tranche of USD 100 million of equity capital provided
by GCF (USD 40 million), FCDO (USD 40 million) and at least one other investor (USD 20 million) by 10x to create an initial
guarantee capacity of USD 1 billion.
GGC will then undertake the activities outlined in the diagram below to work with origination partners to identify climate
mitigation and adaptation projects which are aligned with the initial eligibility criteria set out in Annex 23 (the “Initial Eligibility
Criteria”) which will be finalised prior to the first disbursement under FAA and which shall be consistent with the Initial
Criteria (the “Eligibility Criteria”) and will approve, provide financial structuring support, and execute transactions in
accordance with the Transaction Selection Process (Annex 24A). GGC will only enter into guarantee transactions for
Eligible Debt Instruments (as defined in the GGC Guarantee Policy). Each Eligible Debt Instrument may contain one or
multiple Eligible Climate Projects (as defined in the GGC Guarantee Policy) (or “Sub-Projects”).
Figure 6: How GGC will work
1.77 Sub-Activities:
1.3.1 Build network of Origination Partners
1.3.2 Provide financial structuring support to Origination Partners and Borrowers to build a pipeline of potential guarantee
transactions which are aligned with the GGC Guarantee Policy (and in line with the Transaction Selection Process
designed to optimize climate change benefits)
1.3.3 Progress transactions through the GGC guarantee process as outlined in the GGC Guarantee Policy
1.3.4 Execute transactions

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 23
B
1.78 Indicators:
1.3.1 Number of partnership agreements signed with Origination Partners
1.3.2 Number of transactions screened and submitted for review by the GGC Impact and Credit Committees
1.3.3 Number of transactions which are approved by the GGC Impact and Credit Committees
1.3.4 Number of guarantees issued
1.79 Activity 1.4 – Manage and report on portfolio of guarantees for risk management, performance, and impact.
GGC will actively manage the credit risk of the portfolio of guarantees seeking to proactively take action to support
Borrowers that are at risk of a potential payment default by facilitating communication with investors and arranging a
restructuring of the debt obligation to avoid a payment default and if unavoidable paying any claim under the guarantee
and taking steps to recover GGC’s capital from the Borrower.
GGC will work with Borrowers in developing countries, where needed mobilsing technical assistance grants from third
parties (and potentially from a dedicated technical assistance grant facility within GGC) to help them build their own capacity
and capabilities to report on the performance, ESG and climate impact of their mitigation and adaptation projects.
Over the life of a guarantee, GGC will also drive the monitoring and reporting of ESG and climate impact KPIs to investors
and its shareholders at both a transaction and portfolio level. A key element of GGC’s value proposition will be the use of
a digital platform (e.g. GGC will also become a vocal and visible advocate for developing countries in global credit and
capital markets using its ability to share risk with investors to become a thought-leader and influencer in thill seek to partner
with the Climate Bond Initiative, whose Climate Bonds Standards and Certification Scheme will be used to certify all the
debt instruments that GGC guarantees.
In combination these activities will help build greater under and capacity amongst institutional investors in global credit and
capital markets to understand the actual level of risk associated with climate mitigation and adaptation projects in
developing countries thereby increasing their risk appetite and their capacity to provide greater volumes of climate finance
without the need for guarantees.
1.80 Sub-Activities:
1.4.1 Provide active risk management of guarantee portfolio including guarantee claim payment, restructuring and claim
recovery by GGC entering into a recourse agreement with the borrower which creates an obligation for the borrower to repay GGC
any payments made on its behalf under claims on the guarantee.
Where a borrower is in financial difficulty this can involve GGC participating in a restructuring of the business to ensure
its interests are protected and getting repaid over a longer period of time.
1.4.2 Provide support to borrowers to develop impact reporting frameworks and where needed mobilise technical
assistance grants from third parties to enable capacity-building for borrowers
1.4.3 Regularly monitor and prepare reporting documentation on performance, ESG and climate KPIs of borrowers
1.4.4 Advocate publicly at industry events, conferences and thought leadership initiatives for global credit and capital
markets to provide greater climate finance to developing countries
1.4.5 Identify sources of technical assistance funding to support Borrowers in accessing global credit and capital
markets
1.81 Indicators:
1.4.1 No indicator
1.4.2 Number of Borrowers onboarded on to digital reporting platform and achieving reporting KPIs
1.4.3 Number of invitations to participate in industry events, conferences and thought leadership initiatives
1.4.4 Number of technical assistance donors/providers committed to support Borrowers
1.82 Activity 1.5 – Establish commercial viability of GGC and facilitate exit for GCF and FCDO
GGC’s activities in Activity 1.3 and Activity 1.4 are directed towards generating a return on equity that would be attractive
to private sector investors to facilitate an exit for anchor investors (which include GCF and FCDO) via either a listing the
shares of GGC on a public market or via a sale to a private sector third party. The ability to access larger pools of equity
capital from private investors is going to be essential for GGC’s ability to scale its activities and accelerate the paradigm
shift in global credit and capital markets to increase flows of climate finance into developing countries.

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 24
B
1.83 Sub-Activities:
1.5.1 Assess and develop an exit strategy for anchor investors (which include GCF and FCDO)
1.5.2 Execute exit strategy
1.84 Indicators:
1.5.1 Listing of GGC by Year 5 of operations
1.5.2 Exit for GCF and FCDO by Year 10 of operations (please see Section B6)
Referring to the feasibility study, describe why this set of interventions was selected instead of alternative solutions and how the
project/programme can help unlock the needed support in a sustainable manner. Also identify trade-offs of the selected
interventions, if applicable.
1.85 It is noteworthy to point out that, the green bond and loan issuance process is consistent with the existing practices of the
markets and save for the introduction of a guarantor promising to pay when the borrower does not, the delivery of climate
financing from investors in developed countries into developing countries will be based on established market mechanisms
without any need for any other invention or intervention. In 2019 a market study commissioned by the United Kingdom's
Department for International Development (“DFID”) and carried out by the international development consultancy,
Palladium, titled "Barriers to Investment in Emerging and Frontier Markets for Institutional Investors” identified the same
barriers discussed earlier in Section 1.65 of this Funding Proposal and consequently led FCDO (the successor to DFID) to
launch a competition called MOBILIST in 2021 focused on mobilising public markets to catalyse new scalable and replicable
financial products that support the Global Goals and net-zero transition. GGC was submitted as an idea to MOBILIST and
was selected as a finalist (https://www.ukmobilist.com/press-release/) with the fundraising process for GGC being launched
at COP26. GGC’s ability to be sustainable is also founded on the sizable demand or opportunity for GGC to provide
guarantees and economics of the guarantee fees it can earn relative to the risks of the underlying projects that it guarantees.
Detailed analysis points to the following findings on GGC’s sustainability.
• There is a large opportunity for targeted climate project segments across the developing countries totaling hundreds
of USD billions which is large multiples of GGC’s targeted portfolio size of USD 4 billion
• The correlation of the green bond and loan issuances in the past to countries with higher sovereign ratings; point to
large scope for GGC to support projects from many developing countries which are below investment grade and due
to higher debts levels post Covid, are likely to remain non-investment grade
• Notwithstanding the non-investment grade ratings of the sovereigns, the risk of supporting infrastructure projects as
well as green infrastructure projects have been statistically proven to be lower than comparable ratings from other
asset classes like corporate lending. Moody’s studies show that project finance ratings cross a 10-year horizon (with
most infrastructure debt being 15 to 20 years in tenor) exhibit real default rates in Africa and Asia that are below the
threshold to be rated “A” or investment grade by Moody’s. GGC’s guarantee fees are expected to cover any
anticipated losses as well as deliver commercial returns.
1.86 A possible trade-off of GGC’s intervention is that the projects will not be funded indigenously by local capital and its
respective financial sectors, perhaps at the outset. However as explained in Section 1.8 there is presently insufficient
liquidity in most local capital markets to fund the climate finance gap, therefore global credit and capital markets need to be
incentivised to provide solutions.
For Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals and projects/programmes with financial intermediation (loans or on-granting),
describe the selection criteria of the sub-project and types.
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
Provide a description of the project/programme implementation structure, outlining legal, contractual, institutional, and financial
arrangements from and between the GCF, the Accredited Entity (AE) and/or the Executing Entity(ies) (EE) or any third parties (if
applicable) and beneficiaries.
- Provide information on governance arrangements (supervisory boards, consultative groups among others) set to oversee
and guide project implementation. Provide a composition of the decision-making body and oversight function, particularly
for Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals.
- Provide information on the financial flows and implementation arrangements (legal and contractual) between the AE and
the EE, between the EE or any third party and beneficiaries. For EEs that will administer GCF funds, indicate if a
Capacity Assessment has been carried out. Where applicable, summarize the results of the assessment.
- Describe the experience and track record of the AE and EEs with respect to the activities (sector and country/region) that
they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.

--- Table 1 on Page 28 ---
1.83 Sub-Activities:
1.5.1 Assess and develop an exit strategy for anchor investors (which include GCF and FCDO)
1.5.2 Execute exit strategy
1.84 Indicators:
1.5.1 Listing of GGC by Year 5 of operations
1.5.2 Exit for GCF and FCDO by Year 10 of operations (please see Section B6)
Referring to the feasibility study, describe why this set of interventions was selected instead of alternative solutions and how the
project/programme can help unlock the needed support in a sustainable manner. Also identify trade-offs of the selected
interventions, if applicable.
1.85 It is noteworthy to point out that, the green bond and loan issuance process is consistent with the existing practices of the
markets and save for the introduction of a guarantor promising to pay when the borrower does not, the delivery of climate
financing from investors in developed countries into developing countries will be based on established market mechanisms
without any need for any other invention or intervention. In 2019 a market study commissioned by the United Kingdom's
Department for International Development (“DFID”) and carried out by the international development consultancy,
Palladium, titled "Barriers to Investment in Emerging and Frontier Markets for Institutional Investors” identified the same
barriers discussed earlier in Section 1.65 of this Funding Proposal and consequently led FCDO (the successor to DFID) to
launch a competition called MOBILIST in 2021 focused on mobilising public markets to catalyse new scalable and replicable
financial products that support the Global Goals and net-zero transition. GGC was submitted as an idea to MOBILIST and
was selected as a finalist (https://www.ukmobilist.com/press-release/) with the fundraising process for GGC being launched
at COP26. GGC’s ability to be sustainable is also founded on the sizable demand or opportunity for GGC to provide
guarantees and economics of the guarantee fees it can earn relative to the risks of the underlying projects that it guarantees.
Detailed analysis points to the following findings on GGC’s sustainability.
• There is a large opportunity for targeted climate project segments across the developing countries totaling hundreds
of USD billions which is large multiples of GGC’s targeted portfolio size of USD 4 billion
• The correlation of the green bond and loan issuances in the past to countries with higher sovereign ratings; point to
large scope for GGC to support projects from many developing countries which are below investment grade and due
to higher debts levels post Covid, are likely to remain non-investment grade
• Notwithstanding the non-investment grade ratings of the sovereigns, the risk of supporting infrastructure projects as
well as green infrastructure projects have been statistically proven to be lower than comparable ratings from other
asset classes like corporate lending. Moody’s studies show that project finance ratings cross a 10-year horizon (with
most infrastructure debt being 15 to 20 years in tenor) exhibit real default rates in Africa and Asia that are below the
threshold to be rated “A” or investment grade by Moody’s. GGC’s guarantee fees are expected to cover any
anticipated losses as well as deliver commercial returns.
1.86 A possible trade-off of GGC’s intervention is that the projects will not be funded indigenously by local capital and its
respective financial sectors, perhaps at the outset. However as explained in Section 1.8 there is presently insufficient
liquidity in most local capital markets to fund the climate finance gap, therefore global credit and capital markets need to be
incentivised to provide solutions.
For Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals and projects/programmes with financial intermediation (loans or on-granting),
describe the selection criteria of the sub-project and types.
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
Provide a description of the project/programme implementation structure, outlining legal, contractual, institutional, and financial
arrangements from and between the GCF, the Accredited Entity (AE) and/or the Executing Entity(ies) (EE) or any third parties (if
applicable) and beneficiaries.
- Provide information on governance arrangements (supervisory boards, consultative groups among others) set to oversee
and guide project implementation. Provide a composition of the decision-making body and oversight function, particularly
for Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals.
- Provide information on the financial flows and implementation arrangements (legal and contractual) between the AE and
the EE, between the EE or any third party and beneficiaries. For EEs that will administer GCF funds, indicate if a
Capacity Assessment has been carried out. Where applicable, summarize the results of the assessment.
- Describe the experience and track record of the AE and EEs with respect to the activities (sector and country/region) that
they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 25
B
Provide a diagram(s) or organogram(s) that maps such arrangements including the governance structure, legal arrangements, and
the flow and reflow of funds between entities.
Figure 7: Implementation Structure
Key Implementation Entities
1.87 Accredited Entity (AE)
MUFG Bank (“MUFG”) - MUFG Bank, formerly the Bank of Tokyo‐Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd., is an international private‐sector
entity headquartered in Japan. As one of the largest commercial banks in Japan. MUFG Bank provides comprehensive
financial services and products globally through a variety of financial instruments. It has funded sustainable development
and climate projects with a focus on renewable energy, including hydropower, geothermal, solar power and wind, and
infrastructure including railways, with a goal to contribute towards solving social issues through core financial businesses,
as well as realising a sustainable society. MUFG has two GCF-funded projects; FP115 and FP128.
MUFG, as AE will oversee and monitor the project implementation and will ensure project compliance with MUFG’s own
relevant policies as well as from the perspectives of GCF’s interest in the project. MUFG will execute a subsidiary
agreement (Implementation Agreement) with EE (DGG, GGC, GCF Holdings and GCF Holdings Manager) and this
agreement passes down the GCF requirements to EE. By the legal arrangements, AE will make sure that EE will be
responsible for the obligations which the AE has under the Accredited Master Agreement and the Funded Activity
Agreement. GCF Holdings will sign shareholder’s agreement. Besides, MUFG plans to appoint its employee to a Board of
Director of GGC. MUFG as an AE can directly receive information only relevant to shareholders and review the
information and report it to GCF. In addition to a Board of Director role, MUFG will try to get involved in the project such
as by capturing more substantive information related to GGC’s operation. First, MUFG’s Emerging Market team based in
London would be an Originating Partner of GGC. This team will present potential projects to GGC and if such project is
awarded, the team will act as a bond originator. Also, MUFG is in discussion with its affiliate company to become the
third-party investment managers of GGC subject to a procurement process. MUFG will receive GCF fund in an existing
GCF Bank Account which has been established in MUFG’s Head Office in Tokyo. The GCF Account will be jointly used
with other GCF-funded projects.

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 26
B
In order for GCF not to be a direct shareholder of GGC, MUFG will incorporate a special purpose company (GCF
Holdings) along with Holdings Manager. GCF Holdings as well as Holdings Manager will be EE. Holdings Manager will be
selected from administrative perspectives. GCF Holdings will open a bank account .
1.88 Executing Entities (EE):
DGG was founded by Boo Hock Khoo, Dale Petrie and Lasitha Perera and Cardano Development BV (“CD”), a Netherlands
based foundation and fund manager focused on frontier markets, thereby uniting the collective experience of a global
network of experts in setting up and running guarantee companies and programmes focused on addressing development
challenges globally.
CD is the manager for several existing specialist guarantors focused on emerging markets such as GuarantCo and
Frontclear, as well as developing new specialist guarantors, such as Agri3 and Octobre. CD will be involved in the
governance of both DGG and GGC, with subject matter experts from across the CD group being available to support the
activities of GGC and to participate in its operations. A key strength of CD is its risk management expertise, both from a
financial and a governance perspective which is why it is trusted by multiple donors and development finance institutions
globally, and has over USD 3 billion of capital under management. CD will be an active rather than passive shareholder in
DGG and will be involved in the management of GGC including ensuring continuity in terms of management personnel. CD
frequently creates independent management companies to house the teams of different initiatives that it is supporting and
as such DGG represents the CD management company for GGC.
Boo Hock used to be Vice President, Operations, at the Credit Guarantee & Investment Facility (“CGIF”) a guarantor set
up under the auspices of the Asian Development Bank and was previously Deputy CEO of Danajamin, an infrastructure
guarantee company based in Malaysia.
Dale and Lasitha were previously employees of CD and acted as CFO and CEO of GuarantCo respectively, a specialist
local currency focused guarantor focused on developing local capital markets in Africa and Asia, that is part of the Private
Infrastructure Development Group, a multilateral development finance institution. At GuarantCo, Lasitha conceptualised
the InfraCredit strategy, which resulted in the setting up of specialist infrastructure guarantors, InfraCredit Nigeria and
InfraZamin Pakistan.
GGC will also be an EE, together with GCF Holdings and GCF Holdings Manager.
1.89 Activity 1.1 – Formation and capitalisation of Green Guarantee Company Limited – (Implemented by DGG, GGC,)
Following the completion of a procurement process conducted by the EEs the international law firm, Gowling WLG, has
been selected to advise GGC on the equity documentation and management agreement with the potential shareholders.
GGC has been incorporated in United Kingdom as a limited liability company and will have two core activities.
1. To issue shares to its equity shareholders and on the back the equity available.
2. Issue guarantees on behalf of Borrowers in developing countries seeking to raise green bonds or loans to finance
climate mitigation and adaptation projects.
GGC itself will not have any full-time employees or staff but will have a Board of Directors (the “Board”) appointed by GGC’s
shareholders following a selection process run in partnership with DGG.
The Board will be responsible for appointing, approving and delegating decision-making authority to DGG (the “Manager”)
to manage GGC’s guarantee operations on a day-to-day basis. The on-going role of the Board will be to review, challenge
and approve the annual strategy and budget for GGC proposed by the Manager and to monitor and review the performance
of the Manager in delivering on the strategy and budget. The Board will also be responsible for communication with GGC’s
shareholders and providing them with periodic progress updates and ensuring their priorities are appropriately considered
in the context of setting strategy for GGC. It has been proposed that the Board have up to five members to allow for a mix
of experience, with at least three members expected to have relevant climate impact experience in addition to E&S and
gender experience.
The three GGC Board members with climate, E&S and gender experience will be independent members of the GGC Impact
and Credit Committees providing review and challenge to the DGG Impact Team in their assessment of potential climate
projects and have a veto over which projects are progressed to a final approval. The anticipated profiles of the Board

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 27
B
members are provided in the TSP (see Annex 24A) and the Terms of Service are included in the Operations Manual
(Operating Plan) (Annex 21). GCF will also have the right to have an observer join the GGC Impact Committee to provide
additional advice and support to the GGC Impact Committee in respect of the latest thinking on specific climate impact
issues.
GCF Holdings will be incorporated as a special purpose vehicle. GCF Holdings will be solely owned by GCF.GCF Holdings
will execute a management agreement with Holdings Manager so that Holdings Manager will be responsible for daily
operations of GCF Holdings including establishing a bank account, preparing financial statements, and receiving and
sending dividends, etc.
Both GCF Holdings and GCF Holdings Manager will be EE.
DGG will negotiate service contracts with the following key service providers for GGC:
1. An international credit rating agency – GGC requires an investment grade credit rating from one of the three
international credit rating agencies (Fitch, Moody’s and S&P Global) to support its guarantee activities. GGC will pay
an annual rating fee for the credit rating. The credit rating opinion provided by the international credit rating agency will
determine whether GGC is rated as investment grade and under what conditions (e.g., capital adequacy ratio), which
will establish what GGC’s guarantee capacity is. The Manager will be responsible for managing the day-to-day
relationship between GGC and the international credit rating agency, being responsible for explaining strategy and
meeting any reporting requirements and information requests.
2. Third party investment managers – as guarantees are unfunded until called GGC’s equity capital and retained
earnings (to the extent not distributed to shareholders) will be invested conservatively via a third-party investment
managers of strong repute (for example PIMCO). The investment managers will be given an investment mandate by
the Board of GGC and would be expected to act on this. The Manager will receive reports from the investment manager
demonstrating that the portfolio of investments has been invested in line with the investment mandate and the Manager
will circulate these to the Board of GGC for their review and action (if required). Capital preservation will be the primary
goal for the investment managers. An indicative investment mandate has been included in GGC’s Treasury Policy which
is attached as an annex to this proposal (see Annex 27). GGC’s investment portfolio is expected to be highly rated and
highly liquid. Prior to and upon any claim of a guarantee, the Board of GGC shall instruct the investment manager to
raise funds to allow for GGC to meet any claims on its guarantee obligations. The selection of the investment manager
will be based on a competitive selection of experienced firms with strong reputation and track record of managing funds
and providing the required accounting and reporting data to prepare GGC’s financial statements and reports.
GGC is targeting to leverage its equity capital up to 10x, meaning for every USD 1 of capital GGC will write USD 10 of
guarantees. Given this unique ability to leverage, GGC does not require to raise all of the capital envisaged in its 10-year
business plan all at once. Consequently, the capital raise has been structured across three or more stages as follows:
1. Stage 1: Raise USD 100 million of paid-in equity capital to enable commencement of operations
2. Stage 2: Raise USD 170 million by Year 3 of the business plan to support growth to USD 2 billion portfolio
3. Stage 3: Raise up to USD 135 million of callable capital (which when called will crystalise as equity) in Year 2 - Year 5
of the business plan to support growth to USD 4 billion portfolio
Stage 1
GGC has obtained approvals-in-principle from FCDO for USD 40 million and is actively working to raise a further USD
20 million of equity to support its first tranche of equity, which with a contribution of USD 40 million from GCF, puts
GGC in a position to achieve its first close by the end of 2022 and to commence writing guarantees in early 2023 with
a guarantee capacity of USD 1 billion (10x USD 100 million – explained in Section A21).
Stage 2
GGC is expected to commit most of its initial guarantee capacity of USD 1 billion within two years of commencing
operations and consequently the Manager will continue to fundraise in parallel to issuing guarantees with a further USD
170 million of paid-in equity targeted for a second close. This will give GGC a total guarantee capacity of USD 2.7
billion. GCF is being asked to be the anchor investor and to help attract additional investors into the second tranche of
equity. Early discussions have been had with a couple of developed country governments who have expressed an
interest in investing in the second close.

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 28
B
Stage 3
As GGC nears achieving a guarantee portfolio of USD 2 billion by circa Year 5 it is expected to be generating profits
which can either be distributed to shareholders or retained to support the further growth of GGC. Given that GGC’s
business model is expected to be sustainable at this point the focus will shift from raising additional funded equity to
looking at callable (or unfunded) capital which can be structured so that when undrawn the capital attracts a return
which is lower than when funded. The callable capital is typically structured so that it can be called at the point that a
pre-agreed trigger event has occurred (e.g., GGC’s cash equity has reduced down to USD 100 million). The capital is
then “called” and crystallises as either equity or debt depending on what has been agreed with the callable capital
provider. FCDO has provided callable capital for other guarantors (e.g., GuarantCo) and could be a future callable
capital provider for GGC as well.
1.90 Activity 1.2 – Secure investment grade credit rating for GGC – (Implemented by DGG and GGC)
To obtain a credit rating for GGC it will be necessary for the Manager to engage one or more international credit rating
agencies to undertake a rating assessment process where they will review the fundamental assumptions underpinning
GGC's business plan and how those assumptions align with the rating methodology that has been chosen. The outcome
of this process will be an indicative rating which GGC will then need to decide if it wishes to use as a public rating. The
process of converting an indicative rating to a public rating is quick as essentially most of the analysis has been carried out
by the rating agency during the initial rating assessment. To make a rating public it will be necessary for GGC to enter into
a rating agreement with the international rating agency and pay an annual rating fee.
1.91 Activity 1.3 – Identify and execute guarantees that mobilise institutional capital in global credit and capital markets
to fund climate mitigation and adaptation projects in developing countries – (Implemented by DGG and GGC)
The process for identifying and executing guarantees is detailed in the GGC Transaction Selection Process (Annex 24A),
the Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B) and its Guarantee Policy (see Annex 23).
A typical guarantee transaction is formed via a tri-partite relationship as shown in the diagram below.
Figure 8: Contractual Structure of Typical Guarantee Transaction
Once the transaction selection process explained in Annex 24A has been completed and a guarantee has been issued
there is no immediate flow of funds from GGC but rather from the guaranteed Investors to the Borrower via a debt
instrument as it would in a conventional financing.
1.92 Activity 1.4 – Manage and report on portfolio of guarantees – (Implemented by DGG and GGC)
As mentioned above, liquidity management and maintaining confidence are both critical to the success of a guarantor such
as GGC, consequently active portfolio management is needed to be able to anticipate potential guarantee claims in
advance of them materialising and to be prepared to make payments when they become due in a timely manner, thereby
establishing confidence in GGC’s guarantee and protecting its reputation.
Effective portfolio management is based on strong lines of communication with the Borrower through regular monitoring of
its financial and impact KPIs. GGC will benefit from proven portfolio management systems and processes that have been
used by the Manager in managing other guarantors and are straight-forward and cost-effective to implement and manage.
This proactive relationship management means that GGC can foresee in advance whether the Borrower will encounter
difficulties in meeting the payment obligations on the debt instrument and if a payment default by the Borrower is
unavoidable then GGC steps in and makes payment on its behalf. The trigger for a claim under a GGC guarantee will

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 29
B
typically be the failure of a Borrower to fund a Debt Service Account in advance (typically 30 days) of a debt service payment
date.
GGC will usually only make the scheduled payment due to avoid an acceleration of the full principal value of the debt
instrument. This creates a window of time in which the GGC can work with the Borrower and Investor to restructure the
financing and find a more sustainable basis (e.g., longer tenor) on which the Borrower can meet its payment obligations.
Once the Borrower has stabilised then GGC will request repayment of the amounts it has paid under the guarantee along
under the terms of the Recourse Agreement which will have been agreed with the Borrower ahead of GGC issuing its
guarantee.
As claims under guarantees are unpredictable and ad hoc in nature, GGC's cash equity is invested in highly liquid
investment grade debt instruments by a professional third-party fund manager (e.g., PIMCO) on GGC’s behalf. This
allows GGC to earn an income on these investments which contributes to covering its operating expenses as it builds its
guarantee portfolio. When a claim is made under a guarantee GGC will typically get 10 business days to pay the
beneficiary and consequently liquidity management becomes critical to ensuring that GGC is able to obtain funds from its
investment portfolio within a short timescale. GGC’s business model is built on the confidence that it can and it would pay
under its guarantees if the conditions required to do so are met.
1.93 Activity 1.5 – Establish commercial viability of GGC and facilitate exit (Implemented by DGG, GGC, FCDO, and
other investors)
Commercial viability of GGC will largely be established by the effective implementation of Activities 1.1 to 1.4.
Activities in relation to enabling an exit for GGC are discussed in Section B6.
1.94 AE – Implementation Arrangement
As noted above, MUFG is serving as the AE to the GCF, and the Programme will be implemented through a Funded Activity
Agreement (FAA) between GCF and MUFG. MUFG, DGG, GCF Holdings, GCF Holdings Manager and the GGC will enter
into an Implementation Agreement whereby MUFG, as AE, will pass through obligations in the FAA to GGC and DGG as
the EE by signing subsidiary agreements with both. DGG will then implement the activities in the FAA and provide reporting
to MUFG and thereon to the GCF.
MUFG, as per will be responsible for:
• Overall implementation, oversight, and coordination GCF’s commitment to GGC.
• Proper use of GCF’s commitment to GGC.
• Ensure compliance of GGC activities with the FAA.
• Ensure investments performed by GGC respect GCF policies.
• Reporting and Accounting of GGC
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Explain why the project/programme requires GCF funding, i.e. Why is the project/programme not currently being financed by public
and/or private sector?
1.95 In the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, privately capitalized guarantors in the form of monoline guarantors all
collapsed due to their excessive leverage (30-50 times) and exposures to US sub-prime mortgages save for Assured
Guaranty whose exposures to this toxic asset class was kept to the minimum. Since then, the guarantee modality has been
championed by very few Government-funded initiatives tasked to develop local currency infrastructure financing
(GuarantCo and InfraCredit Nigeria) and local currency bond markets (Danajamin and Credit Guarantee and Investment
Facility). Although these guarantors have performed well and have experienced very low levels of claims and losses, their
low leverage allowed by their rating agencies to maintain their high ratings have not allowed the demonstration of
commercial rates of return to attract private capital.
1.96 GCF and the other Government’s equity contribution to start-up GGC also provides confidence to rating agencies that rate
GGC as the pedigree of ownership is a key rating factor at least at the early stage. For a guarantor to commence operations
and succeed, it is critical for the rating agencies to be convinced of GGC’s commitment towards its objectives and the policy
importance of its mandate to its shareholders. Given the green financing focus of GGC, there is no equivalent shareholder
to GCF to accomplish this.
Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any other domestic or international sources of financing?
Mobilising Private Capital into Developing Countries
1.97 The development finance world has long sought to find a solution to best mobilise the abundant savings in developed
countries to support the financing (particularly infrastructure) needs of developing countries. Core to this problem is the
mismatch between the appetite of the fund managers (mostly into investment grade opportunities) and the risk ratings of

--- Table 1 on Page 33 ---
typically be the failure of a Borrower to fund a Debt Service Account in advance (typically 30 days) of a debt service payment
date.
GGC will usually only make the scheduled payment due to avoid an acceleration of the full principal value of the debt
instrument. This creates a window of time in which the GGC can work with the Borrower and Investor to restructure the
financing and find a more sustainable basis (e.g., longer tenor) on which the Borrower can meet its payment obligations.
Once the Borrower has stabilised then GGC will request repayment of the amounts it has paid under the guarantee along
under the terms of the Recourse Agreement which will have been agreed with the Borrower ahead of GGC issuing its
guarantee.
As claims under guarantees are unpredictable and ad hoc in nature, GGC's cash equity is invested in highly liquid
investment grade debt instruments by a professional third-party fund manager (e.g., PIMCO) on GGC’s behalf. This
allows GGC to earn an income on these investments which contributes to covering its operating expenses as it builds its
guarantee portfolio. When a claim is made under a guarantee GGC will typically get 10 business days to pay the
beneficiary and consequently liquidity management becomes critical to ensuring that GGC is able to obtain funds from its
investment portfolio within a short timescale. GGC’s business model is built on the confidence that it can and it would pay
under its guarantees if the conditions required to do so are met.
1.93 Activity 1.5 – Establish commercial viability of GGC and facilitate exit (Implemented by DGG, GGC, FCDO, and
other investors)
Commercial viability of GGC will largely be established by the effective implementation of Activities 1.1 to 1.4.
Activities in relation to enabling an exit for GGC are discussed in Section B6.
1.94 AE – Implementation Arrangement
As noted above, MUFG is serving as the AE to the GCF, and the Programme will be implemented through a Funded Activity
Agreement (FAA) between GCF and MUFG. MUFG, DGG, GCF Holdings, GCF Holdings Manager and the GGC will enter
into an Implementation Agreement whereby MUFG, as AE, will pass through obligations in the FAA to GGC and DGG as
the EE by signing subsidiary agreements with both. DGG will then implement the activities in the FAA and provide reporting
to MUFG and thereon to the GCF.
MUFG, as per will be responsible for:
• Overall implementation, oversight, and coordination GCF’s commitment to GGC.
• Proper use of GCF’s commitment to GGC.
• Ensure compliance of GGC activities with the FAA.
• Ensure investments performed by GGC respect GCF policies.
• Reporting and Accounting of GGC
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Explain why the project/programme requires GCF funding, i.e. Why is the project/programme not currently being financed by public
and/or private sector?
1.95 In the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, privately capitalized guarantors in the form of monoline guarantors all
collapsed due to their excessive leverage (30-50 times) and exposures to US sub-prime mortgages save for Assured
Guaranty whose exposures to this toxic asset class was kept to the minimum. Since then, the guarantee modality has been
championed by very few Government-funded initiatives tasked to develop local currency infrastructure financing
(GuarantCo and InfraCredit Nigeria) and local currency bond markets (Danajamin and Credit Guarantee and Investment
Facility). Although these guarantors have performed well and have experienced very low levels of claims and losses, their
low leverage allowed by their rating agencies to maintain their high ratings have not allowed the demonstration of
commercial rates of return to attract private capital.
1.96 GCF and the other Government’s equity contribution to start-up GGC also provides confidence to rating agencies that rate
GGC as the pedigree of ownership is a key rating factor at least at the early stage. For a guarantor to commence operations
and succeed, it is critical for the rating agencies to be convinced of GGC’s commitment towards its objectives and the policy
importance of its mandate to its shareholders. Given the green financing focus of GGC, there is no equivalent shareholder
to GCF to accomplish this.
Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any other domestic or international sources of financing?
Mobilising Private Capital into Developing Countries
1.97 The development finance world has long sought to find a solution to best mobilise the abundant savings in developed
countries to support the financing (particularly infrastructure) needs of developing countries. Core to this problem is the
mismatch between the appetite of the fund managers (mostly into investment grade opportunities) and the risk ratings of

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 30
B
bond issues from the developing world (with many of the developing countries rated low investment grade or non-investment
grade). Bonds issued by the developing market borrowers would be predominantly non-investment grade – at best capped
by or worse notched down from their own sovereign’s rating. Of the 8 Beneficiary Countries, only 3 are investment grade –
Indonesia, Philippines, and Trinidad & Tobago. GGC will be able to uplift the issuances to investment grade with its
guarantees – channelling greater amounts of capital which would otherwise not be able to flow into the developing world.
Reviving Guarantors
1.98 As proven, specialist guarantors as financing mobilization mechanism, can be a viable tool if utilized with due care even for
supporting infrastructure financing in developing countries as evident by GuarantCo’s accomplishments (see
https://guarantco.com/impact/ for more information). Current donor Governments remain committed with the initial
objectives to use their existing guarantors for local currency savings mobilisation given increasing demand for their
guarantees and the success of these institutions. At present, with their limited resources available, they do not have
sufficient allocations to fully support the establishment of a new hard currency guarantor for green financing. As such,
GCF’s contribution of a substantial amount of the capital needed to help GGC attain a minimum size of equity will be critical
towards getting it operational. The remaining amounts are expected to be contributed by Governments including the UK
and US Governments via their respective departments.
1.99 It is anticipated that GGC’s public capital equity base needed to start-up its operations will be progressively combined with
private sector capital partially as it matures and eventually with a strong track record established, fully replaced when
commercial returns are proven. When this occurs, GCF and GGC’s Government shareholders would not only have
successfully developed a vehicle to mobilise the financial support into the Beneficiary Countries to meet their climate
commitments but also revived the guarantee modality sufficiently to attract private capital. New guarantors can then follow
to address other climate change financing or other pressing challenges (Social, Blue, Transition bonds) in our world.
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall financing package.
i.e., What is the coherence between activities financed by grants and those financed by reimbursable funds?
1.100 With the goal of reviving the guarantee modality and attracting private capital, it is important for GGC to deliver financing
solutions that are market based with as minimum concessionality in each of the transactions as well as operating as a
guarantor. While at the on-set GGC will tap on grants and Technical Assistance to help borrowers better prepare their
projects and reporting capabilities, these would be ancillary to the main solution of uplifting the credit profile of the bonds
via the issuance of guarantees, of which requires equity contributions from GCF.
How were co-financing amounts and prices determined?
1.101 The equity of GGC from each contributor will be determined based on the respective Government’s ability and investment
policies while the pricing for each participant will be at par with each other.
1.102 For the projects that will be supported by GGC, it is anticipated that there will not be any co-financing for most instances.
If there are other co-financiers, the amounts will be driven by GGC’s single risk capacity relative to the size of funding
needed and/or availability of co-financiers. In such instances, pricing of financing will be arranged on a parity basis as a
principle across various financing solutions subject to adjustments for tenor and ranking considerations.
How does the concessionality of the GCF financing compare to that of the co-financing? If applicable, provide a short market read
on the prevailing of the pricing and/or financial markets for similar projects/programmes.
1.103 As GGC will operate on commercial terms, the minimum concessionality of GCF’s equity contribution as with GGC’s other
shareholders is in the form of “shareholder patience” with respect to returns on equity. This is important to allow GGC to
carefully build up the portfolio with strong emphasis on the quality of the borrowers it guarantees with respect to their credit
and green credentials including focusing on critical of projects in developing countries. With ample time to build up the
business and processes, GGC will be able to deliver the anticipated commercial like returns if allowed sufficient time to
mature.
1.104 GCF’s support in providing equity as with the other contributors to GGC’s capital base also allows for GGC to issue longer
term guarantees to support longer termed bonds – potentially up to 20 years. While minimum concessionality in terms of
pricing is anticipated, the availability of long-term financing to allow for climate projects that have longer payback periods
will be extremely beneficial to the project sponsors and the end beneficiaries or users with less pressure to increase prices
in the immediate term to pay for the project.
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial instrument(s) is the minimum required to make the investment viable.
Additionally, how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept of minimum concessionality? Who benefits
from concessionality? In your answer, please consider the risk sharing structure between the public and private sectors, the barriers
to investment and the indebtedness of the recipient. Please reference relevant annexes, such as the feasibility study, economic
analysis, or financial analysis when appropriate.
1.105 The concessionality explained above is at the minimum with none amongst other equity providers as well as in the
operations of GGC. The beneficiaries of the minimum concessionality however, will be cutting across all stakeholders.

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 31
B
• Investors in the guaranteed bonds, will benefit from the safety of the guarantee and a yield pick-up from alternative higher
rated Green Bonds from Multilateral Banks as well as quality monitoring and reporting and avoid having to take non-
investment grade risks on their green bond portfolios
• Borrowers will benefit from appropriate funding terms, tenor, and costs for their projects
• Countries will benefit from having access to financing to meet their higher the climate commitments as per their NDCs
• Users will benefit from lower or no unit price increases whilst knowing that their consumption moving forward will be
beneficial to the climate
• GGC will benefit from the stronger portfolio and greater impact of its operations
GGC’s shareholders will benefit from an eventual exit that bears greater return from the successful guarantor as well as the ability
to further deploy similar support to address other challenges.
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Explain how the project/programme will successfully exit once implementation is completed, including how results and benefits will
continue beyond the project/programme period and how the contribution to paradigm shift will be maintained.
Include information pertaining to the longer-term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations, and maintenance of
investments (e.g., key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements). In case of private sector, please describe the GCF’s
financial exit strategy through Initial Public Offerings, trade sales, etc.
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as part of the
project/programme to ensure sustainability of the results attained.
Sustainability of Impact
1.106 Unlike a fund, GGC is not being set up with a defined lifespan but as a self-sustaining corporate that will seek to grow its
guarantee activities based on market demand and need. Given that over USD 500 billion of climate finance per annum is
estimated to be required by developing countries to invest in climate adaptation and mitigation projects up to 2050 it can
be assumed that GGC could have a role to play until at least that point and possibly beyond.
1.107 Consequently, GGC’s impact potential could last for a significantly longer period than the envisaged investment from GCF
and GGC’s other founding shareholders. The sustainability of GGC’s impact will be demonstrated in the following ways:
1. By using a digital platform to report on ESG and climate impact of the projects that GGC is guaranteeing it is anticipated
that Borrowers in developing countries will understand better the positive relationship between transparency and impact
with availability and cost of capital. This could have a trickle-down effect to the governments of the developing countries,
with the scale of the transactions that GGC is seeking to support (i.e., average guarantee size of USD 200 million)
incentivising them to adopt international standards at a national level to facilitate greater flows of capital.
2. Once this data is added to the platform it becomes part of a growing body of evidence as to the true underlying risks
associated with climate infrastructure in developing countries and over time the trends that emerge from this body of
evidence can help future climate projects in developing countries to attract capital from global credit and capital markets
on fairer terms.
3. Resulting from the combination of (1) and (2) above GGC expects that over time market transformation will take place
with investors in global credit and capital markets increasing their own capacity to understand and evaluate the risks
associated with climate projects in developing countries and thereby needing less or no guarantees from GGC to invest.
In such a scenario an exit will come through GGC stopping issuing new guarantees and managing down its portfolio.
An example of this can be seen from the evolution of guarantors in the United States. In the 1960s municipal
infrastructure in the United States was not viewed as an attractive investment by investors who did not understand how
to evaluate the risks associated with the asset class. This led to the creation of the monoline insurers in the 1970s –
effectively investment grade guarantee companies with the mandate to credit enhance municipal infrastructure bonds
and make them attractive for investors. The success of this innovation can be judged today by the fact that in developed
markets municipal infrastructure is now a highly liquid asset class and of the several monoline insurers created only
one is left as demand for guarantees in developed markets has fallen in line with growing investor confidence. This is
the kind of market transformation that GGC hopes to emulate through providing guarantees to global investors to help
them support climate adaptation and mitigation projects in developing and emerging markets. The true power of the
guarantee is not in the financing that it mobilises on a transactional basis but rather the capacity it creates amongst
investors to learn about an asset class and build their confidence to invest without guarantees in the future. This kind
of market transformation is going to be essential to addressing the scale of the climate finance gap discussed earlier
and so positions GGC as a globally scalable and transformative climate finance solution.

--- Table 1 on Page 35 ---
• Investors in the guaranteed bonds, will benefit from the safety of the guarantee and a yield pick-up from alternative higher
rated Green Bonds from Multilateral Banks as well as quality monitoring and reporting and avoid having to take non-
investment grade risks on their green bond portfolios
• Borrowers will benefit from appropriate funding terms, tenor, and costs for their projects
• Countries will benefit from having access to financing to meet their higher the climate commitments as per their NDCs
• Users will benefit from lower or no unit price increases whilst knowing that their consumption moving forward will be
beneficial to the climate
• GGC will benefit from the stronger portfolio and greater impact of its operations
GGC’s shareholders will benefit from an eventual exit that bears greater return from the successful guarantor as well as the ability
to further deploy similar support to address other challenges.
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Explain how the project/programme will successfully exit once implementation is completed, including how results and benefits will
continue beyond the project/programme period and how the contribution to paradigm shift will be maintained.
Include information pertaining to the longer-term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations, and maintenance of
investments (e.g., key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements). In case of private sector, please describe the GCF’s
financial exit strategy through Initial Public Offerings, trade sales, etc.
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as part of the
project/programme to ensure sustainability of the results attained.
Sustainability of Impact
1.106 Unlike a fund, GGC is not being set up with a defined lifespan but as a self-sustaining corporate that will seek to grow its
guarantee activities based on market demand and need. Given that over USD 500 billion of climate finance per annum is
estimated to be required by developing countries to invest in climate adaptation and mitigation projects up to 2050 it can
be assumed that GGC could have a role to play until at least that point and possibly beyond.
1.107 Consequently, GGC’s impact potential could last for a significantly longer period than the envisaged investment from GCF
and GGC’s other founding shareholders. The sustainability of GGC’s impact will be demonstrated in the following ways:
1. By using a digital platform to report on ESG and climate impact of the projects that GGC is guaranteeing it is anticipated
that Borrowers in developing countries will understand better the positive relationship between transparency and impact
with availability and cost of capital. This could have a trickle-down effect to the governments of the developing countries,
with the scale of the transactions that GGC is seeking to support (i.e., average guarantee size of USD 200 million)
incentivising them to adopt international standards at a national level to facilitate greater flows of capital.
2. Once this data is added to the platform it becomes part of a growing body of evidence as to the true underlying risks
associated with climate infrastructure in developing countries and over time the trends that emerge from this body of
evidence can help future climate projects in developing countries to attract capital from global credit and capital markets
on fairer terms.
3. Resulting from the combination of (1) and (2) above GGC expects that over time market transformation will take place
with investors in global credit and capital markets increasing their own capacity to understand and evaluate the risks
associated with climate projects in developing countries and thereby needing less or no guarantees from GGC to invest.
In such a scenario an exit will come through GGC stopping issuing new guarantees and managing down its portfolio.
An example of this can be seen from the evolution of guarantors in the United States. In the 1960s municipal
infrastructure in the United States was not viewed as an attractive investment by investors who did not understand how
to evaluate the risks associated with the asset class. This led to the creation of the monoline insurers in the 1970s –
effectively investment grade guarantee companies with the mandate to credit enhance municipal infrastructure bonds
and make them attractive for investors. The success of this innovation can be judged today by the fact that in developed
markets municipal infrastructure is now a highly liquid asset class and of the several monoline insurers created only
one is left as demand for guarantees in developed markets has fallen in line with growing investor confidence. This is
the kind of market transformation that GGC hopes to emulate through providing guarantees to global investors to help
them support climate adaptation and mitigation projects in developing and emerging markets. The true power of the
guarantee is not in the financing that it mobilises on a transactional basis but rather the capacity it creates amongst
investors to learn about an asset class and build their confidence to invest without guarantees in the future. This kind
of market transformation is going to be essential to addressing the scale of the climate finance gap discussed earlier
and so positions GGC as a globally scalable and transformative climate finance solution.

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 32
B
Exit Strategy
1.108 The business plan anticipates that GGC will be able to deliver a return on equity that will be attractive to commercial
investors by Year 10 of operations. Consequently, GGC will seek to prepare an exit for the founding shareholders, including
GCF, in two steps:
1. GGC will seek a public listing of its equity in a global capital market (e.g., LSE) by Year 5 of operations. It is not
anticipated that this will create an exit for the founding shareholders but is more an intermediary step and creates a
“shop window” for potential private sector investors to observe how GGC performs over a period of time.
2. Between Year 5 and Year 10, private sector investors will be sought to acquire the listed shares from the founding
shareholders with the ambition of them having exited in full by Year 10.
1.109 Should a public listing of GGC’s equity be deemed not viable at a future date then an alternative exit strategy will be for
GGC to develop a share buy-back programme (where the number of issued shares is reduced on a pro rata basis, being
bought by GGC at a premium from the shareholders, thereby increasing the economic value of the remaining shares, with
no dilution in percentage ownership). In GGC’s financial model (Annex 3) it is forecasted that the average Profit before Tax
will be USD 20 million by Year 10 of operations. Conservatively assuming that GGC does not grow its portfolio beyond the
USD 4 billion projected for Year 10 of operations, GGC is still able to generate sufficient cash to return USD 200 million of
cash to shareholders over the following 10 years of operations. Consequently, GCF should at least have its initial capital
investment returned within this period of time.
1.110 Should GGC prove unsuccessful in achieving its business plan then an option available to its Board and shareholders will
be to stop writing new guarantee business and to move the portfolio into run-off. As existing guarantees mature/expire over
time and GGC’s capital is deleveraged it can be returned to the shareholders on a pro rata basis, thereby ensuring an
orderly exit.

--- Table 1 on Page 36 ---
Exit Strategy
1.108 The business plan anticipates that GGC will be able to deliver a return on equity that will be attractive to commercial
investors by Year 10 of operations. Consequently, GGC will seek to prepare an exit for the founding shareholders, including
GCF, in two steps:
1. GGC will seek a public listing of its equity in a global capital market (e.g., LSE) by Year 5 of operations. It is not
anticipated that this will create an exit for the founding shareholders but is more an intermediary step and creates a
“shop window” for potential private sector investors to observe how GGC performs over a period of time.
2. Between Year 5 and Year 10, private sector investors will be sought to acquire the listed shares from the founding
shareholders with the ambition of them having exited in full by Year 10.
1.109 Should a public listing of GGC’s equity be deemed not viable at a future date then an alternative exit strategy will be for
GGC to develop a share buy-back programme (where the number of issued shares is reduced on a pro rata basis, being
bought by GGC at a premium from the shareholders, thereby increasing the economic value of the remaining shares, with
no dilution in percentage ownership). In GGC’s financial model (Annex 3) it is forecasted that the average Profit before Tax
will be USD 20 million by Year 10 of operations. Conservatively assuming that GGC does not grow its portfolio beyond the
USD 4 billion projected for Year 10 of operations, GGC is still able to generate sufficient cash to return USD 200 million of
cash to shareholders over the following 10 years of operations. Consequently, GCF should at least have its initial capital
investment returned within this period of time.
1.110 Should GGC prove unsuccessful in achieving its business plan then an option available to its Board and shareholders will
be to stop writing new guarantee business and to move the portfolio into run-off. As existing guarantees mature/expire over
time and GGC’s capital is deleveraged it can be returned to the shareholders on a pro rata basis, thereby ensuring an
orderly exit.


=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 33
D
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested
Total amount Currency
GCF funding
(i + ii + iii + iv + v
+ vi + vii) 82.5 million USD ($)million USD ($)
GCF financial
Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
instrument
(i) Senior loans Enter amount Enter years Enter years Enter %
(ii) Subordinated
Enter amount Enter years Enter years Enter %
loans
(iii) Equity 82.5 6 % equity return
(iv) Guarantees Enter amount Enter years
(v) Reimbursable
Enter amount
grants
(vi) Grants Enter amount
(vii) Results-based
Enter amount
payments
(b) Co-financing Total amount Currency
information 322.5 Options
Name of Financial Tenor &
Amount Currency Pricing Seniority
institution instrument grace
6% pari passu
FCDO Equity 40 Options Enter years
6% pari passu
Other Equity 147.5 Options Enter years
3% pari passu
Other Equity 135 Options Enter years
(c) Total Amount Currency
financing
(c) = (a)+(b) 405 million USD ($)
Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type of
guarantee (e.g., sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).
1.111 Taking the lead in structuring the guaranteed green bond and loan transactions, GGC aims
to “crowd in” other risk participants into the transaction to share and reduce GGC’s risks
exposure in a transaction. It can anchor a transaction with up to a 100% guarantee and
work with partners and interested public and private sector co-participants to share risks
where possible.
1.112 To support more challenging projects where repayment certainty is less pronounced but are
critically needed for adaptation purposes for example, sovereign guarantees or other forms
(d) Other
of sovereign support (such as first loss capital) may be sought on a case-by-case basis to
financing
allow for the project to be supported.
arrangements
and Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax exemptions and
contributions contributions of assets.
(max. 250 words,
approximately 1.113 While not needed for GGC on an institution basis, specific projects may benefit from
0.5 page) contributions in-kind and tax exemptions including withholding tax on interest payments and
guarantee fees to allow for savings to be transferred to the users and beneficiaries of the
projects in the communities. This will be solely the prerogative of the respective Sovereigns
to support projects which are critical to their climate change mitigation and adaptation goals.
GGC can then complement the support for the projects by raising long term funding at more
affordable funding costs to make them bankable.
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme (refer to the co-
financing policy).

--- Table 1 on Page 37 ---
FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) Requested |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF funding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (i + ii + iii + iv + v |  | 82.5 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($)million USD ($) |  |  |  |  | 
 | + vi + vii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF financial |  | Amount |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  |  | Pricing |  | 
 | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(i) Senior loans |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  | 
 | (ii) Subordinated |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  | 
 | loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(iii) Equity |  |  | 82.5 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 6 % equity return |  | 
(iv) Guarantees |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (v) Reimbursable |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vi) Grants |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vii) Results-based |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | payments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (b) Co-financing |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | information |  | 322.5 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Options |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Name of |  |  | Financial |  | Amount |  | Currency |  |  | Tenor & |  |  | Pricing |  | Seniority | 
 | institution |  |  | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  | grace |  |  |  |  |  | 
FCDO |  |  | Equity |  |  | 40 |  | Options |  | Enter years |  |  |  | 6% |  | pari passu | 
Other |  |  | Equity |  |  | 147.5 |  | Options |  | Enter years |  |  |  | 6% |  | pari passu | 
Other |  |  | Equity |  |  | 135 |  | Options |  | Enter years |  |  |  | 3% |  | pari passu | 
(c) Total
financing
(c) = (a)+(b) |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 405 |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(d) Other
financing
arrangements
and
contributions
(max. 250 words,
approximately
0.5 page) |  |  | Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type of
guarantee (e.g., sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).
1.111 Taking the lead in structuring the guaranteed green bond and loan transactions, GGC aims
to “crowd in” other risk participants into the transaction to share and reduce GGC’s risks
exposure in a transaction. It can anchor a transaction with up to a 100% guarantee and
work with partners and interested public and private sector co-participants to share risks
where possible.
1.112 To support more challenging projects where repayment certainty is less pronounced but are
critically needed for adaptation purposes for example, sovereign guarantees or other forms
of sovereign support (such as first loss capital) may be sought on a case-by-case basis to
allow for the project to be supported.
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax exemptions and
contributions of assets.
1.113 While not needed for GGC on an institution basis, specific projects may benefit from
contributions in-kind and tax exemptions including withholding tax on interest payments and
guarantee fees to allow for savings to be transferred to the users and beneficiaries of the
projects in the communities. This will be solely the prerogative of the respective Sovereigns
to support projects which are critical to their climate change mitigation and adaptation goals.
GGC can then complement the support for the projects by raising long term funding at more
affordable funding costs to make them bankable.
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme (refer to the co-
financing policy). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 37 ---
(c) Total
financing
(c) = (a)+(b)

--- Table 3 on Page 37 ---
(d) Other
financing
arrangements
and
contributions
(max. 250 words,
approximately
0.5 page)

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 34
D
1.114 By drawing support from other co-participants as explained above, GGC’s risk exposure on
a gross (partial guarantee) and net basis (if insured) will reduce by the introduction of other
participants to take up or share risks to the projects guaranteed. Their participation will be
backed by their own equity and risk capacity that will be sitting in parallel with GGC’s
guarantee exposures. While it is not possible to quantify this at this moment, any risk
sharing, and co-participation of risks will be reported to GCF on an on-going basis when
GGC is operational. As an indication of the levels possible, CGIF has successfully
implemented a quota share reinsurance treaty from private reinsurers for 25% of their
portfolio since 2016.
C.2. Financing by component
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and disaggregate
by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output. Provide the
summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
Options Options Instrument Options Instrume Institutions
nt
Activity 1.1 - 1,058,294 Equity 2,791,706 Equity FCDO and
Formation other public
and 3,850,000 and private
Component 1:
capitalisatio investors
Equity
n of GGC
Investment
Activity 1.2 - 294,022 Equity 895,978 Equity FCDO and
Secure 1,190,000 other public
investment

--- Table 1 on Page 38 ---
 | 1.114 By drawing support from other co-participants as explained above, GGC’s risk exposure on
a gross (partial guarantee) and net basis (if insured) will reduce by the introduction of other
participants to take up or share risks to the projects guaranteed. Their participation will be
backed by their own equity and risk capacity that will be sitting in parallel with GGC’s
guarantee exposures. While it is not possible to quantify this at this moment, any risk
sharing, and co-participation of risks will be reported to GCF on an on-going basis when
GGC is operational. As an indication of the levels possible, CGIF has successfully
implemented a quota share reinsurance treaty from private reinsurers for 25% of their
portfolio since 2016.
C.2. Financing by component | 
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and disaggregate
by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output. Provide the
summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
Options Options Instrument Options Instrume Institutions
nt
Activity 1.1 - 1,058,294 Equity 2,791,706 Equity FCDO and
Formation other public
and 3,850,000 and private
Component 1:
capitalisatio investors
Equity
n of GGC
Investment
Activity 1.2 - 294,022 Equity 895,978 Equity FCDO and
Secure 1,190,000 other public
investment | 

--- Table 2 on Page 38 ---
Component | Output | Indicative
cost
Options |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Amount
Options | Amount | Financial
Instrument | Financial |  | Amount
Options | Amount |  | Financial |  | Name of
Institutions | Name of | 
 |  |  |  | Options |  | Instrument |  |  | Options |  | Instrume |  |  | Institutions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | nt |  |  |  | 
Component 1:
Equity
Investment | Activity 1.1 -
Formation
and
capitalisatio
n of GGC | 3,850,000 | 1,058,294 |  | Equity |  |  | 2,791,706 |  | Equity |  |  | FCDO and
other public
and private
investors |  | 
 | Activity 1.2 -
Secure
investment | 1,190,000 | 294,022 |  | Equity |  |  | 895,978 |  | Equity |  |  | FCDO and
other public |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 38 ---
Indicative
cost
Options

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 35
D
grade credit and private
rating for investors
GGC
Activity 1.3 78,179,837 Equity 309,142,888 Equity FCDO and
– Identify, other public
execute and and private
financially investors
structure
guarantees
that
mobilise
institutional
capital in
387,322,724
global credit
and capital
markets to
fund climate
mitigation
and
adaptation
projects in
developing
countries.
Activity 1.4 - 2,492,520 Equity 8,104,574 Equity FCDO and
Manage other public
and report and private
on portfolio investors
of
10,597,094
guarantees
Enter
for risk
amount
manageme
nt,
performanc
e, and
impact
Activity 1.5 475,327 Equity 1,564,855 Equity FCDO and
- Establish other public
commercial and private
viability of investors
GGC and
2,040,182
facilitate
exit for
GCF and
FCDO
Indicative total cost (USD)
405,000,000 82,500,000 322,500,000
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.
In case of a multi-country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in annex
17, if available.
1.115 Note: For illustrative purposes only. Actual budget by component is subject to change. GCF’s allocated
financing amount for activities is equal to 21% of total indicative cost assuming GCF commits $82.5 million.
For breakdown of component 1 expenses, please see Annex 4 set-up costs. It should be further noted that
any costs incurred (including management fees) are anticipated to be covered first by operating cashflows.

--- Table 1 on Page 39 ---
 | grade credit
rating for
GGC |  |  |  |  |  | and private
investors
 | Activity 1.3
– Identify,
execute and
financially
structure
guarantees
that
mobilise
institutional
capital in
global credit
and capital
markets to
fund climate
mitigation
and
adaptation
projects in
developing
countries. | 387,322,724 | 78,179,837 | Equity | 309,142,888 | Equity | FCDO and
other public
and private
investors
 | Activity 1.4 -
Manage
and report
on portfolio
of
guarantees
for risk
manageme
nt,
performanc
e, and
impact | 10,597,094
Enter
amount | 2,492,520 | Equity | 8,104,574 | Equity | FCDO and
other public
and private
investors
 | Activity 1.5
- Establish
commercial
viability of
GGC and
facilitate
exit for
GCF and
FCDO | 2,040,182 | 475,327 | Equity | 1,564,855 | Equity | FCDO and
other public
and private
investors
Indicative total cost (USD) |  | 405,000,000 | 82,500,000 |  | 322,500,000 |  | 

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 36
D
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? Yes ☐ No ☒
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology
Yes ☐ No ☒
development/transfer?
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a
brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent
possible.
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s Initial
Investment Framework.
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
1.116 The GGC will contribute to five of the GCF’s results areas: MRA1, MRA2, MRA3, and ARA2 and ARA3.
1.117 In terms of contribution to the shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways, the GGC will have an estimated
mitigation impact of 74 MtCO2e over the course of the programme’s lifetime (based on the 5 result areas calculated), across
all beneficiary countries (CORE 1; kindly refer to calculation methodology in Annex 22). It is anticipated that many mitigation
projects will have useful lifetimes and benefits beyond the GGC’s plan. Further, there should be an additional catalysing
impact due to the GGC stepping in, with increased technology transfer of low-carbon, mitigation-supporting technologies.
1.118 In terms of contribution increased climate-resilient sustainable development, the GGC will have an estimated adaptation
impact of 16,295,956 direct beneficiaries and 18,343,300 indirect beneficiaries over the course of the programme’s lifetime,
across all participating countries (CORE 2: kindly refer to calculation methodology in Annex 22).
1.119 The GGC will also have a positive impact on the enabling environment for climate finance in participating countries, and
across developing economies more broadly. It will do so by contributing to a high degree to market development and
transformation (CORE 7), making guarantees more viable and frequently used financial instruments to de-risk climate
change mitigation and adaptation investments, expanding private capital flows in the markets. Furthermore, the GGC will
contribute to a high degree to effective knowledge generation and learning processes, and the use of good practices,
methodologies, and standards (CORE 8) by virtue of the lessons learnt through its operations and its capturing and sharing
of its ‘learning-by-doing’ insights into the use of guarantees to accelerate and scale-up private sector capital for climate
mitigation and adaptation investments.
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Describe the degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project or programme investment.
Describe the following, if applicable:
• Potential for scaling up and replication; Potential for knowledge sharing and learning; Contribution to the creation of an
enabling environment; Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies; Overall contribution to climate-resilient
development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change adaptation strategies and plans
1.120 GGC’s ability to leverage its equity 10x (i.e., every USD 1 of additional equity contribution enabling USD 10 of guarantee
capacity) means that it is able to scale quickly and thereby mobilise large amounts of private sector climate finance than
would typically be possible via direct investment models. Furthermore, GGC’s construct as a corporate allows it to be able
to accept different types of capital (e.g., callable capital) and still achieve leverage, meaning it is able to look at attracting a
broad range of public and private sector investors. Once established as a demonstrated guarantee company able to
accomplish its objectives, there is the possibility for other guarantors to be established to address similar or more specific
climate challenges (for example Climate Investor One, a climate focused fund supported by GCF has now created Climate
Investor Two to focus on ocean-based initiatives). GGC is therefore both highly scalable and replicable.
1.121 While GGC is not expected to participate in transactions directly involving other GCF initiatives, to avoid double-counting
of impact, GGC still expects to be highly complementary to other initiatives supported by GCF. For example, GGC’s ability
to mobilise private sector climate finance at scale could enable the pathways to success established by other GCF backed
initiatives such as the Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment Fund for Adaptation Technologies in Developing
Countries or the Sub-National Climate Fund Global to be replicated by other private sector actors and scaled. GGC will
establish an ongoing dialogue with other GCF supported initiatives which operate at global, regional and/or national levels

--- Table 1 on Page 40 ---
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) |  |  | 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? |  |  | Yes ☐ No ☒
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology |  | Yes ☐ No ☒
 | development/transfer? |  | 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a
brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent
possible. |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 40 ---
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA |  | 
 | This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s Initial | 
 | Investment Framework. | 
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 1.116 The GGC will contribute to five of the GCF’s results areas: MRA1, MRA2, MRA3, and ARA2 and ARA3. | 
 |  | 
 | 1.117 In terms of contribution to the shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways, the GGC will have an estimated | 
 | mitigation impact of 74 MtCO2e over the course of the programme’s lifetime (based on the 5 result areas calculated), across | 
 | all beneficiary countries (CORE 1; kindly refer to calculation methodology in Annex 22). It is anticipated that many mitigation | 
 | projects will have useful lifetimes and benefits beyond the GGC’s plan. Further, there should be an additional catalysing | 
 | impact due to the GGC stepping in, with increased technology transfer of low-carbon, mitigation-supporting technologies. | 
 |  | 
 | 1.118 In terms of contribution increased climate-resilient sustainable development, the GGC will have an estimated adaptation | 
 | impact of 16,295,956 direct beneficiaries and 18,343,300 indirect beneficiaries over the course of the programme’s lifetime, | 
 | across all participating countries (CORE 2: kindly refer to calculation methodology in Annex 22). | 
 |  | 
 | 1.119 The GGC will also have a positive impact on the enabling environment for climate finance in participating countries, and | 
 | across developing economies more broadly. It will do so by contributing to a high degree to market development and | 
 | transformation (CORE 7), making guarantees more viable and frequently used financial instruments to de-risk climate | 
 | change mitigation and adaptation investments, expanding private capital flows in the markets. Furthermore, the GGC will | 
 | contribute to a high degree to effective knowledge generation and learning processes, and the use of good practices, | 
 | methodologies, and standards (CORE 8) by virtue of the lessons learnt through its operations and its capturing and sharing | 
 | of its ‘learning-by-doing’ insights into the use of guarantees to accelerate and scale-up private sector capital for climate | 
 | mitigation and adaptation investments. | 
 |  | 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | Describe the degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project or programme investment. | 
 | Describe the following, if applicable: | 
 | • Potential for scaling up and replication; Potential for knowledge sharing and learning; Contribution to the creation of an | 
 | enabling environment; Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies; Overall contribution to climate-resilient | 
 | development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change adaptation strategies and plans | 
 |  | 
 | 1.120 GGC’s ability to leverage its equity 10x (i.e., every USD 1 of additional equity contribution enabling USD 10 of guarantee | 
 | capacity) means that it is able to scale quickly and thereby mobilise large amounts of private sector climate finance than | 
 | would typically be possible via direct investment models. Furthermore, GGC’s construct as a corporate allows it to be able | 
 | to accept different types of capital (e.g., callable capital) and still achieve leverage, meaning it is able to look at attracting a | 
 | broad range of public and private sector investors. Once established as a demonstrated guarantee company able to | 
 | accomplish its objectives, there is the possibility for other guarantors to be established to address similar or more specific | 
 | climate challenges (for example Climate Investor One, a climate focused fund supported by GCF has now created Climate | 
 | Investor Two to focus on ocean-based initiatives). GGC is therefore both highly scalable and replicable. | 
 | 1.121 While GGC is not expected to participate in transactions directly involving other GCF initiatives, to avoid double-counting | 
 | of impact, GGC still expects to be highly complementary to other initiatives supported by GCF. For example, GGC’s ability | 
 | to mobilise private sector climate finance at scale could enable the pathways to success established by other GCF backed | 
 | initiatives such as the Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment Fund for Adaptation Technologies in Developing | 
 | Countries or the Sub-National Climate Fund Global to be replicated by other private sector actors and scaled. GGC will | 
 | establish an ongoing dialogue with other GCF supported initiatives which operate at global, regional and/or national levels | 

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 37
D
to explore opportunities to share their knowledge and learning at a project level more widely with global credit and capital
markets thereby enabling replication and maximising the initiatives’ collective impact.
1.122 In the context of green financing, a key challenge faced at the national level in GGC target countries is the limited local
climate finance market depth and underdeveloped financial market infrastructure and frameworks to identify, certify and
price green debt instruments. GGC will be focusing on enabling those borrowers that are already active in their local credit
and capital markets (so investment grade at a local level) to access global credit and capital markets (where they would be
considered sub-investment grade). This will require a process of education for these borrowers in terms of understanding
and meeting the international standards required by global credit and capital markets in terms of quality and availability of
information and identifying, measuring, and tracking green assets. Having been through this education process with the
support of GGC, these borrowers, given their high profile in local credit and capital markets, can play an important advocacy
role to enable the replication and/or alignment of national financial markets infrastructure and frameworks with international
standards. The success of local borrowers raising long-term climate finance from global credit and capital markets can
provide a powerful and needed stimulus to national governments to create similar enabling environments needed to scale
local climate finance markets which both local and, in time, global institutional investors can participate in.
1.123 Following from the last point above, for sub-projects and borrowers, following the successful guaranteed bond or loan, they
will have the ability to issue bonds or loans on their own without support from GGC mirroring the terms of the earlier bond
or loan once investors have gain confidence and comfort with the borrower and transaction. Additional phases of the same
project or new projects replicating the earlier design and transaction terms can be supported without GGC’s guarantee – a
product of its prior financial structuring efforts and the confidence building impact of the guarantee.
1.124 Global institutional investors in the guaranteed bonds and loans will invariably learn more about the borrower, sector, and
country they are in when they buy the guaranteed bond or loan. This knowledge can then be applied in a cross-cutting
manner – by these global institutional investors to support other climate projects in the same country or to similar projects
in different countries – anchored by GGC’s demonstrative effect in each of the guaranteed transactions. GGC will also seek
to use a digital platform (e.g., www.esgbook.com) to make the performance and impact data of the debt instruments that it
guarantees available to institutional investors that may not have participated in the guaranteed bonds or loans so that they
can track the performance and impact over time, thereby building their confidence to participate in future.
1.125 An important feature of global credit and capital markets is the high degree of transparency and information sharing that
occurs on transactions via the use of transaction information memorandums, finance industry conferences, financial
information platforms such as Bloomberg or the financial press (e.g., Financial Times or Wall Street Journal). GGC intends
to embrace this feature to advocate for climate projects in developing countries and to help replicate successfully executed
transactions by sharing knowledge about the financial structuring (i.e., solutions developed to overcome risks/barriers)
used. GGC will also help develop case studies on transactions which can be used by Origination Partners, NDAs, and
others to facilitate knowledge-sharing and encourage replication at scale, both in global and local credit and capital markets.
1.126 Another longer-term impact that GGC would be seeking to enable is the migration of global institutional investors into
providing climate finance in local currency. As mentioned earlier, GGC providing guarantees in hard currency will be an
important “stepping stone” to get global institutional investors to learn about the actual risks of investing in climate projects
in developing countries versus their perceived risk which is presently high enough to discourage any investment. Over time,
as investors become more educated with the actual risk then it is possible that their appetite to accept local currency risk
may also increase thereby increasing liquidity in local capital markets. As part of its strategy, where possible, GGC will look
at supporting synthetic local currency (i.e., hard currency denominated but indexed to local currency so that investor takes
the currency risk) climate finance debt instruments to support this migration of global investors from global to local capital
markets.
1.127 The preference of global credit and capital markets to focus on scale, with minimum transaction sizes being typically set at
USD 100 million, means that for smaller developing countries, particularly Least Developed Countries (“LDC”) and Small
Island Developing States (“SIDS”), it may be more challenging for GGC to find individual transactions which meet the
minimum size requirement. That said, the opportunity exists for GGC to guarantee transactions which raise capital on an
aggregated basis to finance smaller transactions in LDC and SIDS. For example, GGC has been in discussion with both a
green investment fund and a national development bank in a target LDC which have requested support from GGC to help
them raise either a green bond or syndicated loan in the global credit and capital markets. These local financial institutions
will then on-lend the proceeds of the green bond or loan to smaller climate mitigation and adaptation projects in their country.
In parallel, GGC is in dialogue with a member of the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (“GFANZ”) that is interested
in creating a debt fund focused on providing climate finance or SIDS. Again, GGC would seek to guarantee large size green
debt instruments issued by the fund which would then be on-lent to SIDS as smaller size loans but benefiting from better
terms and tenor that tend to be given to financings of scale. This proposed on-lending structure is replicable, scalable and
a powerful tool for mobilising climate finance to LDC and SIDS. With credit enhancement from GGC to help demonstrate
their viability, these on-lending structures offer an effective solution to support LDC and SIDS in a way which meets the
requirement for scale from the global capital and credit markets.
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

--- Table 1 on Page 41 ---
 | to explore opportunities to share their knowledge and learning at a project level more widely with global credit and capital | 
 | markets thereby enabling replication and maximising the initiatives’ collective impact. | 
 | 1.122 In the context of green financing, a key challenge faced at the national level in GGC target countries is the limited local | 
 | climate finance market depth and underdeveloped financial market infrastructure and frameworks to identify, certify and | 
 | price green debt instruments. GGC will be focusing on enabling those borrowers that are already active in their local credit | 
 | and capital markets (so investment grade at a local level) to access global credit and capital markets (where they would be | 
 | considered sub-investment grade). This will require a process of education for these borrowers in terms of understanding | 
 | and meeting the international standards required by global credit and capital markets in terms of quality and availability of | 
 | information and identifying, measuring, and tracking green assets. Having been through this education process with the | 
 | support of GGC, these borrowers, given their high profile in local credit and capital markets, can play an important advocacy | 
 | role to enable the replication and/or alignment of national financial markets infrastructure and frameworks with international | 
 | standards. The success of local borrowers raising long-term climate finance from global credit and capital markets can | 
 | provide a powerful and needed stimulus to national governments to create similar enabling environments needed to scale | 
 | local climate finance markets which both local and, in time, global institutional investors can participate in. | 
 | 1.123 Following from the last point above, for sub-projects and borrowers, following the successful guaranteed bond or loan, they | 
 | will have the ability to issue bonds or loans on their own without support from GGC mirroring the terms of the earlier bond | 
 | or loan once investors have gain confidence and comfort with the borrower and transaction. Additional phases of the same | 
 | project or new projects replicating the earlier design and transaction terms can be supported without GGC’s guarantee – a | 
 | product of its prior financial structuring efforts and the confidence building impact of the guarantee. | 
 | 1.124 Global institutional investors in the guaranteed bonds and loans will invariably learn more about the borrower, sector, and | 
 | country they are in when they buy the guaranteed bond or loan. This knowledge can then be applied in a cross-cutting | 
 | manner – by these global institutional investors to support other climate projects in the same country or to similar projects | 
 | in different countries – anchored by GGC’s demonstrative effect in each of the guaranteed transactions. GGC will also seek | 
 | to use a digital platform (e.g., www.esgbook.com) to make the performance and impact data of the debt instruments that it | 
 | guarantees available to institutional investors that may not have participated in the guaranteed bonds or loans so that they | 
 | can track the performance and impact over time, thereby building their confidence to participate in future. | 
 | 1.125 An important feature of global credit and capital markets is the high degree of transparency and information sharing that | 
 | occurs on transactions via the use of transaction information memorandums, finance industry conferences, financial | 
 | information platforms such as Bloomberg or the financial press (e.g., Financial Times or Wall Street Journal). GGC intends | 
 | to embrace this feature to advocate for climate projects in developing countries and to help replicate successfully executed | 
 | transactions by sharing knowledge about the financial structuring (i.e., solutions developed to overcome risks/barriers) | 
 | used. GGC will also help develop case studies on transactions which can be used by Origination Partners, NDAs, and | 
 | others to facilitate knowledge-sharing and encourage replication at scale, both in global and local credit and capital markets. | 
 | 1.126 Another longer-term impact that GGC would be seeking to enable is the migration of global institutional investors into | 
 | providing climate finance in local currency. As mentioned earlier, GGC providing guarantees in hard currency will be an | 
 | important “stepping stone” to get global institutional investors to learn about the actual risks of investing in climate projects | 
 | in developing countries versus their perceived risk which is presently high enough to discourage any investment. Over time, | 
 | as investors become more educated with the actual risk then it is possible that their appetite to accept local currency risk | 
 | may also increase thereby increasing liquidity in local capital markets. As part of its strategy, where possible, GGC will look | 
 | at supporting synthetic local currency (i.e., hard currency denominated but indexed to local currency so that investor takes | 
 | the currency risk) climate finance debt instruments to support this migration of global investors from global to local capital | 
 | markets. | 
 | 1.127 The preference of global credit and capital markets to focus on scale, with minimum transaction sizes being typically set at | 
 | USD 100 million, means that for smaller developing countries, particularly Least Developed Countries (“LDC”) and Small | 
 | Island Developing States (“SIDS”), it may be more challenging for GGC to find individual transactions which meet the | 
 | minimum size requirement. That said, the opportunity exists for GGC to guarantee transactions which raise capital on an | 
 | aggregated basis to finance smaller transactions in LDC and SIDS. For example, GGC has been in discussion with both a | 
 | green investment fund and a national development bank in a target LDC which have requested support from GGC to help | 
 | them raise either a green bond or syndicated loan in the global credit and capital markets. These local financial institutions | 
 | will then on-lend the proceeds of the green bond or loan to smaller climate mitigation and adaptation projects in their country. | 
 | In parallel, GGC is in dialogue with a member of the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (“GFANZ”) that is interested | 
 | in creating a debt fund focused on providing climate finance or SIDS. Again, GGC would seek to guarantee large size green | 
 | debt instruments issued by the fund which would then be on-lent to SIDS as smaller size loans but benefiting from better | 
 | terms and tenor that tend to be given to financings of scale. This proposed on-lending structure is replicable, scalable and | 
 | a powerful tool for mobilising climate finance to LDC and SIDS. With credit enhancement from GGC to help demonstrate | 
 | their viability, these on-lending structures offer an effective solution to support LDC and SIDS in a way which meets the | 
 | requirement for scale from the global capital and credit markets. | 
 |  | 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 38
D
Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals and provide
an estimation of the impact potential in terms of:
• Environmental co-benefits; Social co-benefits including health impacts; Economic co-benefits; Gender-sensitive
development impact
1.128 Capital markets represent an important capital mobilization and deployment mechanism in the financing of the SDGs.
Recent estimates place global bond markets outstanding value at over USD 100 trillion which present a major opportunity
to deploy capital at scale by harnessing the cumulative firepower of institutional investors.
1.129 While the public sector and public finance will be core to the implementation of the SDGs, it is widely acknowledged in the
international community that the private sector and capital markets must also play a key role. GGC therefore seeks to
support the many ways the private sector and public sector entities in developing countries can contribute to climate-related
SDGs, while creating a large and diversified green bond market for global investors. In addition, GGC seeks a paradigm
shift where borrowers from developing countries can compete for global institutional capital based not only on their
investment thesis, but also on their impact thesis and how they will use funds to contribute to the SDGs.
1.130 The “Mapping Table” below has been compiled by the ICMA having reviewed the 17 SDGs to identify those that may be
aligned with the ICMA’s Green Bond Principles. According to the ICMA thus far 12 of the SDGs have been identified as
being relevant to the Green Bond Principles.
Table 5: Mapping of the SDGs against the ICMA’s Green Bond Principles
SDG Green Bond Principles – Project Example Indicators
Categories
SDG 1 – NO • Climate Change Adaptation • Number of people provided with basic service
POVERTY (Target 1.5) • Number of people benefitting from measures to mitigate
the consequences of climate change as natural disasters
SDG 3 – GOOD • Pollution Prevention and Control • Amount of wastewater treated, reused, or avoided before
HEALTH AND WELL (Target 3.9) and after he project
BEING • Renewable Energy (Target 3.9) • Amount of raw/untreated sewage sludge that is treated and
disposed of
SDG 6 – CLEAN • Sustainable Water and • Number of people provided with safe and affordable
WATER AND Wastewater Management (Target drinking water
SANITATION 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6a, 6b) • Number of people provided with adequate and equitable
• Terrestrial and Aquatic Biodiversity sanitation
Conservation (Target 6.6) • Volume of water saved
• Volume of wastewater treated for reuse
• Area covered by sustainable land and water resources
management practices
• Potable water produced
SDG 7 – • Energy Efficiency (Targets 7.3, 7a) • Renewable energy produced
AFFORDABLE AND • Renewable Energy (Targets 7.2, • Avoided greenhouse gas emissions (tonnes CO2eq)
CLEA ENERGY 7a) • Number of people with access to clean energy services
SDG 8 – DECENT • Eco-efficient and/or Circular • Number of jobs created
WORK AND Economy Adapted Products, • Number of jobs supported
ECONOMIC Production Technologies, and
GROWTH Processes (Target 8.4)
• Energy Efficiency (Target 8.4)
• Renewable Energy (Target 8.4)
• Energy Efficiency (Target 9.4) • Reduction in industry related GHG
SDG 9 – INDUSTRY, • Renewable Energy (Target 9.1)
INNOVATION AND
INFRASTRUCTURE
• Clean Transportation (Target 11.2) • Number of people with access to safe, affordable, and
• Eco-efficient and/or Circular sustainable housing
Economy Adapted Products, • Number of people with access to sustainable transport
Production Technologies and systems
SDG 11 –
Processes (Target 11b) • Floor space of green real estate
SUSTAINABLE
• Environmentally Sustainable • Waste that is prevented, minimized, reused, or recycled
CITIES AND
Management of Living Natural before and after the project
COMMUNITIES
Resources and Land Use (Targets • Number of people benefitting from selective collection of
11.7, 11a) recyclables
• Green Buildings (Target 11c) • Number of electric vehicles deployed
• Pollution Prevention and Control • Number of electric vehicles charging points installed
(Target 11.6)

--- Table 1 on Page 42 ---
 | Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals and provide |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | an estimation of the impact potential in terms of: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Environmental co-benefits; Social co-benefits including health impacts; Economic co-benefits; Gender-sensitive |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | development impact |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1.128 Capital markets represent an important capital mobilization and deployment mechanism in the financing of the SDGs. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Recent estimates place global bond markets outstanding value at over USD 100 trillion which present a major opportunity |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | to deploy capital at scale by harnessing the cumulative firepower of institutional investors. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1.129 While the public sector and public finance will be core to the implementation of the SDGs, it is widely acknowledged in the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | international community that the private sector and capital markets must also play a key role. GGC therefore seeks to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | support the many ways the private sector and public sector entities in developing countries can contribute to climate-related |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | SDGs, while creating a large and diversified green bond market for global investors. In addition, GGC seeks a paradigm |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | shift where borrowers from developing countries can compete for global institutional capital based not only on their |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | investment thesis, but also on their impact thesis and how they will use funds to contribute to the SDGs. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1.130 The “Mapping Table” below has been compiled by the ICMA having reviewed the 17 SDGs to identify those that may be |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | aligned with the ICMA’s Green Bond Principles. According to the ICMA thus far 12 of the SDGs have been identified as |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | being relevant to the Green Bond Principles. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Table 5: Mapping of the SDGs against the ICMA’s Green Bond Principles |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | SDG | SDG |  |  | Green Bond Principles – Project |  | Example Indicators | Example Indicators | 
 |  |  |  |  | Categories |  |  |  | 
 | SDG 1 – NO
POVERTY |  |  | • Climate Change Adaptation
(Target 1.5) | • Climate Change Adaptation |  |  | • Number of people provided with basic service | 
 |  |  |  |  | (Target 1.5) |  |  | • Number of people benefitting from measures to mitigate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the consequences of climate change as natural disasters | 
 | SDG 3 – GOOD
HEALTH AND WELL
BEING |  |  | • Pollution Prevention and Control
(Target 3.9)
• Renewable Energy (Target 3.9) |  |  |  | • Amount of wastewater treated, reused, or avoided before | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and after he project | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • Amount of raw/untreated sewage sludge that is treated and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | disposed of | 
 | SDG 6 – CLEAN
WATER AND
SANITATION |  |  | • Sustainable Water and
Wastewater Management (Target
6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6a, 6b)
• Terrestrial and Aquatic Biodiversity
Conservation (Target 6.6) |  |  |  | • Number of people provided with safe and affordable | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | drinking water | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • Number of people provided with adequate and equitable | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | sanitation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • Volume of water saved | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • Volume of wastewater treated for reuse | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • Area covered by sustainable land and water resources | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | management practices | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • Potable water produced | 
 |  | SDG 7 – |  | • Energy Efficiency (Targets 7.3, 7a)
• Renewable Energy (Targets 7.2,
7a) |  |  | • Renewable energy produced
• Avoided greenhouse gas emissions (tonnes CO2eq)
• Number of people with access to clean energy services | • Renewable energy produced | 
 |  | AFFORDABLE AND |  |  |  |  |  | • Avoided greenhouse gas emissions (tonnes CO2eq) | 
 |  | CLEA ENERGY |  |  |  |  |  | • Number of people with access to clean energy services | 
 | SDG 8 – DECENT
WORK AND
ECONOMIC
GROWTH | SDG 8 – DECENT |  |  | • Eco-efficient and/or Circular |  | • Number of jobs created
• Number of jobs supported |  | 
 |  | WORK AND |  |  | Economy Adapted Products, |  |  |  | 
 |  | ECONOMIC |  |  | Production Technologies, and |  |  |  | 
 |  | GROWTH |  |  | Processes (Target 8.4) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Energy Efficiency (Target 8.4) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Renewable Energy (Target 8.4) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | • Energy Efficiency (Target 9.4)
• Renewable Energy (Target 9.1) | • Energy Efficiency (Target 9.4) |  | • Reduction in industry related GHG |  | 
 |  | SDG 9 – INDUSTRY, |  |  | • Renewable Energy (Target 9.1) |  |  |  | 
 |  | INNOVATION AND |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | INFRASTRUCTURE |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | SDG 11 –
SUSTAINABLE
CITIES AND
COMMUNITIES |  |  |  | • Clean Transportation (Target 11.2) |  |  | • Number of people with access to safe, affordable, and | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Eco-efficient and/or Circular |  |  | sustainable housing | 
 |  |  |  |  | Economy Adapted Products, |  |  | • Number of people with access to sustainable transport | 
 |  |  |  |  | Production Technologies and |  |  | systems | 
 |  | SDG 11 – |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Processes (Target 11b) |  |  | • Floor space of green real estate | 
 |  | SUSTAINABLE |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Environmentally Sustainable |  |  | • Waste that is prevented, minimized, reused, or recycled | 
 |  | CITIES AND |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Management of Living Natural |  |  | before and after the project | 
 |  | COMMUNITIES |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Resources and Land Use (Targets |  |  | • Number of people benefitting from selective collection of | 
 |  |  |  |  | 11.7, 11a) |  |  | recyclables | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Green Buildings (Target 11c) |  |  | • Number of electric vehicles deployed | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Pollution Prevention and Control |  |  | • Number of electric vehicles charging points installed | 
 |  |  |  |  | (Target 11.6) |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 42 ---
SDG 3 – GOOD
HEALTH AND WELL
BEING

--- Table 3 on Page 42 ---
• Pollution Prevention and Control
(Target 3.9)
• Renewable Energy (Target 3.9)

--- Table 4 on Page 42 ---
SDG 6 – CLEAN
WATER AND
SANITATION

--- Table 5 on Page 42 ---
• Sustainable Water and
Wastewater Management (Target
6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6a, 6b)
• Terrestrial and Aquatic Biodiversity
Conservation (Target 6.6)

--- Table 6 on Page 42 ---
• Energy Efficiency (Targets 7.3, 7a)
• Renewable Energy (Targets 7.2,
7a)

--- Table 7 on Page 42 ---
• Number of jobs created
• Number of jobs supported


=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 39
D
• Renewable Energy (Target 11c)
• Sustainable Water and
Wastewater Management (Target
11.5)
• Eco-efficient and/or Circular • Avoided resource waste
Economy Adapted Products, • Avoided emissions to air (other than greenhouse gases)
SDG 12 – Production Technologies, and • Reduction of food losses
RESPONSIBLE Processes (Target 12.5) • Material sourced sustainably or recycled
CONSUMPTION • Environmentally Sustainable • Absolute or % reduction in local pollutants
AND PRODUCTION Management of Living Natural • Reduction of hazardous materials used
Resources and Land Use (Target
12.2)
• Pollution Prevention and Control
(Targets 12.4, 12.5)
• Renewable Energy (Target 12.4)
• Wastewater Management
(Targets 12.2, 12.5)
• Climate Change Adaption • Water storage capacity
(Targets 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13b) • Reduction in weather-related disruption (days p.a.) and/or
SDG 13 – CLIMATE • Climate Change Mitigation risk frequency (%)
ACTION (Targets 13.1, 13.3) • Flood-resilient floor space
• High-risk assets with climate insurance cover
• GHG emissions reduced
• Environmentally Sustainable • Avoided or reduced marine and freshwater pollution
SDG 14 – LIFE Management of Living Natural (ecotoxicity, eutrophication)
BELOW WATER Resources and Land Use
(Target 14.4, 14.6, 14a)
1.131 Figure 10 below is data provide by the Climate Bond Initiative and IFC and shows the use of proceeds for emerging market
green bonds between 2012 and 2020. As can be seen Energy, Transport, Buildings and Water projects account for more
than 80% of the use of proceeds historically.
Figure 10: Emerging Market Green Bond Issuance
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

--- Table 1 on Page 43 ---
 |  |  |  |  | • Renewable Energy (Target 11c) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Sustainable Water and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Wastewater Management (Target |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 11.5) |  |  |  | 
 | SDG 12 –
RESPONSIBLE
CONSUMPTION
AND PRODUCTION |  |  |  | • Eco-efficient and/or Circular |  | • Avoided resource waste
• Avoided emissions to air (other than greenhouse gases)
• Reduction of food losses
• Material sourced sustainably or recycled
• Absolute or % reduction in local pollutants
• Reduction of hazardous materials used |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Economy Adapted Products, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Production Technologies, and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Processes (Target 12.5) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Environmentally Sustainable |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Management of Living Natural |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Resources and Land Use (Target |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 12.2) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Pollution Prevention and Control |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (Targets 12.4, 12.5) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Renewable Energy (Target 12.4) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Wastewater Management |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (Targets 12.2, 12.5) |  |  |  | 
 | SDG 13 – CLIMATE
ACTION |  |  | • Climate Change Adaption
(Targets 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13b)
• Climate Change Mitigation
(Targets 13.1, 13.3) | • Climate Change Adaption |  |  | • Water storage capacity | 
 |  |  |  |  | (Targets 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13b) |  |  | • Reduction in weather-related disruption (days p.a.) and/or | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Climate Change Mitigation |  |  | risk frequency (%) | 
 |  |  |  |  | (Targets 13.1, 13.3) |  |  | • Flood-resilient floor space | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • High-risk assets with climate insurance cover | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • GHG emissions reduced | 
 |  |  |  |  | • Environmentally Sustainable |  |  | • Avoided or reduced marine and freshwater pollution | 
 |  | SDG 14 – LIFE |  |  | Management of Living Natural |  |  | (ecotoxicity, eutrophication) | 
 |  | BELOW WATER |  |  | Resources and Land Use |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (Target 14.4, 14.6, 14a) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1.131 Figure 10 below is data provide by the Climate Bond Initiative and IFC and shows the use of proceeds for emerging market |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | green bonds between 2012 and 2020. As can be seen Energy, Transport, Buildings and Water projects account for more |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | than 80% of the use of proceeds historically. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Figure 10: Emerging Market Green Bond Issuance |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 43 ---

SDG 12 –
RESPONSIBLE
CONSUMPTION
AND PRODUCTION

--- Table 3 on Page 43 ---
• Avoided resource waste
• Avoided emissions to air (other than greenhouse gases)
• Reduction of food losses
• Material sourced sustainably or recycled
• Absolute or % reduction in local pollutants
• Reduction of hazardous materials used

--- Table 4 on Page 43 ---

SDG 13 – CLIMATE
ACTION

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 40
D
1.132 Benchmarking the target countries, relative to all countries, in terms of their climate change vulnerability, adaptive capacity,
and risk levels (using the ND-GAIN vulnerability and readiness index rankings, the German watch global climate risk index,
and the INFORM risk index) indicates that most of the countries selected fall within the world’s top third or top half of most
climate-vulnerable nations, or within the bottom third or bottom half of the world’s most climate-ready nations. Thus, they
have pressing needs for investments that will reduce climate change vulnerability and/or enhance adaptive capacity and
resilience.
1.133 The flexibility of the guarantee product means that GGC represents a unique opportunity for GCF to catalyse a programme
which can consider and address multiple needs of developing countries across Africa, Asia, and Latin America, thereby
being cross-cutting and global in its mandate. For example, GGC has been asked to consider supporting the development
of climate resistant affordable housing in Indonesia (focused on the smaller and more vulnerable islands in the archipelago)
and Rwanda. Equally, opportunities have been identified for GGC to support the propagation of electric vehicles in India
(with the government seeking to deliver an ambitious target of electrifying 30% of its vehicle populations by 2030). GGC is
therefore able to help countries to raise climate finance in a targeted way and help them address specific vulnerabilities
identified in their NDCs. As explained earlier, in GGC’s Transaction Selection Process (see Annex 24A) a key early step in
its guarantee process will be to consider how a potential transaction aligns with the priorities identified in the NDC of target
countries (see Annex 2).
1.134 At COP26 developing countries were vocal about their need for greater volumes of climate finance to be mobilised from
developed countries to help them deliver the targets in their NDCs and in response to the IPCC’s Working Group II most
recent report20 “Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability”, the Least Developed Countries Group on
Climate Change, a lobby group of 46 nations that identify themselves as being especially vulnerable to climate change,
stated “It was confirmed last year that developed countries failed in their commitment to deliver USD 100 billion in climate
finance by 2020. The short fall must be made up urgently, to support our people to adapt to the worsening impacts the
report confirms are coming.”.
1.135 Unfortunately, global and geopolitical events such as the COVID-19 pandemic and conflict in Eastern Europe have put
significant fiscal strain on both developed and developing countries alike, resulting in the former having to reduce the
amount of climate finance that they can provide to the latter on a concessional basis. Conversely, whilst sovereign balance
sheets are constrained the assets of private sector institutional investors continue to grow and demand for attractive
investment opportunities remains strong as demonstrated by the fact that despite the pandemic the global green bond grew
exponentially in both 2020 and 2021. Consequently, the most credible opportunity to scale climate finance for developing
countries exists in mobilising global institutional investors from global credit and capital markets, and this is where
guarantees have proven to be the most cost effective and efficient tool in doing so. This belief is supported by the statements
made by Larry Fink, CEO of Blackrock, the global institutional investor with over USD 9 trillion of assets under management,
in which he proposed that existing multilateral development banks be repurposed as credit enhancement providers rather
than lending institutions to help mobilise more climate finance into developing countries on affordable terms.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-07-11/blackrock-s-fink-urges-world-bank-imf-overhaul-for-green-era
1.136 As the first and only guarantor dedicated to supporting developing countries to build bridges with global capital and credit
markets GGC will help address the following financing barriers:
1. Perceived lack of investible climate projects in developing countries. GGC will help identify and structure climate
projects which are aligned with a developing country’s NDC and combine financial viability with delivering significant
climate mitigation and/or adaptation benefits in the developing country. This will include aggregation structures
which will help mobilise climate finance at scale to LDC and SIDS as discussed in Section 1.127.
2. Perceived risks of investing in developing countries generally. By providing its guarantee GGC is risk-sharing with
the investors in the global credit or capital market which is a credible and powerful way of helping them gain
confidence to overcome any concerns about investing in a developing country. GGC’s unique ability to leverage its
equity 10x means that it can multiply the impact of USD 1 of capital from GCF in a way that direct investing initiatives
are unable to and can help mobilise the global credit and capital markets to help deliver the USD 100 billion target
of annual climate finance from developed countries to developing countries.
3. Low capacity of local credit and capital markets in developing countries to understand and/or meet international
standards on reporting about performance and impact. GGC will support borrowers in developing countries and
educate them in terms of understanding and meeting the international standards required by global credit and
capital markets in terms of quality and availability of information and identifying, measuring, and tracking green
assets. As mentioned earlier, the success of local borrowers raising long-term climate finance from global credit
and capital markets can provide a powerful demonstration effect and needed stimulus to national governments to
create similar enabling environments needed to scale local climate finance markets which both local and, in time,
global institutional investors can participate in.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
20 https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-working-group-ii/

--- Table 1 on Page 44 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1.132 Benchmarking the target countries, relative to all countries, in terms of their climate change vulnerability, adaptive capacity, |  |  |  |  | 
 | and risk levels (using the ND-GAIN vulnerability and readiness index rankings, the German watch global climate risk index, |  |  |  |  | 
 | and the INFORM risk index) indicates that most of the countries selected fall within the world’s top third or top half of most |  |  |  |  | 
 | climate-vulnerable nations, or within the bottom third or bottom half of the world’s most climate-ready nations. Thus, they |  |  |  |  | 
 | have pressing needs for investments that will reduce climate change vulnerability and/or enhance adaptive capacity and |  |  |  |  | 
 | resilience. |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1.133 The flexibility of the guarantee product means that GGC represents a unique opportunity for GCF to catalyse a programme |  |  |  |  | 
 | which can consider and address multiple needs of developing countries across Africa, Asia, and Latin America, thereby |  |  |  |  | 
 | being cross-cutting and global in its mandate. For example, GGC has been asked to consider supporting the development |  |  |  |  | 
 | of climate resistant affordable housing in Indonesia (focused on the smaller and more vulnerable islands in the archipelago) |  |  |  |  | 
 | and Rwanda. Equally, opportunities have been identified for GGC to support the propagation of electric vehicles in India |  |  |  |  | 
 | (with the government seeking to deliver an ambitious target of electrifying 30% of its vehicle populations by 2030). GGC is |  |  |  |  | 
 | therefore able to help countries to raise climate finance in a targeted way and help them address specific vulnerabilities |  |  |  |  | 
 | identified in their NDCs. As explained earlier, in GGC’s Transaction Selection Process (see Annex 24A) a key early step in |  |  |  |  | 
 | its guarantee process will be to consider how a potential transaction aligns with the priorities identified in the NDC of target |  |  |  |  | 
 | countries (see Annex 2). |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1.134 At COP26 developing countries were vocal about their need for greater volumes of climate finance to be mobilised from |  |  |  |  | 
 | developed countries to help them deliver the targets in their NDCs and in response to the IPCC’s Working Group II most |  |  |  |  | 
 | recent report20 “Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability”, the Least Developed Countries Group on |  |  |  |  | 
 | Climate Change, a lobby group of 46 nations that identify themselves as being especially vulnerable to climate change, |  |  |  |  | 
 | stated “It was confirmed last year that developed countries failed in their commitment to deliver USD 100 billion in climate |  |  |  |  | 
 | finance by 2020. The short fall must be made up urgently, to support our people to adapt to the worsening impacts the |  |  |  |  | 
 | report confirms are coming.”. |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1.135 Unfortunately, global and geopolitical events such as the COVID-19 pandemic and conflict in Eastern Europe have put |  |  |  |  | 
 | significant fiscal strain on both developed and developing countries alike, resulting in the former having to reduce the |  |  |  |  | 
 | amount of climate finance that they can provide to the latter on a concessional basis. Conversely, whilst sovereign balance |  |  |  |  | 
 | sheets are constrained the assets of private sector institutional investors continue to grow and demand for attractive |  |  |  |  | 
 | investment opportunities remains strong as demonstrated by the fact that despite the pandemic the global green bond grew |  |  |  |  | 
 | exponentially in both 2020 and 2021. Consequently, the most credible opportunity to scale climate finance for developing |  |  |  |  | 
 | countries exists in mobilising global institutional investors from global credit and capital markets, and this is where |  |  |  |  | 
 | guarantees have proven to be the most cost effective and efficient tool in doing so. This belief is supported by the statements |  |  |  |  | 
 | made by Larry Fink, CEO of Blackrock, the global institutional investor with over USD 9 trillion of assets under management, |  |  |  |  | 
 | in which he proposed that existing multilateral development banks be repurposed as credit enhancement providers rather |  |  |  |  | 
 | than lending institutions to help mobilise more climate finance into developing countries on affordable terms. |  |  |  |  | 
 | https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-07-11/blackrock-s-fink-urges-world-bank-imf-overhaul-for-green-era |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1.136 As the first and only guarantor dedicated to supporting developing countries to build bridges with global capital and credit |  |  |  |  | 
 | markets GGC will help address the following financing barriers: |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 1. |  | Perceived lack of investible climate projects in developing countries. GGC will help identify and structure climate |  | 
 |  |  |  | projects which are aligned with a developing country’s NDC and combine financial viability with delivering significant |  | 
 |  |  |  | climate mitigation and/or adaptation benefits in the developing country. This will include aggregation structures |  | 
 |  |  |  | which will help mobilise climate finance at scale to LDC and SIDS as discussed in Section 1.127. |  | 
 |  | 2. |  | Perceived risks of investing in developing countries generally. By providing its guarantee GGC is risk-sharing with |  | 
 |  |  |  | the investors in the global credit or capital market which is a credible and powerful way of helping them gain |  | 
 |  |  |  | confidence to overcome any concerns about investing in a developing country. GGC’s unique ability to leverage its |  | 
 |  |  |  | equity 10x means that it can multiply the impact of USD 1 of capital from GCF in a way that direct investing initiatives |  | 
 |  |  |  | are unable to and can help mobilise the global credit and capital markets to help deliver the USD 100 billion target |  | 
 |  |  |  | of annual climate finance from developed countries to developing countries. |  | 
 |  | 3. |  | Low capacity of local credit and capital markets in developing countries to understand and/or meet international |  | 
 |  |  |  | standards on reporting about performance and impact. GGC will support borrowers in developing countries and |  | 
 |  |  |  | educate them in terms of understanding and meeting the international standards required by global credit and |  | 
 |  |  |  | capital markets in terms of quality and availability of information and identifying, measuring, and tracking green |  | 
 |  |  |  | assets. As mentioned earlier, the success of local borrowers raising long-term climate finance from global credit |  | 
 |  |  |  | and capital markets can provide a powerful demonstration effect and needed stimulus to national governments to |  | 
 |  |  |  | create similar enabling environments needed to scale local climate finance markets which both local and, in time, |  | 
 |  |  |  | global institutional investors can participate in. |  | 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 41
D
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. Describe the
following:
• Existing national climate strategy; Existing GCF country programme; Relevance to and alignment with existing policies
such as Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), and National
Adaptation Plans (NAPs); NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs; Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver; Role
of National Designated Authority; Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including
indigenous peoples, women, and other vulnerable groups
1.137 Engagement with the NDA and relevant stakeholders in a target country will be a continuous and ongoing process for GGC
given that it is not limited to a single transaction in each target country but is able to consider multiple projects over several
decades. Consequently, GGC will work to ensure that guarantee transactions are undertaken in consultation with the NDA
and relevant local stakeholders as well as considering each country’s NDC and Country Programme.
1.138 To date, GGC, in partnership with its AE, MUFG, has begun consultations with Bangladesh, Brazil, Cambodia, India,
Indonesia, Kenya, Laos, the Philippines, Rwanda, South Africa, Trinidad & Tobago and Uganda. These consultations,
several of which have involved local stakeholders alongside the NDA, have been very helpful in shaping GGC’s Guarantee
Policy (Annex 23) which, as mentioned earlier, seeks alignment with a target country’s NDC and Country Programmes,
where appropriate, as part of its selection criteria for selecting a guarantee opportunity. Additionally, the engagement with
Bangladesh, Laos, Rwanda, and Trinidad & Tobago influenced GGC’s decision to include support of aggregation structures
focused on financing smaller climate projects that are more prevalent in LDC and SIDS as a key element of its growth
strategy as discussed in Section D2.
1.139 From a transaction perspective, GGC will be conducting in-country due diligence on every guarantee opportunity it
considers, which will include assessing the transaction against GGC’s E&S Management Framework (which is aligned with
GCF’s own Environmental and Social Standards) and will engage with local stakeholders, including vulnerable communities
(e.g., indigenous peoples) and vulnerable groups (e.g., women). GGC will also prioritise transactions where a Gender
Assessment and Action Plan is in place and in alignment with the requirements set out both by the GCF (GCF & UNWOMEN
2017) and the prevailing international ratified legal frameworks, regional and national gender policies, or other public policy
for gender equality and women’s empowerment. To ensure that the local perspective on a potential climate project is
understood, GGC will seek to engage in-country consultants where necessary to help GGC communicate effectively with
local stakeholders, including NGOs and civil society organizations where appropriate. As explained in Section A21, GGC
will typically get involved in a transaction at a later stage of its development, as such its ability to influence change may be
limited, however where a transaction is unable to demonstrate that it meets or will meet within an acceptable timeframe the
requisite E&S and gender standards the GGC will not provide a guarantee.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including addressing
existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum concessionality to ensure the project is viable without crowding out
private and other public investments. Refer to section B.5 on the justification of GCF funding requested as necessary.
1.140 The targeted equity capital for GGC of USD 250 million is sized as the optimal amount on the assumption that with 10 times
leverage, a USD 2.5 billion portfolio of guarantees can be supported at GGC inception. On the basis that single guarantee
exposures should be around 5-10% of the portfolio to allow for diversification, USD 100 million to USD 200 million per
transaction ticket size will allow for GGC to support sizable bond and loan issuances as too small a transaction would not
be cost effective for a bond issuance after incorporating the arranger fees and other transaction costs.
1.141 As minimum concessionality is expected from GCF in its equity investment save for the provision of patient capital as with
the other contributors, GCF will not be crowding out any private sector or public sector guarantors or financiers especially
when the anticipated projects will not have access to long term funding from the capital markets without GGC’s assistance.
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the total financing and
mitigation/ adaptation impact the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate
benchmark.
1.142 Overall, USD 82.5 million GCF funding will deliver mitigation benefits at USD1.95 per tCO2eq (GCF contribution / expected
lifetime emission reductions).
1.143 If taking into account revolving use of GCF equity contribution to support a revolving guarantee portfolio (maturing and/or
amortised guarantees recycled to support new guarantees), the efficiency ratio improves further. On the assumption that
each guarantee amortises 10% per year and based on a conservative build-up of the portfolio in the initial years, GGC is
expected to issue USD 4.9 billion of guarantees in total over the first 10 years. From this 22.5% increase in total guarantees
issued against the USD 4 billion guarantee portfolio limit on a rolling basis, GGC has the potential to deliver mitigation

--- Table 1 on Page 45 ---
 | Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. Describe the | 
 | following: | 
 | • Existing national climate strategy; Existing GCF country programme; Relevance to and alignment with existing policies | 
 | such as Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), and National | 
 | Adaptation Plans (NAPs); NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs; Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver; Role | 
 | of National Designated Authority; Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including | 
 | indigenous peoples, women, and other vulnerable groups | 
 | 1.137 Engagement with the NDA and relevant stakeholders in a target country will be a continuous and ongoing process for GGC | 
 | given that it is not limited to a single transaction in each target country but is able to consider multiple projects over several | 
 | decades. Consequently, GGC will work to ensure that guarantee transactions are undertaken in consultation with the NDA | 
 | and relevant local stakeholders as well as considering each country’s NDC and Country Programme. | 
 | 1.138 To date, GGC, in partnership with its AE, MUFG, has begun consultations with Bangladesh, Brazil, Cambodia, India, | 
 | Indonesia, Kenya, Laos, the Philippines, Rwanda, South Africa, Trinidad & Tobago and Uganda. These consultations, | 
 | several of which have involved local stakeholders alongside the NDA, have been very helpful in shaping GGC’s Guarantee | 
 | Policy (Annex 23) which, as mentioned earlier, seeks alignment with a target country’s NDC and Country Programmes, | 
 | where appropriate, as part of its selection criteria for selecting a guarantee opportunity. Additionally, the engagement with | 
 | Bangladesh, Laos, Rwanda, and Trinidad & Tobago influenced GGC’s decision to include support of aggregation structures | 
 | focused on financing smaller climate projects that are more prevalent in LDC and SIDS as a key element of its growth | 
 | strategy as discussed in Section D2. | 
 | 1.139 From a transaction perspective, GGC will be conducting in-country due diligence on every guarantee opportunity it | 
 | considers, which will include assessing the transaction against GGC’s E&S Management Framework (which is aligned with | 
 | GCF’s own Environmental and Social Standards) and will engage with local stakeholders, including vulnerable communities | 
 | (e.g., indigenous peoples) and vulnerable groups (e.g., women). GGC will also prioritise transactions where a Gender | 
 | Assessment and Action Plan is in place and in alignment with the requirements set out both by the GCF (GCF & UNWOMEN | 
 | 2017) and the prevailing international ratified legal frameworks, regional and national gender policies, or other public policy | 
 | for gender equality and women’s empowerment. To ensure that the local perspective on a potential climate project is | 
 | understood, GGC will seek to engage in-country consultants where necessary to help GGC communicate effectively with | 
 | local stakeholders, including NGOs and civil society organizations where appropriate. As explained in Section A21, GGC | 
 | will typically get involved in a transaction at a later stage of its development, as such its ability to influence change may be | 
 | limited, however where a transaction is unable to demonstrate that it meets or will meet within an acceptable timeframe the | 
 | requisite E&S and gender standards the GGC will not provide a guarantee. | 
 |  | 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including addressing | 
 | existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum concessionality to ensure the project is viable without crowding out | 
 | private and other public investments. Refer to section B.5 on the justification of GCF funding requested as necessary. | 
 |  | 
 | 1.140 The targeted equity capital for GGC of USD 250 million is sized as the optimal amount on the assumption that with 10 times | 
 | leverage, a USD 2.5 billion portfolio of guarantees can be supported at GGC inception. On the basis that single guarantee | 
 | exposures should be around 5-10% of the portfolio to allow for diversification, USD 100 million to USD 200 million per | 
 | transaction ticket size will allow for GGC to support sizable bond and loan issuances as too small a transaction would not | 
 | be cost effective for a bond issuance after incorporating the arranger fees and other transaction costs. | 
 |  | 
 | 1.141 As minimum concessionality is expected from GCF in its equity investment save for the provision of patient capital as with | 
 | the other contributors, GCF will not be crowding out any private sector or public sector guarantors or financiers especially | 
 | when the anticipated projects will not have access to long term funding from the capital markets without GGC’s assistance. | 
 |  | 
 | Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the total financing and | 
 | mitigation/ adaptation impact the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate | 
 | benchmark. | 
 |  | 
 | 1.142 Overall, USD 82.5 million GCF funding will deliver mitigation benefits at USD1.95 per tCO2eq (GCF contribution / expected | 
 | lifetime emission reductions). | 
 | 1.143 If taking into account revolving use of GCF equity contribution to support a revolving guarantee portfolio (maturing and/or | 
 | amortised guarantees recycled to support new guarantees), the efficiency ratio improves further. On the assumption that | 
 | each guarantee amortises 10% per year and based on a conservative build-up of the portfolio in the initial years, GGC is | 
 | expected to issue USD 4.9 billion of guarantees in total over the first 10 years. From this 22.5% increase in total guarantees | 
 | issued against the USD 4 billion guarantee portfolio limit on a rolling basis, GGC has the potential to deliver mitigation | 

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 42
D
benefits at USD 1.59 per tCO2eq (GCF contribution/ expected lifetime emission reductions based on total guarantees
issued (64 million x 1.225).
1.144 Taking into account total project costs, the program will support projects that will deliver climate change mitigation benefits
at an estimated USD 89.2 per tCO2eq (total project costs (USD 5.71 billion if debt is USD4 billion / expected lifetime
emission reductions), based on the same assumptions used as well as a 70:30 debt to equity ratio for the sub-projects
supported. If calculated on total guarantee issued basis of USD 4.9 billion, the total investment costs of benefits reduce to
USD 72.8 per tCO2eq.
Leverage
1.145 The programme will use USD 82.5 million from GCF up to a rolling portfolio of USD 4 billion- or 48-times leverage. Based
on total guarantee issued and the assumptions of GGC’s conservative portfolio growth in the initial years of USD 4.9 billion,
the leverage increases to 59 times.
1.146 This total leverage is enabled by three factors i) additional contributions from other investors as co-equity providers, ii)
additional unfunded leverage to be sought by GGC as its operations mature and iii) 10x leverage over its total equity and
unfunded leveraged capital.
Mobilization of private insurance and reinsurance markets
1.147 Although not yet certain, plans to introduce private insurance cover for both political risks and quota share credit risk cover
will also see GCF’s equity catalysing risk appetite and partial risk participation from the commercial insurance and
reinsurance markets. This cannot be accurately measured at this moment but will certainly encourage insurers to expose
their liability side instead of just the asset/investments part of their business as green bond investors.
Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support to illustrate the need for GCF funding to
illustrate overall cost effectiveness.
1.148 There is no ability to compare rates of return with and without GCFs support as there would be minimum concessionality
as equity providers to GGC are providing the valuable support of patient capital for GGC to build up its operations and focus
on supporting the most critical climate interventions needed.
Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If applicable, specify the
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.
GGC will be looking to deploy technological tools as they become available not only for mitigation projects like low carbon
transportation but also for adaption projects – assisting with the forestry conservation efforts and more effective monitoring and
enforcements by local authorities like drones and use of Internet of Things to deliver better monitoring of the environment, early
warning systems or communications systems/channels to protect the vulnerable communities and environment.

--- Table 1 on Page 46 ---
 | benefits at USD 1.59 per tCO2eq (GCF contribution/ expected lifetime emission reductions based on total guarantees | 
 | issued (64 million x 1.225). | 
 | 1.144 Taking into account total project costs, the program will support projects that will deliver climate change mitigation benefits | 
 | at an estimated USD 89.2 per tCO2eq (total project costs (USD 5.71 billion if debt is USD4 billion / expected lifetime | 
 | emission reductions), based on the same assumptions used as well as a 70:30 debt to equity ratio for the sub-projects | 
 | supported. If calculated on total guarantee issued basis of USD 4.9 billion, the total investment costs of benefits reduce to | 
 | USD 72.8 per tCO2eq. | 
 |  | 
 | Leverage | 
 | 1.145 The programme will use USD 82.5 million from GCF up to a rolling portfolio of USD 4 billion- or 48-times leverage. Based | 
 | on total guarantee issued and the assumptions of GGC’s conservative portfolio growth in the initial years of USD 4.9 billion, | 
 | the leverage increases to 59 times. | 
 | 1.146 This total leverage is enabled by three factors i) additional contributions from other investors as co-equity providers, ii) | 
 | additional unfunded leverage to be sought by GGC as its operations mature and iii) 10x leverage over its total equity and | 
 | unfunded leveraged capital. | 
 |  | 
 | Mobilization of private insurance and reinsurance markets | 
 | 1.147 Although not yet certain, plans to introduce private insurance cover for both political risks and quota share credit risk cover | 
 | will also see GCF’s equity catalysing risk appetite and partial risk participation from the commercial insurance and | 
 | reinsurance markets. This cannot be accurately measured at this moment but will certainly encourage insurers to expose | 
 | their liability side instead of just the asset/investments part of their business as green bond investors. | 
 |  | 
 | Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support to illustrate the need for GCF funding to | 
 | illustrate overall cost effectiveness. | 
 |  | 
 | 1.148 There is no ability to compare rates of return with and without GCFs support as there would be minimum concessionality | 
 | as equity providers to GGC are providing the valuable support of patient capital for GGC to build up its operations and focus | 
 | on supporting the most critical climate interventions needed. | 
 |  | 
 | Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If applicable, specify the | 
 | innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. | 
 |  | 
 | GGC will be looking to deploy technological tools as they become available not only for mitigation projects like low carbon | 
 | transportation but also for adaption projects – assisting with the forestry conservation efforts and more effective monitoring and | 
 | enforcements by local authorities like drones and use of Internet of Things to deliver better monitoring of the environment, early | 
 | warning systems or communications systems/channels to protect the vulnerable communities and environment. | 

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 43
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results
Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.
E.1. Project/Programme Focus
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select
both.
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages)
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the
paradigm shift described in section D.2 above by applying three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe
the current state (baseline) and the potential scenario (target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale
rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the project/programme will contribute to that
shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability, and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to
section B.2(a) (theory of change).
How the
Current state (baseline)
Assessment Potential target scenario project/programme
Dimension (Description) will contribute
Description Rating
(Description)
Describe key applicable
Mitigation and Adaptation: Mitigation and Adaptation: paradigm outputs and or resulting
adaptation finance shift would involve a measurable outcomes relevant to
globally, and particularly in increase in the volume of guarantee increasing (scaling up)
developing countries, lags finance provided to private sector quantifiable results
within and beyond the
considerably behind the investors in the participating
scope of the
level of need. UNEP developing countries and would be
intervention.
estimates21 that annual linked to a demonstrable scale-up of
adaptation costs in climate adaptation and mitigation
developing countries will finance in these countries by virtue Adaptation: the
range between $155 - of adaptation investments – related intervention is projected
to deliver immense
$330 billion a year by to GCF’s MRA 1-3 and ARA2 and
financial and direct
2030, yet in 2019-2020 ARA3 -- being de-risked by
Scale Low benefit directly in the
average annual adaptation guarantees.
form of guarantees (to
finance only amounted to
bonds and loans) for
$46 billion a year.22
climate change
Mitigation costs range adaptation and will
between $140 billion to leverage in catalytic
$175 billion annually by private finance for
2030 (World Bank). adaptation and
Guarantee finance mitigation investments
presently plays a very over 20 years.
marginal role in unlocking
private capital in climate
adaptation.
Describe key applicable
Mitigation and Adaptation: Mitigation and Adaptation: If the outputs and resulting
Despite the existence of GGC’s model markedly increases outcomes that will be
Replicability the Multilateral Investment Low private capital invested in climate replicated to other
Guarantee Agency change adaptation investments – sectors, markets,
(MIGA),23 and proposals to related to GCF’s MRA 1-3 and geographical regions, or
countries.
operationalize entities such ARA2 and ARA3 – in the
21 UNEP, Adaptation Gap Report, 2021 https://www.unep.org/resources/adaptation-gap-report-2021
22 Climate Policy Initiative, Global Landscape of Climate Finance 2021 https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/global-landscape-of-climate-finance-
2021/
23 MIGA https://www.miga.org/

--- Table 1 on Page 47 ---
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results
Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.1. Project/Programme Focus |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | both. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | paradigm shift described in section D.2 above by applying three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the current state (baseline) and the potential scenario (target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the project/programme will contribute to that |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability, and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | section B.2(a) (theory of change). |  |  |  |  |  | 
Assessment
Dimension |  | Current state (baseline) |  | Potential target scenario
(Description) |  | How the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | project/programme | 
 |  | Description | Rating |  |  | will contribute | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | (Description) | 
Scale |  | Mitigation and Adaptation:
adaptation finance
globally, and particularly in
developing countries, lags
considerably behind the
level of need. UNEP
estimates21 that annual
adaptation costs in
developing countries will
range between $155 -
$330 billion a year by
2030, yet in 2019-2020
average annual adaptation
finance only amounted to
$46 billion a year.22
Mitigation costs range
between $140 billion to
$175 billion annually by
2030 (World Bank).
Guarantee finance
presently plays a very
marginal role in unlocking
private capital in climate
adaptation. | Low | Mitigation and Adaptation: paradigm
shift would involve a measurable
increase in the volume of guarantee
finance provided to private sector
investors in the participating
developing countries and would be
linked to a demonstrable scale-up of
climate adaptation and mitigation
finance in these countries by virtue
of adaptation investments – related
to GCF’s MRA 1-3 and ARA2 and
ARA3 -- being de-risked by
guarantees. | Describe key applicable
outputs and or resulting
outcomes relevant to
increasing (scaling up)
quantifiable results
within and beyond the
scope of the
intervention.
Adaptation: the
intervention is projected
to deliver immense
financial and direct
benefit directly in the
form of guarantees (to
bonds and loans) for
climate change
adaptation and will
leverage in catalytic
private finance for
adaptation and
mitigation investments
over 20 years. |  | 
Replicability |  | Mitigation and Adaptation:
Despite the existence of
the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency
(MIGA),23 and proposals to
operationalize entities such | Low | Mitigation and Adaptation: If the
GGC’s model markedly increases
private capital invested in climate
change adaptation investments –
related to GCF’s MRA 1-3 and
ARA2 and ARA3 – in the | Describe key applicable
outputs and resulting
outcomes that will be
replicated to other
sectors, markets,
geographical regions, or
countries. |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 47 ---
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results
Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.

--- Table 3 on Page 47 ---
Assessment
Dimension

--- Table 4 on Page 47 ---
Potential target scenario
(Description)

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 44
as the African Guarantee participating developing countries, it
Fund’s Green Guarantee could be replicated within other Mitigation and
Facility, guarantees are not Mitigation and Adaptation Results Adaptation: lessons
widely used instruments Areas, and exponentially across a learnt through the
for private investments in number of other developing GGC’s model will
adaptation. Thus, current countries with high climate change directly inform the work
baseline levels of proven risks and pressing adaptation of other institutions
exploring the use of
replicability of guarantees finance needs.
guarantees to boost
in the adaptation sphere
climate finance,
are low.24 Further, NDAs
and other stakeholders
(including banks that
benefit from GGC’s loan
guarantees), can replicate
GGC’s successfully
executed transactions
especially for adaption
projects with the
introduction of “out of the
box” solutions or
components in developing
the transaction
Describe key applicable
Mitigation and Adaptation: Mitigation and Adaptation: paradigm outputs and resulting
as financial instruments, shift would see guarantees being outcomes that will be
guarantees are proven to regarded as extremely reliable and sustained beyond the
be sustainable and highly sustainable financial project/programme
effective.25 A well- instruments for climate change period.
structured guarantee is adaptation investments and would
regarded as attractive in become a preferred and well- Mitigation and
terms of financial accepted approach to de-risking Adaptation: As the
sustainability for climate adaptation investments – programme unfolds
investment flows.26 such as those under the GCF’s over time, the GGC will
Medium share its experience
MRA 1-3 and ARA2 and ARA3 – in
Sustainability with national financial
developing countries.
institutions, both public
and private, to increase
their awareness of the
role and functionality of
guarantees for private
capital directed at
climate change
adaptation investments,
thereby facilitating more
sustainability in the
markets for guarantee
finance.
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core
and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as
defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given project/programme outcomes,
project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).
24 OECD, Climate Finance Provided and Mobilized by Developed Countries: Aggregate Trends Updated with 2019 Data, 2021. https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/docserver/03590fb7-en.pdf?expires=1644155109&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=1FFB1EBDA0C696909327EB729D9D8C57
25 Bhandary, Gallagher, and Zhang, Climate Finance Policy in Practice: A Review of the Evidence, Climate Policy Vol. 21 No. 4, pp. 529-545 (2021).
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/14693062.2020.1871313?needAccess=true
26 The World Bank Group, Enabling Private Investment in Climate Adaptation and Resilience, 2021.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/35203/Enabling-Private-Investment-in-Climate-Adaptation-and-Resilience-Current-Status-
Barriers-to-Investment-and-Blueprint-for-Action.pdf?sequence=5

--- Table 1 on Page 48 ---
 | as the African Guarantee
Fund’s Green Guarantee
Facility, guarantees are not
widely used instruments
for private investments in
adaptation. Thus, current
baseline levels of proven
replicability of guarantees
in the adaptation sphere
are low.24 Further, NDAs
and other stakeholders
(including banks that
benefit from GGC’s loan
guarantees), can replicate
GGC’s successfully
executed transactions
especially for adaption
projects with the
introduction of “out of the
box” solutions or
components in developing
the transaction |  | participating developing countries, it
could be replicated within other
Mitigation and Adaptation Results
Areas, and exponentially across a
number of other developing
countries with high climate change
risks and pressing adaptation
finance needs. | Mitigation and
Adaptation: lessons
learnt through the
GGC’s model will
directly inform the work
of other institutions
exploring the use of
guarantees to boost
climate finance,
Sustainability | Mitigation and Adaptation:
as financial instruments,
guarantees are proven to
be sustainable and
effective.25 A well-
structured guarantee is
regarded as attractive in
terms of financial
sustainability for
investment flows.26 | Medium | Mitigation and Adaptation: paradigm
shift would see guarantees being
regarded as extremely reliable and
highly sustainable financial
instruments for climate change
adaptation investments and would
become a preferred and well-
accepted approach to de-risking
climate adaptation investments –
such as those under the GCF’s
MRA 1-3 and ARA2 and ARA3 – in
developing countries. | Describe key applicable
outputs and resulting
outcomes that will be
sustained beyond the
project/programme
period.
Mitigation and
Adaptation: As the
programme unfolds
over time, the GGC will
share its experience
with national financial
institutions, both public
and private, to increase
their awareness of the
role and functionality of
guarantees for private
capital directed at
climate change
adaptation investments,
thereby facilitating more
sustainability in the
markets for guarantee
finance.
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators) |  |  |  | 
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core
and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as
defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given project/programme outcomes,
project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators). |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 45
Target Assumpt
GCF Result IRMF Means of Verification
Baseline ions /
Area Indicator (MoV)
Note
Mid-term Final27
Ex-ante and ex-post 0 tCO2e 6 865 554 tCO₂e 18 346 413 Assumed
analyses of the GGC’s tCO₂e three-
guarantees, conducted year
by project or implemen
programme investors tation
(and implementation period,
entities), as part of and linear
required MERL systems growth
put in place by and
investors; to be adoption
compiled into annual of
country performance guarante
reports for the GGC (by es
third party contractor) thereafter
Potentially .
supplemented by
additional independent Methodol
verification programmes ogy:
where applicable, such
Emission
as Verra, CDM or Gold
s
Standard.
reduction
s
calculate
Core 1: GHG d based
on
emissions reduced,
MRA1 planned
avoided or
Energy performa
removed/sequester
generation nce of
and access ed underlyin
g
reference
projects.
Impact
results
scaled
based on
local
condition
s (e.g.
grid
emission
factors),
proposed
project
financing,
and other
indicators
where
relevant.
Lifetime:
Various
based on
project
27 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please
also provide the target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the
investment are expected to be effective.

--- Table 1 on Page 49 ---
GCF Result
Area | IRMF
Indicator | Means of Verification
(MoV) | Baseline | Target |  | Assumpt
ions /
Note
 |  |  |  | Mid-term | Final27 | 
MRA1
Energy
generation
and access | Core 1: GHG
emissions reduced,
avoided or
removed/sequester
ed | Ex-ante and ex-post
analyses of the GGC’s
guarantees, conducted
by project or
programme investors
(and implementation
entities), as part of
required MERL systems
put in place by
investors; to be
compiled into annual
country performance
reports for the GGC (by
third party contractor)
Potentially
supplemented by
additional independent
verification programmes
where applicable, such
as Verra, CDM or Gold
Standard. | 0 tCO2e | 6 865 554 tCO₂e | 18 346 413
tCO₂e | Assumed
three-
year
implemen
tation
period,
and linear
growth
and
adoption
of
guarante
es
thereafter
.
Methodol
ogy:
Emission
s
reduction
s
calculate
d based
on
planned
performa
nce of
underlyin
g
reference
projects.
Impact
results
scaled
based on
local
condition
s (e.g.
grid
emission
factors),
proposed
project
financing,
and other
indicators
where
relevant.
Lifetime:
Various
based on
project

--- Table 2 on Page 49 ---
Assumpt
ions /
Note

--- Table 3 on Page 49 ---
GCF Result
Area

--- Table 4 on Page 49 ---
IRMF
Indicator

--- Table 5 on Page 49 ---
Means of Verification
(MoV)

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 46
type.
Median
project
lifetime of
20 years
Annual
emission
reduction
s:
2 296 172
tCO2e
Lifetime
emission
reduction
s: 57 066
295
tCO2e
Cost of
emissions
reduction
s: $40,69
per
tCO2e
Ex-ante and ex-post 0 MWh 343 MW 1000 MW Assumed
analyses of the GGC’s three-
guarantees, conducted year
by project or implemen
programme investors tation
(and implementation period,
entities), as part of and linear
required MERL systems growth
put in place by and
MRA1
Supplementary 1.3: investors; to be adoption
Energy Installed renewable compiled into annual of
generation country performance guarante
energy capacity
and access reports for the GGC (by es
third party contractor) thereafter
Potentially .
supplemented by
additional independent
verification programmes
where applicable, such
as Verra, CDM or Gold
Standard.
Ex-ante and ex-post 0 MWh 9 837 521 MWh 26 288 226 Assumed
analyses of the GGC’s cumulative at MWh three-
guarantees, conducted mid-term cumulative year
by project or at full-term implemen
programme investors tation
(and implementation period,
entities), as part of and linear
MRA1
Supplementary 1.4: required MERL systems growth
Energy
Renewable energy put in place by and
generation
generated investors; to be adoption
and access compiled into annual of
country performance guarante
reports for the GGC (by es
third party contractor) thereafter
Potentially .
supplemented by
additional independent

--- Table 1 on Page 50 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | type.
Median
project
lifetime of
20 years
Annual
emission
reduction
s:
2 296 172
tCO2e
Lifetime
emission
reduction
s: 57 066
295
tCO2e
Cost of
emissions
reduction
s: $40,69
per
tCO2e
MRA1
Energy
generation
and access | Supplementary 1.3:
Installed renewable
energy capacity | Ex-ante and ex-post
analyses of the GGC’s
guarantees, conducted
by project or
programme investors
(and implementation
entities), as part of
required MERL systems
put in place by
investors; to be
compiled into annual
country performance
reports for the GGC (by
third party contractor)
Potentially
supplemented by
additional independent
verification programmes
where applicable, such
as Verra, CDM or Gold
Standard. | 0 MWh | 343 MW | 1000 MW | Assumed
three-
year
implemen
tation
period,
and linear
growth
and
adoption
of
guarante
es
thereafter
.
MRA1
Energy
generation
and access | Supplementary 1.4:
Renewable energy
generated | Ex-ante and ex-post
analyses of the GGC’s
guarantees, conducted
by project or
programme investors
(and implementation
entities), as part of
required MERL systems
put in place by
investors; to be
compiled into annual
country performance
reports for the GGC (by
third party contractor)
Potentially
supplemented by
additional independent | 0 MWh | 9 837 521 MWh
cumulative at
mid-term | 26 288 226
MWh
cumulative
at full-term | Assumed
three-
year
implemen
tation
period,
and linear
growth
and
adoption
of
guarante
es
thereafter
.

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 47
verification programmes Methodol
where applicable, such ogy:
as Verra, CDM or Gold Emission
Standard. s
reduction
s
calculate
d based
on
planned
performa
nce of
underlyin
g
reference
projects.
Impact
results
scaled
based on
local
condition
s (e.g.
grid
emission
factors),
proposed
project
financing,
and other
indicators
where
relevant.
Annual
generatio
n:
3 290 141
MWh
Lifetime
generatio
n: 26 288
226 MWh
Ex-ante and ex-post 0 tCO2e 270 081 tCO₂e 721 722 Assumed
analyses of the GGC’s tCO₂e three-
guarantees, conducted year
by project or impleme
programme investors ntation
Core 1: GHG (and implementation period,
MRA2 Low- emissions reduced, entities), as part of and
emission avoided or required MERL linear
transport removed/sequester systems put in place by growth
ed investors; to be and
compiled into annual adoption
country performance of
reports for the GGC (by guarante
third party contractor) es
thereafter
Potentially .
supplemented by
additional independent

--- Table 1 on Page 51 ---
 |  | verification programmes
where applicable, such
as Verra, CDM or Gold
Standard. |  |  |  | Methodol
ogy:
Emission
s
reduction
s
calculate
d based
on
planned
performa
nce of
underlyin
g
reference
projects.
Impact
results
scaled
based on
local
condition
s (e.g.
grid
emission
factors),
proposed
project
financing,
and other
indicators
where
relevant.
Annual
generatio
n:
3 290 141
MWh
Lifetime
generatio
n: 26 288
226 MWh
MRA2 Low-
emission
transport | Core 1: GHG
emissions reduced,
avoided or
removed/sequester
ed | Ex-ante and ex-post
analyses of the GGC’s
guarantees, conducted
by project or
programme investors
(and implementation
entities), as part of
required MERL
systems put in place by
investors; to be
compiled into annual
country performance
reports for the GGC (by
third party contractor)
Potentially
supplemented by
additional independent | 0 tCO2e | 270 081 tCO₂e | 721 722
tCO₂e | Assumed
three-
year
impleme
ntation
period,
and
linear
growth
and
adoption
of
guarante
es
thereafter
.

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 48
verification
programmes where Methodol
applicable, such as ogy:
Verra, CDM or Gold Emission
Standard. s
reduction
s
calculate
d based
on
planned
performa
nce of
underlyin
g
reference
projects.
Impact
results
scaled
based on
local
condition
s and
other
relevant
indicators
, and
proposed
project
financing.
Lifetime:
Various
based on
project
type.
Median
project
lifetime of
30 years
Annual
emission
reduction
s:
90 328
tCO2e
Lifetime
emission
reduction
s: 4 516
411
tCO2e

--- Table 1 on Page 52 ---
 |  | verification
programmes where
applicable, such as
Verra, CDM or Gold
Standard. |  |  |  | Methodol
ogy:
Emission
s
reduction
s
calculate
d based
on
planned
performa
nce of
underlyin
g
reference
projects.
Impact
results
scaled
based on
local
condition
s and
other
relevant
indicators
, and
proposed
project
financing.
Lifetime:
Various
based on
project
type.
Median
project
lifetime of
30 years
Annual
emission
reduction
s:
90 328
tCO2e
Lifetime
emission
reduction
s: 4 516
411
tCO2e

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 49
Cost of
emissions
reduction
s:
$121.78
per tCO2e
Ex-ante and ex-post 0 MWh 5 714 577 MWh 15 270 725 Assumed
analyses of the GGC’s cumulative at MWh three-
guarantees, conducted mid-term cumulative year
by project or at full-term impleme
programme investors ntation
(and implementation period,
entities), as part of and
required MERL linear
systems put in place by growth
investors; to be and
compiled into annual adoption
country performance of
reports for the GGC (by guarante
MRA2 Low- Supplementary 1.1: third party contractor) es
emission Annual energy thereafter
transport savings Potentially .
supplemented by
additional independent Annual
verification energy
programmes where savings:
applicable, such as 1 911
Verra, CDM or Gold 230
Standard. MWh/y
Lifetime
energy
savings:
95 561
484 MWh
Ex-ante and ex-post 0 tCO2e 11 215 542 11 956 789 Assumed
analyses of the GGC’s tCO₂e tCO₂e three-
guarantees, conducted year
by project or impleme
programme investors ntation
(and implementation period,
entities), as part of and
required MERL linear
MRA3 systems put in place by growth
Buildings, Core 1: GHG investors; to be and
cities, emissions reduced, compiled into annual adoption
industries avoided or country performance of
and removed/sequester reports for the GGC (by guarante
appliances ed third party contractor) es
thereafter
Potentially .
supplemented by
Methodol
additional independent
ogy:
verification
Emission
programmes where
s
applicable, such as
reduction
Verra, CDM or Gold
s
Standard. calculate

--- Table 1 on Page 53 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | Cost of
emissions
reduction
s:
$121.78
per tCO2e
MRA2 Low-
emission
transport | Supplementary 1.1:
Annual energy
savings | Ex-ante and ex-post
analyses of the GGC’s
guarantees, conducted
by project or
programme investors
(and implementation
entities), as part of
required MERL
systems put in place by
investors; to be
compiled into annual
country performance
reports for the GGC (by
third party contractor)
Potentially
supplemented by
additional independent
verification
programmes where
applicable, such as
Verra, CDM or Gold
Standard. | 0 MWh | 5 714 577 MWh
cumulative at
mid-term | 15 270 725
MWh
cumulative
at full-term | Assumed
three-
year
impleme
ntation
period,
and
linear
growth
and
adoption
of
guarante
es
thereafter
.
Annual
energy
savings:
1 911
230
MWh/y
Lifetime
energy
savings:
95 561
484 MWh
MRA3
Buildings,
cities,
industries
and
appliances | Core 1: GHG
emissions reduced,
avoided or
removed/sequester
ed | Ex-ante and ex-post
analyses of the GGC’s
guarantees, conducted
by project or
programme investors
(and implementation
entities), as part of
required MERL
systems put in place by
investors; to be
compiled into annual
country performance
reports for the GGC (by
third party contractor)
Potentially
supplemented by
additional independent
verification
programmes where
applicable, such as
Verra, CDM or Gold
Standard. | 0 tCO2e | 11 215 542
tCO₂e | 11 956 789
tCO₂e | Assumed
three-
year
impleme
ntation
period,
and
linear
growth
and
adoption
of
guarante
es
thereafter
.
Methodol
ogy:
Emission
s
reduction
s
calculate

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 50
d based
on
planned
performa
nce of
underlyin
g
reference
projects.
Impact
results
scaled
based on
local
condition
s and
other
relevant
indicators
, and
proposed
project
financing.
Lifetime:
Various
based on
project
type.
Median
project
lifetime of
15 years
Annual
emission
reduction
s:
2 302
705
tCO2e
Lifetime
emission
reduction
s: 12 996
018
tCO2e
Cost of
emissions
reduction

--- Table 1 on Page 54 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | d based
on
planned
performa
nce of
underlyin
g
reference
projects.
Impact
results
scaled
based on
local
condition
s and
other
relevant
indicators
, and
proposed
project
financing.
Lifetime:
Various
based on
project
type.
Median
project
lifetime of
15 years
Annual
emission
reduction
s:
2 302
705
tCO2e
Lifetime
emission
reduction
s: 12 996
018
tCO2e
Cost of
emissions
reduction

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 51
s: $71.91
per tCO2e
Ex-ante and ex-post O MWh 11 215 542 11 956 789 Assumed
analyses of the GGC’s MWh cumulative MWh three-
guarantees, conducted at mid-term cumulative year
by project or at full-term impleme
programme investors ntation
(and implementation period,
entities), as part of and
required MERL linear
MRA3
systems put in place by growth
Buildings,
Supplementary 1.1: investors; to be and
cities,
Annual energy compiled into annual adoption
industries
savings country performance of
and
reports for the GGC (by guarante
appliances
third party contractor) es
thereafter
Potentially .
supplemented by
additional independent Annual
verification energy
programmes where savings:
applicable, such as 2 302
Verra, CDM or Gold 705
Standard. MWh/y
Ex-ante and ex-post 0 MWh 13 MW 34 MW Assumed
analyses of the GGC’s three-
guarantees, conducted year
by project or impleme
programme investors ntation
(and implementation period,
entities), as part of and
required MERL linear
MRA3
systems put in place by growth
Buildings,
Supplementary 1.3: investors; to be and
cities,
Installed renewable compiled into annual adoption
industries
energy capacity country performance of
and
reports for the GGC (by guarante
appliances
third party contractor) es
thereafter
Potentially .
supplemented by
additional independent
verification
programmes where
applicable, such as
Verra, CDM or Gold
Standard.
ARA2 Ex-ante and ex-post 0 7 694 263 direct 15 388 526 Please
Health, well- analyses of the GGC’s beneficiaries (3 direct refer to
Core 2: Direct and
being, food guarantees, conducted (As the 847 132 male beneficiari Annex 22
indirect
and water by project or investments to be and 3 847 132 es (7 694 for a
beneficiaries
security programme investors targeted by the female) and 7 263 male descriptio
reached
and implementation GGC’s 256 713 indirect and 7 694 n of
entities), as part of guarantees would, beneficiaries (3 263 assumpti
required MERL by definition, not 628 357 male female) ons

--- Table 1 on Page 55 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | s: $71.91
per tCO2e
MRA3
Buildings,
cities,
industries
and
appliances | Supplementary 1.1:
Annual energy
savings | Ex-ante and ex-post
analyses of the GGC’s
guarantees, conducted
by project or
programme investors
(and implementation
entities), as part of
required MERL
systems put in place by
investors; to be
compiled into annual
country performance
reports for the GGC (by
third party contractor)
Potentially
supplemented by
additional independent
verification
programmes where
applicable, such as
Verra, CDM or Gold
Standard. | O MWh | 11 215 542
MWh cumulative
at mid-term | 11 956 789
MWh
cumulative
at full-term | Assumed
three-
year
impleme
ntation
period,
and
linear
growth
and
adoption
of
guarante
es
thereafter
.
Annual
energy
savings:
2 302
705
MWh/y
MRA3
Buildings,
cities,
industries
and
appliances | Supplementary 1.3:
Installed renewable
energy capacity | Ex-ante and ex-post
analyses of the GGC’s
guarantees, conducted
by project or
programme investors
(and implementation
entities), as part of
required MERL
systems put in place by
investors; to be
compiled into annual
country performance
reports for the GGC (by
third party contractor)
Potentially
supplemented by
additional independent
verification
programmes where
applicable, such as
Verra, CDM or Gold
Standard. | 0 MWh | 13 MW | 34 MW | Assumed
three-
year
impleme
ntation
period,
and
linear
growth
and
adoption
of
guarante
es
thereafter
.
ARA2
Health, well-
being, food
and water
security | Core 2: Direct and
indirect
beneficiaries
reached | Ex-ante and ex-post
analyses of the GGC’s
guarantees, conducted
by project or
programme investors
and implementation
entities), as part of
required MERL | 0
(As the
investments to be
targeted by the
GGC’s
guarantees would,
by definition, not | 7 694 263 direct
beneficiaries (3
847 132 male
and 3 847 132
female) and 7
256 713 indirect
beneficiaries (3
628 357 male | 15 388 526
direct
beneficiari
es (7 694
263 male
and 7 694
263
female) | Please
refer to
Annex 22
for a
descriptio
n of
assumpti
ons

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 52
systems put in place by materialize or and 3 628 357 and 14 513 underpin
investors; to be proceed in the female) 427 ning the
compiled into annual absence of the indirect estimatio
country performance de-risking by the beneficiari n of
reports for the GGC (by guarantee) es (7 256 direct
third party contractor) 713 male and
and 7 256 indirect
713 beneficia
female) ries
reached,
under
each
ARA, and
the excel
spreadsh
eet with
back-end
calculatio
ns.
The
estimatio
ns
pertain to
the
beneficia
ries over
the entire
lifecycle
of the
investme
nts (i.e.
their
operation
al
lifetime.)
Ex-ante and ex-post 0 805 718 direct 1 611 434 Please
analyses of the impact beneficiaries direct refer to
of GGC’s guarantees, (As the (402 858 male beneficiari Annex 22
conducted by project or investments to be and 402 858 es (805 for a
programme investors targeted by the female) and 2 717 male descriptio
ARA3 and implementation GGC’s 696 692 indirect and 805 n of
Intrastructur Core 2: Direct and entities), as part of guarantees would, beneficiaries (1 717 assumpti
e and built indirect required MERL by definition, not 348 346 male female) ons
environment beneficiaries systems put in place by materialize or and 1 348 346 and 5 393 underpin
reached investors; to be proceed in the female) 385 ning the
compiled into annual absence of the indirect estimatio
country performance de-risking by the beneficiari n of
reports for the GGC (by guarantee) es (2 696 direct
third party contractor) 692 male and
and 2 696 indirect
beneficia
ries

--- Table 1 on Page 56 ---
 |  | systems put in place by
investors; to be
compiled into annual
country performance
reports for the GGC (by
third party contractor) | materialize or
proceed in the
absence of the
de-risking by the
guarantee) | and 3 628 357
female) | and 14 513
427
indirect
beneficiari
es (7 256
713 male
and 7 256
713
female) | underpin
ning the
estimatio
n of
direct
and
indirect
beneficia
ries
reached,
under
each
ARA, and
the excel
spreadsh
eet with
back-end
calculatio
ns.
The
estimatio
ns
pertain to
the
beneficia
ries over
the entire
lifecycle
of the
investme
nts (i.e.
their
operation
al
lifetime.)
ARA3
Intrastructur
e and built
environment | Core 2: Direct and
indirect
beneficiaries
reached | Ex-ante and ex-post
analyses of the impact
of GGC’s guarantees,
conducted by project or
programme investors
and implementation
entities), as part of
required MERL
systems put in place by
investors; to be
compiled into annual
country performance
reports for the GGC (by
third party contractor) | 0
(As the
investments to be
targeted by the
GGC’s
guarantees would,
by definition, not
materialize or
proceed in the
absence of the
de-risking by the
guarantee) | 805 718 direct
beneficiaries
(402 858 male
and 402 858
female) and 2
696 692 indirect
beneficiaries (1
348 346 male
and 1 348 346
female) | 1 611 434
direct
beneficiari
es (805
717 male
and 805
717
female)
and 5 393
385
indirect
beneficiari
es (2 696
692 male
and 2 696 | Please
refer to
Annex 22
for a
descriptio
n of
assumpti
ons
underpin
ning the
estimatio
n of
direct
and
indirect
beneficia
ries

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 53
692 reached,
female) under
each
ARA, and
the excel
spreadsh
eet with
back-end
calculatio
ns.
The
estimatio
ns
pertain to
the
beneficia
ries over
the entire
lifecycle
of the
investme
nts (i.e.
their
operation
al
lifetime.)
No supplementary indicators have been selected for ARA2 and ARA3 due to the lack of universal applicability of any of the IRMF’s
supplementary indicators (2.1 through 2.7) to the potential GGC adaptation portfolio as a whole.
Given the thematic focus of sub-indicators 2.1 through 2.7, each is applicable to certain investments within the linked sector and
sub-sector, and would be relevant depending on the investment’s design and functionality. But any such indicator would, by its
nature, not be applicable to a large proportion of the potential investment portfolio that falls outside the linked sector and sub-
sector (for instance, a sub-indicator on early warning systems (2.4) would not be an appropriate metric to gauge and measure
results for an investment on climate-resilient building standards, if early warning systems are not inherent in the investment design,
and in such a case sub-indicator 2.6 is more likely to be applicable).
This is not to say that there may not, plausibly, be a sub-set of potential investments that are brought to the GGC to seek
guarantees, to which one of more of the sub-indicators may apply -- depending on the very specific nature and design of that
investment. The sub-indicators may very well be relevant on a case-by-case basis. However, given the GGC's programmatic
nature, plus the absence of an indicative portfolio with identifiable projects and programmes, opting for any one of the sub-
indicators would be inapplicable to the mock portfolio as a whole.
Thus, choosing a sub-indicator to evaluate all adaptation projectts against, when it will not apply across the board and be
misaligned with several of the investments that emerge, is deemed sub-optimal. However, Annex II (M7E framework) does take
cognizance of these sub-indicators and directs those responsible for M&E of GGC-supported investments to examine the IRMF’s
list of supplementary indicators and, on a case-by-case basis, select and integrate into the project-specific M&E the particular sub-
indicator of relevance in each instance.
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and
project/programme’s targeted outcome against the respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target
scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the project/programme will contribute
towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section.

--- Table 1 on Page 57 ---
 |  |  |  |  | 692
female) | reached,
under
each
ARA, and
the excel
spreadsh
eet with
back-end
calculatio
ns.
The
estimatio
ns
pertain to
the
beneficia
ries over
the entire
lifecycle
of the
investme
nts (i.e.
their
operation
al
lifetime.)
No supplementary indicators have been selected for ARA2 and ARA3 due to the lack of universal applicability of any of the IRMF’s
supplementary indicators (2.1 through 2.7) to the potential GGC adaptation portfolio as a whole.
Given the thematic focus of sub-indicators 2.1 through 2.7, each is applicable to certain investments within the linked sector and
sub-sector, and would be relevant depending on the investment’s design and functionality. But any such indicator would, by its
nature, not be applicable to a large proportion of the potential investment portfolio that falls outside the linked sector and sub-
sector (for instance, a sub-indicator on early warning systems (2.4) would not be an appropriate metric to gauge and measure
results for an investment on climate-resilient building standards, if early warning systems are not inherent in the investment design,
and in such a case sub-indicator 2.6 is more likely to be applicable).
This is not to say that there may not, plausibly, be a sub-set of potential investments that are brought to the GGC to seek
guarantees, to which one of more of the sub-indicators may apply -- depending on the very specific nature and design of that
investment. The sub-indicators may very well be relevant on a case-by-case basis. However, given the GGC's programmatic
nature, plus the absence of an indicative portfolio with identifiable projects and programmes, opting for any one of the sub-
indicators would be inapplicable to the mock portfolio as a whole.
Thus, choosing a sub-indicator to evaluate all adaptation projectts against, when it will not apply across the board and be
misaligned with several of the investments that emerge, is deemed sub-optimal. However, Annex II (M7E framework) does take
cognizance of these sub-indicators and directs those responsible for M&E of GGC-supported investments to examine the IRMF’s
list of supplementary indicators and, on a case-by-case basis, select and integrate into the project-specific M&E the particular sub-
indicator of relevance in each instance. |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 57 ---
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and
project/programme’s targeted outcome against the respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target
scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the project/programme will contribute
towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section.

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 54
Rating for
Baseline context Target scenario How the project
Core Indicator current state Coverage
(description) (description) will contribute
(baseline)
Mitigation and Mitigation and
Adaptation: Adaptation: The
Climate finance GGC’s work will
markets in demonstrate,
developing through concrete
Mitigation and
countries have not actions and
Adaptation: the
yet optimized the results, the
GGC’s efforts will
Core indicator 7: deployment of strategic use of
stimulate financial
Degree to which GCF guarantees to the guarantees and
markets in all the
Investments full potential of the the financial utility
participating
contribute to market instrument. Even thereof. It will
low countries, in terms Multi-countries
development/transfor at the GCF itself, serve as proof-of-
of unlocking
mation at the sectoral, while concept in many
greater volumes of
local, or national level approximately 2% markets. Lessons
guarantee finance
of the GCF’s learnt through the
to de-risk private
portfolio GGC’s model will
sector investments
comprises of directly inform the
in climate change.
guarantees, work of other
virtually all of it is institutions
for mitigation exploring the use
projects and of guarantees to
programmes.28 boost climate
finance.
As the programme
There is very little The GGC’s efforts unfolds over time,
existing practice will generate a the GGC will
related to the use wealth of share its
Core indicator 8: of guarantees to knowledge for experience with
Degree to which GCF generate greater national and national financial
investments financial flows of global financial institutions, both
contribute to effective private capital into institutions, in public and private,
knowledge generation climate change terms of the to increase their
low Multi-countries
and learning adaptation efficacy and awareness of the
processes, and use of investments, and operationalization role and
good practices, therefore ineligible of guarantees to functionality of
methodologies and knowledge and unlock private guarantees for
standards awareness. sector investment private capital
in various climate directed at climate
change thematic change mitigation
areas. and adaptation
investments.
28 GCF, Status of the GCF Portfolio: Approved Projects and Fulfillment of Conditions, September 2021.
https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/gcf-b30-inf12.pdf

--- Table 1 on Page 58 ---
Core Indicator | Baseline context
(description) |  | Rating for |  | Target scenario
(description) | How the project
will contribute | Coverage
 |  |  | current state |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | (baseline) |  |  |  | 
Core indicator 7:
Degree to which GCF
Investments
contribute to market
development/transfor
mation at the sectoral,
local, or national level | Mitigation and
Adaptation:
Climate finance
markets in
developing
countries have not
yet optimized the
deployment of
guarantees to the
full potential of the
instrument. Even
at the GCF itself,
while
approximately 2%
of the GCF’s
portfolio
comprises of
guarantees,
virtually all of it is
for mitigation
projects and
programmes.28 | low |  |  | Mitigation and
Adaptation: the
GGC’s efforts will
stimulate financial
markets in all the
participating
countries, in terms
of unlocking
greater volumes of
guarantee finance
to de-risk private
sector investments
in climate change. | Mitigation and
Adaptation: The
GGC’s work will
demonstrate,
through concrete
actions and
results, the
strategic use of
guarantees and
the financial utility
thereof. It will
serve as proof-of-
concept in many
markets. Lessons
learnt through the
GGC’s model will
directly inform the
work of other
institutions
exploring the use
of guarantees to
boost climate
finance. | Multi-countries
Core indicator 8:
Degree to which GCF
investments
contribute to effective
knowledge generation
and learning
processes, and use of
good practices,
methodologies and
standards | There is very little
existing practice
related to the use
of guarantees to
generate greater
financial flows of
private capital into
climate change
adaptation
investments, and
therefore ineligible
knowledge and
awareness. | low |  |  | The GGC’s efforts
will generate a
wealth of
knowledge for
national and
global financial
institutions, in
terms of the
efficacy and
operationalization
of guarantees to
unlock private
sector investment
in various climate
change thematic
areas. | As the programme
unfolds over time,
the GGC will
share its
experience with
national financial
institutions, both
public and private,
to increase their
awareness of the
role and
functionality of
guarantees for
private capital
directed at climate
change mitigation
and adaptation
investments. | Multi-countries

--- Table 2 on Page 58 ---
Baseline context
(description)

--- Table 3 on Page 58 ---
Target scenario
(description)

--- Table 4 on Page 58 ---
How the project
will contribute

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 55
E
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs). AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed.
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).
Target
Project/programme
Project/programme Means of Verification
results Baseline Assumptions / Note
specific Indicator (MoV) Mid-term Final
(outcomes/ outputs)
Outcome 1 Mitigation:
shift to low-emission
sustainable development No. of guaranteed projects All guaranteed projects will
Official documents
pathways with a received with a mitigation 80% 40% 80% achieve GHG emission
tracking progress
corresponding focus targets
mitigation impact (GHG
emissions reduced)
Number of Borrowers
Output 1.1 Borrowers
increased Projects are available in the
have increased access to X+25% X+50%
Official documents country that are viable and
green bonds and loans to X
Number of Borrowers that tracking progress meet the GGC’s policy
implement climate-related, X+5 X+8
have a gender related requirements
mitigation projects
focus
Outcome 2 Adaptation:
Increased climate-
resilient sustainable
developmental impact
All guaranteed projects will
and improved adaptative No. of projects guaranteed Official documents
20% 10% 20% achieve adaptation
capacity are achieved in with an adaptation focus tracking progress
interventions
the supported projects
that successfully
contribute to the NDC of
selected countries
Output 2.1 Borrowers Number of Borrowers Official documents X+25% X+50% Projects are available in the
X
have increased access to increased tracking progress country that are viable and

--- Table 1 on Page 59 ---
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs). AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed.
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project/programme
results
(outcomes/ outputs) |  |  |  |  |  | Means of Verification
(MoV) |  |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  |  |  | Assumptions / Note |  | 
 |  |  |  | Project/programme |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  |  | Final |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | specific Indicator |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Outcome 1 Mitigation: |  | No. of guaranteed projects
received with a mitigation
focus |  |  | Official documents
tracking progress |  |  | 80% | 40% |  |  | 80% |  |  | All guaranteed projects will
achieve GHG emission
targets |  | 
 | shift to low-emission |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | sustainable development |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | pathways with a |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | corresponding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | mitigation impact (GHG |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | emissions reduced) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 1.1 Borrowers
have increased access to
green bonds and loans to
implement climate-related,
mitigation projects |  |  |  | Number of Borrowers |  | Official documents
tracking progress |  |  | X | X+25%
X+5 |  |  | X+50%
X+8 |  |  | Projects are available in the
country that are viable and
meet the GGC’s policy
requirements |  | 
 |  |  |  | increased |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Number of Borrowers that |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | have a gender related |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | focus |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
I
r
t
t | Outcome 2 Adaptation: |  | No. of projects guaranteed
with an adaptation focus |  |  | Official documents
tracking progress |  |  | 20% | 10% |  |  | 20% |  |  | All guaranteed projects will
achieve adaptation
interventions |  | 
 | ncreased climate- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | esilient sustainable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | developmental impact |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and improved adaptative |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | capacity are achieved in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | he supported projects |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | hat successfully |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | contribute to the NDC of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | selected countries |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 2.1 Borrowers |  |  | Number of Borrowers |  |  | Official documents |  | X |  | X+25% |  |  | X+50% |  |  | Projects are available in the | 
 | have increased access to |  |  | increased |  |  | tracking progress |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | country that are viable and | 

--- Table 2 on Page 59 ---
Project/programme
results
(outcomes/ outputs)

--- Table 3 on Page 59 ---
Means of Verification
(MoV)

--- Table 4 on Page 59 ---
No. of guaranteed projects
received with a mitigation
focus

--- Table 5 on Page 59 ---
All guaranteed projects will
achieve GHG emission
targets

--- Table 6 on Page 59 ---
Official documents
tracking progress

--- Table 7 on Page 59 ---
Output 1.1 Borrowers
have increased access to
green bonds and loans to
mplement climate-related,
mitigation projects

--- Table 8 on Page 59 ---
Projects are available in the
country that are viable and
meet the GGC’s policy
requirements

--- Table 9 on Page 59 ---
X+25%

X+5

--- Table 10 on Page 59 ---
X+50%

X+8

--- Table 11 on Page 59 ---
Official documents
tracking progress

--- Table 12 on Page 59 ---
All guaranteed projects will
achieve adaptation
interventions

--- Table 13 on Page 59 ---
No. of projects guaranteed
with an adaptation focus

--- Table 14 on Page 59 ---
Official documents
tracking progress

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 56
E
green bonds and loans to X+5 X+8 meet the GGC’s policy
implement climate-relate, Number of Borrowers that requirements
adaptation projects have a gender related
focus
Outcome 3: Enabling
Environment: Market
transformation by
providing a de-risking
mechanism that leads to
an increase in green
bonds and loans being
Credit borrowers are willing
issued by developing No. of borrowers with an Official documents
X X+3 X+5 to participate in the
countries. This includes improved credit rating tracking progress
programme
borrowers accessing an
improved credit rating
that closes the climate
finance gap and drives
financial sector
development and
stability
Output 3.1 - A credit
guarantee portfolio of
green bonds and loans No of green bonds and Official documents To be To be
X
issued by developing loans issued tracking progress determined determined
countries to borrowers by
the capitalized GGC
Output 3.2 - Local and
international partnerships No. of local and
Official documents
on climate solutions aiding international partnerships X X+8 X+15
tracking progress
access to global capital forged
markets
Outcome 4: Enabling
Environment: Increased
access to effective
knowledge generation No. of monitoring and 20 years: 4 20 years: 4
and learning processes evaluation reports Documentation stored 0 reports: reports:
into the use of No. of quarterly reports X+borrowers X+borrowers
guarantees to accelerate
and scale-up private
sector capital for

--- Table 1 on Page 60 ---
green bonds and loans to
implement climate-relate,
adaptation projects |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | X+5 | X+8 | meet the GGC’s policy
requirements
 |  |  |  | Number of Borrowers that |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | have a gender related |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | focus |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Outcome 3: Enabling |  | No. of borrowers with an
improved credit rating |  |  | Official documents
tracking progress | X | X+3 | X+5 | Credit borrowers are willing
to participate in the
programme
 | Environment: Market |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | transformation by |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | providing a de-risking |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | mechanism that leads to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | an increase in green |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | bonds and loans being |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | issued by developing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | countries. This includes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | borrowers accessing an |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | improved credit rating |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | that closes the climate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | finance gap and drives |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | financial sector |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | development and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | stability |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 3.1 - A credit |  | No of green bonds and
loans issued |  |  | Official documents
tracking progress | X | To be
determined | To be
determined | 
 | guarantee portfolio of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | green bonds and loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | issued by developing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | countries to borrowers by |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the capitalized GGC |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 3.2 - Local and |  | No. of local and
international partnerships
forged |  |  | Official documents
tracking progress | X | X+8 | X+15 | 
 | international partnerships |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | on climate solutions aiding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | access to global capital |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | markets |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Outcome 4: Enabling |  | No. of monitoring and
evaluation reports
No. of quarterly reports |  |  | Documentation stored | 0 | 20 years: 4
reports:
X+borrowers | 20 years: 4
reports:
X+borrowers | 
 | Environment: Increased |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | access to effective |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | knowledge generation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and learning processes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | into the use of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | guarantees to accelerate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and scale-up private |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | sector capital for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 60 ---
green bonds and loans to
implement climate-relate,
adaptation projects

--- Table 3 on Page 60 ---
meet the GGC’s policy
requirements

--- Table 4 on Page 60 ---
Credit borrowers are willing
to participate in the
programme

--- Table 5 on Page 60 ---
No. of borrowers with an
improved credit rating

--- Table 6 on Page 60 ---
Official documents
tracking progress

--- Table 7 on Page 60 ---
No of green bonds and
loans issued

--- Table 8 on Page 60 ---
Official documents
tracking progress

--- Table 9 on Page 60 ---
To be
determined

--- Table 10 on Page 60 ---
To be
determined

--- Table 11 on Page 60 ---
No. of local and
international partnerships
forged

--- Table 12 on Page 60 ---
Official documents
tracking progress

--- Table 13 on Page 60 ---
No. of monitoring and
evaluation reports
No. of quarterly reports

--- Table 14 on Page 60 ---
20 years: 4
reports:
X+borrowers

--- Table 15 on Page 60 ---
20 years: 4
reports:
X+borrowers

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 57
E
climate mitigation and
adaptation investments
Output 4.1. Training and
capacity building leads to
a robust portfolio of
No. of participants Official documents
projects leading to X X+50 X+100
attending training tracking progress
investment-ready, high-
integrity projects
Project/programme co-benefit indicators
Co-benefit 1 – (A) Proportion of the fund
Reduction in air-pollution portfolio that reduce air-
Workshops There will be no other
impacts, technological pollution impacts, 0 (reductions and
Official national , local 10% 15% significant polluting
innovation; employment technological innovation; not absolute levels)
reports factors
and public health benefits employment and public
health benefits
Co-benefit 2 – (B)
Proportion of the fund
Reducing exposure to
portfolio that reduce Workshops There will be no other
natural resource and 0 (reductions and
exposure to natural Official national , local 10% 15% significant polluting
biodiversity threats and not absolute levels)
resource and biodiversity reports factors
health impacts
and health impacts
Transactions with a gender
Number of small and
Co-benefit 3 (C)– Market Annual reporting by focus are closed and
medium sized enterprises 0 2% 5%
development Borrower proceed to implementation
assisted by the investment
phase
Number of people from a
marginalized or vulnerable
Co-benefit 4 (D and F) – group reached via a Annual reporting by Transactions with a gender
0 2% 5%
Social inclusion targeted project Borrower focus are closed and
deliverables proceed to implementation
(disaggregated by gender) phase
Transactions with a gender
Percent of investors that Annual reporting by focus are closed and
Co-Benefit 5 (E) – Gender 0 8% 10%
are led by women Borrower proceed to implementation
phase
Number of investments to Annual reporting by Transactions with a gender
Co-Benefit 6 (E) – Gender 0 5% 8%
women-led businesses Borrower focus are closed and

--- Table 1 on Page 61 ---
 | climate mitigation and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | adaptation investments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 4.1. Training and |  | No. of participants
attending training |  |  | Official documents
tracking progress |  |  | X | X+50 | X+100 |  |  | 
 | capacity building leads to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | a robust portfolio of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | projects leading to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | investment-ready, high- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | integrity projects |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
i
i | Co-benefit 1 – (A) |  | t | Proportion of the fund |  | Workshops
Official national , local
reports |  |  | 0 (reductions and
not absolute levels) | 10% | 15% | There will be no other
significant polluting
factors |  | 
 | Reduction in air-pollution |  |  | portfolio that reduce air- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | mpacts, technological |  |  | pollution impacts, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | nnovation; employment |  |  | echnological innovation; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and public health benefits |  |  | employment and public |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | health benefits |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Co-benefit 2 – (B) |  | Proportion of the fund
portfolio that reduce
exposure to natural
resource and biodiversity
and health impacts |  |  | Workshops
Official national , local
reports |  |  | 0 (reductions and
not absolute levels) | 10% | 15% | There will be no other
significant polluting
factors |  | 
 | Reducing exposure to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | natural resource and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | biodiversity threats and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | health impacts |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 3 (C)– Market
development |  |  | Number of small and
medium sized enterprises
assisted by the investment |  |  | Annual reporting by
Borrower |  |  | 0 | 2% | 5% |  | Transactions with a gender | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | focus are closed and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | proceed to implementation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | phase | 
Co-benefit 4 (D and F) –
Social inclusion |  |  | t
( | Number of people from a |  | Annual reporting by
Borrower |  |  | 0 | 2% | 5% | Transactions with a gender
focus are closed and
proceed to implementation
phase |  | 
 |  |  |  | marginalized or vulnerable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | group reached via a |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Transactions with a gender | 
 |  |  |  | argeted project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | focus are closed and | 
 |  |  |  | deliverables |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | proceed to implementation | 
 |  |  |  | disaggregated by gender) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | phase | 
Co-Benefit 5 (E) – Gender |  |  | Percent of investors that
are led by women |  |  | Annual reporting by
Borrower |  |  | 0 | 8% | 10% |  | Transactions with a gender | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | focus are closed and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | proceed to implementation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | phase | 
Co-Benefit 6 (E) – Gender |  |  |  | Number of investments to |  |  | Annual reporting by |  | 0 | 5% | 8% |  | Transactions with a gender | 
 |  |  |  | women-led businesses |  |  | Borrower |  |  |  |  |  | focus are closed and | 

--- Table 2 on Page 61 ---
No. of participants
attending training

--- Table 3 on Page 61 ---
Official documents
tracking progress

--- Table 4 on Page 61 ---
Workshops
Official national , local
reports

--- Table 5 on Page 61 ---
There will be no other
significant polluting
factors

--- Table 6 on Page 61 ---
0 (reductions and
not absolute levels)

--- Table 7 on Page 61 ---
Proportion of the fund
portfolio that reduce
exposure to natural
esource and biodiversity
and health impacts

--- Table 8 on Page 61 ---
Workshops
Official national , local
reports

--- Table 9 on Page 61 ---
There will be no other
significant polluting
factors

--- Table 10 on Page 61 ---
0 (reductions and
not absolute levels)

--- Table 11 on Page 61 ---
Number of small and
medium sized enterprises
assisted by the investment

--- Table 12 on Page 61 ---
Co-benefit 3 (C)– Market
development

--- Table 13 on Page 61 ---
Annual reporting by
Borrower

--- Table 14 on Page 61 ---
Co-benefit 4 (D and F) –
Social inclusion

--- Table 15 on Page 61 ---
Annual reporting by
Borrower

--- Table 16 on Page 61 ---
Percent of investors that
are led by women

--- Table 17 on Page 61 ---
Annual reporting by
Borrower

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 58
E
proceed to implementation
phase
Percent of portfolio Transactions with a gender
companies that meet both Annual reporting by focus are closed and
Co-Benefit 7 (E) – Gender 0 3% 5%
the climate finance and 2X Borrower proceed to implementation
direct criteria phase
Share of women in the
fund’s senior management
Transactions with a gender
or share of women on the
Annual reporting by focus are closed and
Co-benefit 8 (E) – Gender fund’s Board, where the 0 8% 10%
Borrower proceed to implementation
fund invests in companies
phase
providing mitigation and/or
adaptation solutions
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as
needed.
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-activities as
shown below to associate to the related activity.
Activities Description Sub-activities Deliverables
GGC has been incorporated as a legal entity which can
provide guarantees to institutional investors in global credit
and capital markets. GGC has been formed as a private
1.1.1 Ensure GGC is compliant with all necessary legal
limited company in the United Kingdom and will be
and tax filings
eventually capitalised with USD 270 million of equity. The
1.1.2 Procure legal services A. Incorporation
equity will be raised in two tranches with an initial tranche
1.1.3 Develop and negotiate GGC equity B. Equity
Activity 1.1. Formation and of USD 100 million raised to enable GGC to commence
documentation and management agreement with Documentation and
capitalization of GGC (Yr operations and the second tranche of USD 170 million
DGG. management
2022-2025) raised within 36 months to support GGC’s growth. DGG will
1.1.4 Close GCF and FCDO into first tranche of equity agreement
be the Manager (running the day-to-day operations of
for GGC. C. Proposals
GGC) and there will be a management agreement between
1.1.5 Close management agreement between GGC
GGC and DGG which outlines the services that will be
and DGG
provided by the latter party and on what terms.
To be able to play its role as a guarantor and to credit
Activity 1.2 Secure 1.2.1 Procure (annually) credit rating service from one
enhance the debt instruments issued by Borrowers from A. Proof of investment
investment grade credit or more of the international credit rating agencies.
developing countries it will be necessary for GGC to have grade rating
rating for Green Guarantee
obtained an investment grade credit rating from one of the

--- Table 1 on Page 62 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | proceed to implementation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | phase | 
Co-Benefit 7 (E) – Gender | Percent of portfolio |  | Annual reporting by
Borrower | 0 |  | 3% | 5% |  |  | Transactions with a gender | 
 | companies that meet both |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | focus are closed and | 
 | the climate finance and 2X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | proceed to implementation | 
 | direct criteria |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | phase | 
Co-benefit 8 (E) – Gender | Share of women in the |  | Annual reporting by
Borrower | 0 |  | 8% | 10% |  | Transactions with a gender
focus are closed and
proceed to implementation
phase |  | 
 | fund’s senior management |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | or share of women on the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | fund’s Board, where the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | fund invests in companies |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | providing mitigation and/or |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | adaptation solutions |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as
needed.
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-activities as
shown below to associate to the related activity. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities | Description |  |  |  | Sub-activities |  |  | Deliverables |  |  | 
Activity 1.1. Formation and
capitalization of GGC (Yr
2022-2025) | GGC has been incorporated as a legal entity which can
provide guarantees to institutional investors in global credit
and capital markets. GGC has been formed as a private
limited company in the United Kingdom and will be
eventually capitalised with USD 270 million of equity. The
equity will be raised in two tranches with an initial tranche
of USD 100 million raised to enable GGC to commence
operations and the second tranche of USD 170 million
raised within 36 months to support GGC’s growth. DGG will
be the Manager (running the day-to-day operations of
GGC) and there will be a management agreement between
GGC and DGG which outlines the services that will be
provided by the latter party and on what terms. |  |  |  | 1.1.1 Ensure GGC is compliant with all necessary legal
and tax filings
1.1.2 Procure legal services
1.1.3 Develop and negotiate GGC equity
documentation and management agreement with
DGG.
1.1.4 Close GCF and FCDO into first tranche of equity
for GGC.
1.1.5 Close management agreement between GGC
and DGG |  |  | A. Incorporation
B. Equity
Documentation and
management
agreement
C. Proposals |  |  | 
Activity 1.2 Secure
investment grade credit
rating for Green Guarantee | To be able to play its role as a guarantor and to credit
enhance the debt instruments issued by Borrowers from
developing countries it will be necessary for GGC to have
obtained an investment grade credit rating from one of the |  |  |  | 1.2.1 Procure (annually) credit rating service from one
or more of the international credit rating agencies. |  |  | A. Proof of investment
grade rating |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 62 ---
Annual reporting by
Borrower

--- Table 3 on Page 62 ---
Transactions with a gender
focus are closed and
proceed to implementation
phase

--- Table 4 on Page 62 ---
Annual reporting by
Borrower

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 59
E
Company Limited (Yr three international credit rating agencies, Fitch, Moodys or
2022-2023) Standard and Poors. This investment grade credit rating
will provide institutional investors in global credit and capital
markets with the assurance that GGC is a creditworthy
counterparty on whose guarantees they can rely.
GGC expects to leverage (as explained earlier in sections
1.3.1 Build network of Origination Partners
1.16 to 1.18) the first tranche of USD 100 million of equity
1.3.2 Provide financial structuring support to
Activity 1.3 Identify, capital provided by Green Climate Fund (USD 40 million),
Origination Partners and Borrowers to build a A. Partnership
execute and financially FCDO (USD 40 million) and at least one other investor
pipeline of potential guarantee transactions which Agreements
structure guarantees that (USD 20 million) by 10x to create an initial guarantee
are aligned with the GGC Guarantee Policy (and B. Transaction
mobilise institutional capital capacity of USD 1 billion. GGC will then undertake the
in line with the Transaction Selection Process Scorecard
in global credit and capital activities outlined in the diagram below to work with
designed to optimize climate change benefits) C. Due diligence report
markets to fund climate Origination Partners to identify climate mitigation and
1.3.3 Progress transactions through the GGC D. Disclosure reports
mitigation and adaptation adaptation projects which are aligned with the Eligibility
guarantee process as outlined in the GGC E. Remediation
projects in developing Criteria outlined GGC’s Guarantee Policy (see Annex 23)
Guarantee Policy Strategy
countries (Yr 2023-2042) and will approve, provide financial structuring support, and
1.3.4 Execute transactions
execute transactions in accordance with the guarantee
process articulated in the Guarantee Policy.
1.4.1 Provide active risk management of guarantee
portfolio including guarantee claim payment,
restructuring and claim recovery
1.4.2 Provide support to Borrowers to develop impact
GGC will actively manage the credit risk of the portfolio of reporting frameworks and where needed
mobilise technical assistance grants from third
guarantees seeking to proactively take action to support
Activity 1.4 Manage and Borrowers that are at risk of a potential payment default parties (and potentially a dedicated technical
assistance grant facility within GGC) to enable A. Monitoring and
report on portfolio of by facilitating communication with investors and arranging
capacity-building for Borrowers Evaluation Progress
guarantees for risk a restructuring of the debt obligation to avoid a payment
1.4.3 Regularly monitor and prepare reporting Report
management, default and if unavoidable paying any claim under the
documentation on performance, ESG and B. ESG and climate
performance, and impact guarantee and taking steps to recover GGC’s capital from climate KPIs of Borrowers impact reports
(Yr 2023-2042) the Borrower. 1.4.4 Advocate publicly at industry events,
conferences and thought leadership initiatives
for global credit and capital markets to provide
greater climate finance to developing countries
1.4.5 Identify sources of technical assistance funding
to support Borrowers in accessing global credit
and capital markets
GGC’s activities in Activity 1.3 and Activity 1.4 are directed 1.5.1 Assess and develop an exit strategy for GCF and
Activity 1.5 Establish
towards generating a return on equity that would be FCDO A. Exit strategy
commercial viability of
attractive to private sector investors to facilitate an exit for 1.5.2 Execute exit strategy

--- Table 1 on Page 63 ---
Company Limited (Yr
2022-2023) | three international credit rating agencies, Fitch, Moodys or
Standard and Poors. This investment grade credit rating
will provide institutional investors in global credit and capital
markets with the assurance that GGC is a creditworthy
counterparty on whose guarantees they can rely. |  | 
Activity 1.3 Identify,
execute and financially
structure guarantees that
mobilise institutional capital
in global credit and capital
markets to fund climate
mitigation and adaptation
projects in developing
countries (Yr 2023-2042) | GGC expects to leverage (as explained earlier in sections
1.16 to 1.18) the first tranche of USD 100 million of equity
capital provided by Green Climate Fund (USD 40 million),
FCDO (USD 40 million) and at least one other investor
(USD 20 million) by 10x to create an initial guarantee
capacity of USD 1 billion. GGC will then undertake the
activities outlined in the diagram below to work with
Origination Partners to identify climate mitigation and
adaptation projects which are aligned with the Eligibility
Criteria outlined GGC’s Guarantee Policy (see Annex 23)
and will approve, provide financial structuring support, and
execute transactions in accordance with the guarantee
process articulated in the Guarantee Policy. | 1.3.1 Build network of Origination Partners
1.3.2 Provide financial structuring support to
Origination Partners and Borrowers to build a
pipeline of potential guarantee transactions which
are aligned with the GGC Guarantee Policy (and
in line with the Transaction Selection Process
designed to optimize climate change benefits)
1.3.3 Progress transactions through the GGC
guarantee process as outlined in the GGC
Guarantee Policy
1.3.4 Execute transactions | A. Partnership
Agreements
B. Transaction
Scorecard
C. Due diligence report
D. Disclosure reports
E. Remediation
Strategy
Activity 1.4 Manage and
report on portfolio of
guarantees for risk
management,
performance, and impact
(Yr 2023-2042) | GGC will actively manage the credit risk of the portfolio of
guarantees seeking to proactively take action to support
Borrowers that are at risk of a potential payment default
by facilitating communication with investors and arranging
a restructuring of the debt obligation to avoid a payment
default and if unavoidable paying any claim under the
guarantee and taking steps to recover GGC’s capital from
the Borrower. | 1.4.1 Provide active risk management of guarantee
portfolio including guarantee claim payment,
restructuring and claim recovery
1.4.2 Provide support to Borrowers to develop impact
reporting frameworks and where needed
mobilise technical assistance grants from third
parties (and potentially a dedicated technical
assistance grant facility within GGC) to enable
capacity-building for Borrowers
1.4.3 Regularly monitor and prepare reporting
documentation on performance, ESG and
climate KPIs of Borrowers
1.4.4 Advocate publicly at industry events,
conferences and thought leadership initiatives
for global credit and capital markets to provide
greater climate finance to developing countries
1.4.5 Identify sources of technical assistance funding
to support Borrowers in accessing global credit
and capital markets | A. Monitoring and
Evaluation Progress
Report
B. ESG and climate
impact reports
Activity 1.5 Establish
commercial viability of | GGC’s activities in Activity 1.3 and Activity 1.4 are directed
towards generating a return on equity that would be
attractive to private sector investors to facilitate an exit for | 1.5.1 Assess and develop an exit strategy for GCF and
FCDO
1.5.2 Execute exit strategy | A. Exit strategy

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 60
E
GGC and facilitate exit for GCF and FCDO via either a listing the shares of GGC on a
GCF and FCDO public market or via a sale to a private sector third party.
(Yr 2028-2042) The ability to access larger pools of equity capital from
private investors is going to be essential for GGC’s ability
to scale its activities and accelerate the paradigm shift in
global credit and capital markets to increase flows of
climate finance into developing countries.
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Purpose of the M&E Plan:
GGC's monitoring and evaluation plan is intended to help investors and project teams (i.e. Borrowers) to establish effective monitoring and reporting protocols that provide consistent,
accurate data and information. The plan seeks to generate evidence on achieving specific climate-related outcomes, as well as co-benefits from the investments such as those related
to gender and market transformation. GGC will also track their progress to meet their programme specific indicators. The system will require real-time monitoring approach to
complement the quarterly and annual results reporting cycles as the projects evolve. Borrowers will be required to capture, analyze and learn in real-time from their investments. This
approach is based on proactive monitoring of key issues, challenges and risks that may arise during the transaction selection process.
Parties responsible:
GGC is ultimately responsible for overseeing and reporting to the investors (for example to GCF) on the progress made in the monitoring and evaluation plan. This task will be
supported by the AE who will submit the overarching, aggregated data report to the relevant stakeholders. GGC is also responsible for managing the system design, execution and
monitoring of the reporting platform while the project owner or borrower will be responsible for contributing to the expected results and submitting the achieved results to GGC for
their review. To ensure that any social, economic climate agenda indicators or targets are reported adequately and fairly, a Climate Advisory Team will be appointed to assist with
ensuring that the estimated and analyzed outcomes are as realistic and translatable as possible before investors such as the Green Climate Fund receive the data. The Climate
Advisory Team will also assist with collecting baseline data at a country level to ensure that recipient countries are designing projects which are country relevant. The team will not
rely on established partnership and networks but also on official documentation and research. An additional third party reviewer or auditor will also be appointed to verify the aggregated
outcomes in the report submitted to the investors. Borrowers will be expected during any reporting period to account for expected results targets as indicated per in their logframe/M&E
plan. It is intended that in time, all applications will be submitted online through a digital platform created by GGC which will assist with collecting the relevant data aggregating it and
thus allowing for a more streamlined approach to reporting to the various investors. Borrowers will be tasked to devise a full data collection protocol for their projects at the time of
approval. This will ensure that they are adequately collecting data sources, incorporating timelines and have the systems in place to ensure that the data is readily available during
the quarterly and annual reporting cycles. Borrowers will also be encouraged to consider the data they need to adequately and robustly complete reports. Wherever possible, all
indicators will be disaggregated by sex, and subpopulation by subcategory. In addition, data on progress to meet the various indicators will be collected at the field level during
workshops hosted in various countries every quarter whereby Participants are encouraged to share their lessons learned challenges and experiences with implementing projects to
determine the impact of the programme.
The process to monitor, evaluate and report is as follows:
• Once subprojects are identified and transactions are closed, Climate Advisory team will be appointed to update Annex 11 with relevant baseline data and logframe targets.
• Borrowers will be required to complete the updated in Annex 11 (Monitoring and Evaluation) and Climate Impact reports as per the instructions and as adapted to suit the
project needs. The reporting function will occur on a quarterly and annual basis whereby the annual report will contain greater detail of achievements, milestones and
challenges that may have occurred in the reporting period while the quarterly report showcases progress made against specific indicators.
• GGC will receive the annual E&S Risks Standards (Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts) and Climate Impact reports and
monitoring data from the Borrowers of the bonds. GGC assesses the E&S Risks Standards and Climate Impact reports and monitoring data, the use of proceeds and

--- Table 1 on Page 64 ---
GGC and facilitate exit for
GCF and FCDO
(Yr 2028-2042) |  | GCF and FCDO via either a listing the shares of GGC on a
public market or via a sale to a private sector third party.
The ability to access larger pools of equity capital from
private investors is going to be essential for GGC’s ability
to scale its activities and accelerate the paradigm shift in
global credit and capital markets to increase flows of
climate finance into developing countries. |  |  | 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  | 
 | Purpose of the M&E Plan: |  |  |  | 
 | GGC's monitoring and evaluation plan is intended to help investors and project teams (i.e. Borrowers) to establish effective monitoring and reporting protocols that provide consistent, |  |  |  | 
 | accurate data and information. The plan seeks to generate evidence on achieving specific climate-related outcomes, as well as co-benefits from the investments such as those related |  |  |  | 
 | to gender and market transformation. GGC will also track their progress to meet their programme specific indicators. The system will require real-time monitoring approach to |  |  |  | 
 | complement the quarterly and annual results reporting cycles as the projects evolve. Borrowers will be required to capture, analyze and learn in real-time from their investments. This |  |  |  | 
 | approach is based on proactive monitoring of key issues, challenges and risks that may arise during the transaction selection process. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Parties responsible: |  |  |  | 
 | GGC is ultimately responsible for overseeing and reporting to the investors (for example to GCF) on the progress made in the monitoring and evaluation plan. This task will be |  |  |  | 
 | supported by the AE who will submit the overarching, aggregated data report to the relevant stakeholders. GGC is also responsible for managing the system design, execution and |  |  |  | 
 | monitoring of the reporting platform while the project owner or borrower will be responsible for contributing to the expected results and submitting the achieved results to GGC for |  |  |  | 
 | their review. To ensure that any social, economic climate agenda indicators or targets are reported adequately and fairly, a Climate Advisory Team will be appointed to assist with |  |  |  | 
 | ensuring that the estimated and analyzed outcomes are as realistic and translatable as possible before investors such as the Green Climate Fund receive the data. The Climate |  |  |  | 
 | Advisory Team will also assist with collecting baseline data at a country level to ensure that recipient countries are designing projects which are country relevant. The team will not |  |  |  | 
 | rely on established partnership and networks but also on official documentation and research. An additional third party reviewer or auditor will also be appointed to verify the aggregated |  |  |  | 
 | outcomes in the report submitted to the investors. Borrowers will be expected during any reporting period to account for expected results targets as indicated per in their logframe/M&E |  |  |  | 
 | plan. It is intended that in time, all applications will be submitted online through a digital platform created by GGC which will assist with collecting the relevant data aggregating it and |  |  |  | 
 | thus allowing for a more streamlined approach to reporting to the various investors. Borrowers will be tasked to devise a full data collection protocol for their projects at the time of |  |  |  | 
 | approval. This will ensure that they are adequately collecting data sources, incorporating timelines and have the systems in place to ensure that the data is readily available during |  |  |  | 
 | the quarterly and annual reporting cycles. Borrowers will also be encouraged to consider the data they need to adequately and robustly complete reports. Wherever possible, all |  |  |  | 
 | indicators will be disaggregated by sex, and subpopulation by subcategory. In addition, data on progress to meet the various indicators will be collected at the field level during |  |  |  | 
 | workshops hosted in various countries every quarter whereby Participants are encouraged to share their lessons learned challenges and experiences with implementing projects to |  |  |  | 
 | determine the impact of the programme. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | The process to monitor, evaluate and report is as follows: |  |  |  | 
 | • Once subprojects are identified and transactions are closed, Climate Advisory team will be appointed to update Annex 11 with relevant baseline data and logframe targets. |  |  |  | 
 | • Borrowers will be required to complete the updated in Annex 11 (Monitoring and Evaluation) and Climate Impact reports as per the instructions and as adapted to suit the |  |  |  | 
 | project needs. The reporting function will occur on a quarterly and annual basis whereby the annual report will contain greater detail of achievements, milestones and |  |  |  | 
 | challenges that may have occurred in the reporting period while the quarterly report showcases progress made against specific indicators. |  |  |  | 
 | • GGC will receive the annual E&S Risks Standards (Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts) and Climate Impact reports and |  |  |  | 
 | monitoring data from the Borrowers of the bonds. GGC assesses the E&S Risks Standards and Climate Impact reports and monitoring data, the use of proceeds and |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 61
E
compares actual results with the set of pre-determined targets. If a material factor is not covered or omitted, GGC will take the appropriate remediation steps which may
include assisting the Borrower to commission or undertake an independent assessment with the support of a network of independent local and international verifying firms.
• GGC will evaluate and aggregate the data received from the Borrowers into a consolidated format.
• The data collated will be reviewed by an appointed Climate Advisory Team to verify the information and provide an independent analysis of the outcomes received in the
report.
• GGC will review the consolidated report and if required, appoint a third party review or auditor to review the outcomes (on an annual basis).
• GGC will submit the consolidated report to MUFG.
• MUFG will review, comment and ensure and offer feedback on the report, where required.
• Once approved, the consolidated report will be submitted by MUFG to the GCF.
• The final report will be stored on a shared database for ease of reference by investors and GGCs internal team.
Certification and annual reporting standards
Annual Reporting will be done according to GGC investors requirements including:
• E&S Risks Standards Reporting
a. E&S risks and safeguards reporting includes: Business description, Use of Proceeds, Applicable E&S Performance Standards, Corporate Governance practices,
stakeholder consultations and stakeholder engagement process, and grievance redress mechanisms.
b. In case of a Category A guaranteed project by GGC, the Access to Information Policy of the IFC will be followed.
• Climate Impact reporting
a. Climate KPIs. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for mitigation and adaptation for each investment including the nature of and number of beneficiaries and
including the actual annual results with the targets on guarantee portfolio and individual bond level.
b. SDGs and NDCs. Actual SDG-related as well as NDC-related investment results (quantitative and qualitative) vs. expected results for each project sector and
type will be reported.
GGC aims to actively support the borrowers in the developing countries in following best practices for the adoption of the Green Bond Principles, Green Loan
Principles and the Climate Bonds Standard and Certification Scheme. GGC also supports the borrowers in their E&S reporting to the buyers of the bonds and
loans (the lenders).
The bonds will be pre- and post-issuance (ongoing) be certified by independent Approved Verifiers of the list of the Climate Bonds Standard and certification process of the Climate
Bonds Standards (version 3.0). The Climate Bond certification includes the analysis of the compliance with the Green Bond Principles and the Green Bonds will be part of the
Climate Bonds Green Bonds Database. Post-issuance Use of proceeds reporting, and Climate Impact reporting are core components of the Green Bond principles.
The Climate Bonds Taxonomy identifies the assets and projects needed to deliver a low carbon economy and gives GHG emissions screening criteria consistent with the 2-degree
global warming target set by the COP 21 Paris Agreement. The Taxonomy is the foundation used by the Climate Bonds Initiative to screen bonds to determine whether assets or
projects underlying an investment are eligible for green or climate finance. Where detailed analysis of a sector has been undertaken and specific eligibility Criteria have been
developed the Taxonomy is the foundation used by the Climate Bonds Initiative to screen bonds to determine whether assets or projects underlying an investment are eligible for
green or climate finance. Where detailed analysis of a sector has been undertaken and specific eligibility Criteria have been developed, bonds in that sector can be Climate Bonds
Certified. Where detailed sector-based Criteria for Certification are still under development, these sectors cannot yet be certified under the Climate Bonds Standard and we will
accordingly not provide our guarantees.
GGC’s Guarantee Policy is aligned with the Climate Bonds Taxonomy.

--- Table 1 on Page 65 ---
 | compares actual results with the set of pre-determined targets. If a material factor is not covered or omitted, GGC will take the appropriate remediation steps which may | 
 | include assisting the Borrower to commission or undertake an independent assessment with the support of a network of independent local and international verifying firms. | 
 | • GGC will evaluate and aggregate the data received from the Borrowers into a consolidated format. | 
 | • The data collated will be reviewed by an appointed Climate Advisory Team to verify the information and provide an independent analysis of the outcomes received in the | 
 | report. | 
 | • GGC will review the consolidated report and if required, appoint a third party review or auditor to review the outcomes (on an annual basis). | 
 | • GGC will submit the consolidated report to MUFG. | 
 | • MUFG will review, comment and ensure and offer feedback on the report, where required. | 
 | • Once approved, the consolidated report will be submitted by MUFG to the GCF. | 
 | • The final report will be stored on a shared database for ease of reference by investors and GGCs internal team. | 
 |  | 
 | Certification and annual reporting standards | 
 | Annual Reporting will be done according to GGC investors requirements including: | 
 | • E&S Risks Standards Reporting | 
 | a. E&S risks and safeguards reporting includes: Business description, Use of Proceeds, Applicable E&S Performance Standards, Corporate Governance practices, | 
 | stakeholder consultations and stakeholder engagement process, and grievance redress mechanisms. | 
 | b. In case of a Category A guaranteed project by GGC, the Access to Information Policy of the IFC will be followed. | 
 | • Climate Impact reporting | 
 | a. Climate KPIs. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for mitigation and adaptation for each investment including the nature of and number of beneficiaries and | 
 | including the actual annual results with the targets on guarantee portfolio and individual bond level. | 
 | b. SDGs and NDCs. Actual SDG-related as well as NDC-related investment results (quantitative and qualitative) vs. expected results for each project sector and | 
 | type will be reported. | 
 | GGC aims to actively support the borrowers in the developing countries in following best practices for the adoption of the Green Bond Principles, Green Loan | 
 | Principles and the Climate Bonds Standard and Certification Scheme. GGC also supports the borrowers in their E&S reporting to the buyers of the bonds and | 
 | loans (the lenders). | 
 | The bonds will be pre- and post-issuance (ongoing) be certified by independent Approved Verifiers of the list of the Climate Bonds Standard and certification process of the Climate | 
 | Bonds Standards (version 3.0). The Climate Bond certification includes the analysis of the compliance with the Green Bond Principles and the Green Bonds will be part of the | 
 | Climate Bonds Green Bonds Database. Post-issuance Use of proceeds reporting, and Climate Impact reporting are core components of the Green Bond principles. | 
 | The Climate Bonds Taxonomy identifies the assets and projects needed to deliver a low carbon economy and gives GHG emissions screening criteria consistent with the 2-degree | 
 | global warming target set by the COP 21 Paris Agreement. The Taxonomy is the foundation used by the Climate Bonds Initiative to screen bonds to determine whether assets or | 
 | projects underlying an investment are eligible for green or climate finance. Where detailed analysis of a sector has been undertaken and specific eligibility Criteria have been | 
 | developed the Taxonomy is the foundation used by the Climate Bonds Initiative to screen bonds to determine whether assets or projects underlying an investment are eligible for | 
 | green or climate finance. Where detailed analysis of a sector has been undertaken and specific eligibility Criteria have been developed, bonds in that sector can be Climate Bonds | 
 | Certified. Where detailed sector-based Criteria for Certification are still under development, these sectors cannot yet be certified under the Climate Bonds Standard and we will | 
 | accordingly not provide our guarantees. | 
 |  | 
 | GGC’s Guarantee Policy is aligned with the Climate Bonds Taxonomy. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 62
E
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), sanctions,
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistle-blowers or witnesses, as well as
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices
Each project in the Fund portfolio will have its own Risk Assessment and Management performed at feasibility stage. At Due
Diligence stage, the Fund teams will toughly review and asses the risk and take appropriate mitigation measures before submitting
any project to the GGC Credit Committee.
Main Risks and Risks at Fund level may be summarized as following:
Selected Risk Factor 1: Pipeline
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
GGC can only scale-up as quickly as it finds suitable transactions. Failure to scale will impact profitability and the ability to absorb
ECL losses.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
GGC will develop a network of Origination Partners globally which will help grow the portfolio. GGC is able to operate in any ODA
eligible country which means that its addressable market is significant. If GGC is unable to scale-up as quickly then GGC and
DGG will review and revise origination strategy, prioritize high return transactions to maximize revenue and DGG will delay
recruitment and rationalize cost base.
Selected Risk Factor 2: Credit rating
Category Probability Impact (should be high)
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
GGC will need to obtain and maintain an investment grade credit rating from an international rating agency which will mean that its
ability to leverage its capital will depend on the confidence that the credit rating agency has in the operations and management of
GGC. Failure to obtain this will undermine the business model.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
DGG, the manager of GGC, has significant experience of working with the major international credit rating agencies and balancing
portfolio growth with maintenance of credit ratings.

--- Table 1 on Page 66 ---
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  | 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  | 
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), sanctions,
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistle-blowers or witnesses, as well as
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices
Each project in the Fund portfolio will have its own Risk Assessment and Management performed at feasibility stage. At Due
Diligence stage, the Fund teams will toughly review and asses the risk and take appropriate mitigation measures before submitting
any project to the GGC Credit Committee.
Main Risks and Risks at Fund level may be summarized as following: |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 1: Pipeline |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Medium
Description |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
GGC can only scale-up as quickly as it finds suitable transactions. Failure to scale will impact profitability and the ability to absorb
ECL losses. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
GGC will develop a network of Origination Partners globally which will help grow the portfolio. GGC is able to operate in any ODA
eligible country which means that its addressable market is significant. If GGC is unable to scale-up as quickly then GGC and
DGG will review and revise origination strategy, prioritize high return transactions to maximize revenue and DGG will delay
recruitment and rationalize cost base. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2: Credit rating |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact (should be high)
Technical and operational | Medium | Medium
Description |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
GGC will need to obtain and maintain an investment grade credit rating from an international rating agency which will mean that its
ability to leverage its capital will depend on the confidence that the credit rating agency has in the operations and management of
GGC. Failure to obtain this will undermine the business model. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
DGG, the manager of GGC, has significant experience of working with the major international credit rating agencies and balancing
portfolio growth with maintenance of credit ratings. |  | 

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 63
E
Selected Risk Factor 3: Human resources
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
The scarcity of guarantee companies focused on developing countries means that there is a very shallow market for experienced
investment professionals with guarantee experience. This means GGC will need to train up new guarantee professionals which
could impact its ability to scale.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
The co-founders of DGG have a proven track record in establishing and scaling guarantee companies including building teams of
guarantee professionals.
Selected Risk Factor 4: Lower Guarantee Capacity
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
GGC’s inability to meet market demand will inhibit GGC from scaling-up as quickly as forecasted. Failure to do this will impact
profitability and the ability to absorb ECL losses.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
If GGC is unable to scale-up as quickly as forecasted then GGC and DGG will review and revise origination strategy, initiate
strategy to minimize any reputational risk and prioritizing high return transactions to maximize revenue. DGG will also delay
recruitment and rationalize cost base.
Selected Risk Factor 5: Lower climate impact
Category Probability Impact
Other Low Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
GGC will need to ensure transactions that it invests do indeed mitigate climate impact either through mitigation or adaption. Failure to
achieve this will undermine the business model.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
If GGC’s transactions do not meet key climate key performance indicators (“KPI”), GGC to review and revise origination strategy
and review and revise GGC’s Guarantee Policy (Annex 23), Transaction Selection Process (Annex 24A) and Transaction
Scorecard (Annex 24B).
Selected Risk Factor 6: Liquidity
Category Probability Impact

--- Table 1 on Page 67 ---
Selected Risk Factor 3: Human resources |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
The scarcity of guarantee companies focused on developing countries means that there is a very shallow market for experienced
investment professionals with guarantee experience. This means GGC will need to train up new guarantee professionals which
could impact its ability to scale. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
The co-founders of DGG have a proven track record in establishing and scaling guarantee companies including building teams of
guarantee professionals. |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 67 ---
Selected Risk Factor 4: Lower Guarantee Capacity |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
GGC’s inability to meet market demand will inhibit GGC from scaling-up as quickly as forecasted. Failure to do this will impact
profitability and the ability to absorb ECL losses. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
If GGC is unable to scale-up as quickly as forecasted then GGC and DGG will review and revise origination strategy, initiate
strategy to minimize any reputational risk and prioritizing high return transactions to maximize revenue. DGG will also delay
recruitment and rationalize cost base. |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 67 ---
Selected Risk Factor 5: Lower climate impact |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Other | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
GGC will need to ensure transactions that it invests do indeed mitigate climate impact either through mitigation or adaption. Failure to
achieve this will undermine the business model. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
If GGC’s transactions do not meet key climate key performance indicators (“KPI”), GGC to review and revise origination strategy
and review and revise GGC’s Guarantee Policy (Annex 23), Transaction Selection Process (Annex 24A) and Transaction
Scorecard (Annex 24B). |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 6: Liquidity |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 64
E
Other Low Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Impaired ability to meet guarantee call obligations because GGC does not have sufficient liquid assets. This could impact GGC
reputation. Also, GGC may crystalize mark to market losses which would impact profitability.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
GGC to ensure it has robust treasury management strategy is in place.
Selected Risk Factor 7: Treasury Income
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
GGC’s investment book generates lower returns than forecasted. This will reduce profitability.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
If GGC earns less finance income from its investment book GGC will review and revise treasury management strategy to ensure
higher returns, ensuring at all times capital preservation is prioritized.
Selected Risk Factor 8: Higher expenses
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Higher expenses incurred by GGC or DGG could impact GGC’s profitability.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
IF GGC or DGG’s expenses are higher than forecasted, GGC and DGG to review and revise budgeting process and rationalize
cost base.

--- Table 1 on Page 68 ---
Other | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Impaired ability to meet guarantee call obligations because GGC does not have sufficient liquid assets. This could impact GGC
reputation. Also, GGC may crystalize mark to market losses which would impact profitability. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
GGC to ensure it has robust treasury management strategy is in place. |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 68 ---
Selected Risk Factor 7: Treasury Income |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Medium
Description |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
GGC’s investment book generates lower returns than forecasted. This will reduce profitability. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
If GGC earns less finance income from its investment book GGC will review and revise treasury management strategy to ensure
higher returns, ensuring at all times capital preservation is prioritized. |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 68 ---
Selected Risk Factor 8: Higher expenses |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Higher expenses incurred by GGC or DGG could impact GGC’s profitability. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
IF GGC or DGG’s expenses are higher than forecasted, GGC and DGG to review and revise budgeting process and rationalize
cost base. |  | 

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 65
F
Selected Risk Factor 9: Money laundering, terrorist financing, sanctions and prohibited practices
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low MediumMedium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
inadequacy or absence of sound anti-money laundering and combatting terrorism risk management exposes institutions to serious
risks, especially reputational, operational, compliance and concentration risks.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
GGC and DGG have a very good understanding of money laundering and terrorist financing risks and the risks associated with
sanctions and prohibited practices. DGG and GGC have a suite of policies and robust procedures in place to ensure any individual
or entity who is sanctioned or is involved in prohibited practices is not financed or supported.
Selected Risk Factor 9: Gender and social inclusion
Category Probability Impact
Other Low Low
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Low uptake of investments with a gender related focus or with no senior management or share of women on the fund’s Board,
where the fund invests in companies providing mitigation and/or adaptation solutions
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
GGC and will ensure that a gender related assessment, intervention and plan is in place for their investments that promote gender
equity in the operation of the programme. GGC can also elicit interest in the programme amongst women-led organizations to gain
traction on receiving more proposals with a gender-related focus as well as a green-climate nexus.
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale for assigning
such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments developed for the proposal
(for example, Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), environmental and
social audits, etc.). Provide a summary of the main outcomes of these instruments. Present the key environmental and social risks
and impacts and the measures on how the project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage
(e.g. preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with GCF’s Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) standards.
If the proposed project or programme involves investments through financial intermediations, describe the due diligence and
management plans by the Executing Entities (EEs) and the oversight and supervision arrangements. Describe the capacity of the
EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for compliance monitoring, supervision, and reporting. Include a
description of the project/programme-level grievance redress mechanism, a summary of the extent of multi-stakeholder
consultations undertaken for the project/programme, the plan of the Accredited Entity (AE) and EEs to continue to engage the
stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and timing of disclosure of the applicable safeguards reports
following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy and Environmental and Social Policy.
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the development of
an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and informed consent, pursuant to
the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy.

--- Table 1 on Page 69 ---
Selected Risk Factor 9: Money laundering, terrorist financing, sanctions and prohibited practices |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | MediumMedium
Description |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
inadequacy or absence of sound anti-money laundering and combatting terrorism risk management exposes institutions to serious
risks, especially reputational, operational, compliance and concentration risks. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
GGC and DGG have a very good understanding of money laundering and terrorist financing risks and the risks associated with
sanctions and prohibited practices. DGG and GGC have a suite of policies and robust procedures in place to ensure any individual
or entity who is sanctioned or is involved in prohibited practices is not financed or supported. |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 69 ---
Selected Risk Factor 9: Gender and social inclusion |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Other | Low | Low
Description |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Low uptake of investments with a gender related focus or with no senior management or share of women on the fund’s Board,
where the fund invests in companies providing mitigation and/or adaptation solutions |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
GGC and will ensure that a gender related assessment, intervention and plan is in place for their investments that promote gender
equity in the operation of the programme. GGC can also elicit interest in the programme amongst women-led organizations to gain
traction on receiving more proposals with a gender-related focus as well as a green-climate nexus. |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 69 ---
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale for assigning
such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments developed for the proposal
(for example, Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), environmental and
social audits, etc.). Provide a summary of the main outcomes of these instruments. Present the key environmental and social risks
and impacts and the measures on how the project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage
(e.g. preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with GCF’s Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) standards.
If the proposed project or programme involves investments through financial intermediations, describe the due diligence and
management plans by the Executing Entities (EEs) and the oversight and supervision arrangements. Describe the capacity of the
EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for compliance monitoring, supervision, and reporting. Include a
description of the project/programme-level grievance redress mechanism, a summary of the extent of multi-stakeholder
consultations undertaken for the project/programme, the plan of the Accredited Entity (AE) and EEs to continue to engage the
stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and timing of disclosure of the applicable safeguards reports
following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy and Environmental and Social Policy.
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the development of
an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and informed consent, pursuant to
the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy.

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 66
F
Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on the environmental and
social risk category as annex 6.
GGC has developed an E&S Framework based on international best practice which outlines the methodology of GGC to select bond
investments in developing counties that significantly contribute to climate mitigation and adaption, whilst mitigating and managing
any E&S risks and impacts. In addition to, enabling GGC to demonstrate the impact outcomes it has on climate through its guarantee.
The framework, policy and system include screening, risk categorization, due diligence and guidance materials and reporting
protocols. The framework comprises of five core pillars, which together form the overarching framework, and equally contribute to
GGC’s overall goals and objectives, as outlined in Figure 10 below.
Figure 2 GGC and E&S Framework
Pillar one, Environmental & Social (E&S) Risks Standards and Requirements, focuses on how GGC’s TSP (Annex 24A) guided by
its Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B) integrates E&S risk management into every stage of its financing lifecycle and decision-
making processes. As part of this, GGC shall identify, monitor, and report on E&S risks and impacts associated with the bonds and
loans that are made possible through the provision of guarantees by GGC. This involves conducting rigorous screening and due
diligences of all opportunities presented by Origination Partners to ensure alignment with set E&S standards and requirements,
including providing recommendations and guidance to borrowers in order to rectify any issues / gaps identified and improve E&S
performance. GGC requires guaranteed bonds and loans to adhere to the GGC Exclusion List, applicable local and national E&S
laws, and regulations, the International Finance Corporation Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability
(IFC PS) (2012), the World Bank Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) guidelines and sector specific guidelines, and the core
labour conventions of the International Labour Organisations (ILO). Refer to Annex 6 of the GGC Funding Proposal for further details
on the GGC E&S Framework. GGC has developed a tailored E&S Management System (ESMS) to ensure the systematic
operationalization of its commitments set as part of its E&S Framework. Furthermore, GGC will build a dedicated and competent
E&S team and digital systems in order to effectively implement GGC’s E&S risk management, and overall E&S framework.
Key guidelines for applying the E&S framework are as follows:
• GGC’s Guarantee Policy (Annex 23), Transaction Selection Process (Annex 24A) and Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B)
will be followed to screen potential investments to ensure that no investment is made in projects or companies that are
operating with excluded activities. The screening process permits the interim categorization of proposed projects into higher,
medium, and lower risk (Category A, B or C respectively) projects and that then determines the level of E&S due diligence
required and the actions to be taken to minimize potential impacts. All projects guaranteed by GGC shall comply with host
country regulatory requirements and the relevant IFC Performance Standards.
• GGC will conduct a rigorous assessment, guided by its Transaction Selection Process (Annex 24A) and the Transaction
Scorecard (Annex 24B), of all opportunities presented by Origination Partners to ensure alignment with set E&S standards
and requirements. The Transaction Scorecard includes an initial screening to filter non-compliant transactions out early in
the Transaction Selection Process (TSP),
• GGC will likely not have the opportunity to influence the E&S assessment of a climate project at an early stage in the
project development cycle. Instead, GGC relies on having a robust TSP which will review and carry out strategic due

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 67
F
diligence on the borrower’s existing E&S documentation, processes, and systems to determine if they are compliant with
the requirements of GGC’s E&S Management Framework.
• In-country E&S specialist consultants will also be used where necessary to assist GGC in conducting ad hoc monitoring
and evaluation (M&E) of a selected transaction project, post financial-close, as well as working with a borrower to improve
their E&S Management competencies.
• A version of the due diligence report (compliant with GCF’s disclosure requirements) will be disclosed on the GGC website
and sent to GCF with a 30-day (calendar day) review period.
• Stakeholder engagement is an essential part of the Framework to facilitate the integration of gender considerations into
GGC’s financing lifecycle and decision making. In this context, stakeholder engagement denotes proactive ongoing
dialogue, information sharing and interactions between GGC and its stakeholders such as women led organizations. As
such, GGC commits to developing and implementing effective stakeholder engagement mechanisms (internally and
externally and as noted in Annex 7) to support a culture of transparency and accountability and learning and continual
improvement.
• Concerning external communication mechanisms, an important mechanism that will be implemented and maintained is a
grievance mechanism. This will support the process to effectively identify, receive, register, screen and evaluate, track, and
formally address complaints or feedback from stakeholders regarding the subproject activities.
• GGC will ensure that necessary and qualified E&S resources are employed at an organisational level to implement its
E&S Framework, and the commitments contained within.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme-level gender action plan that is aligned with the objectives
of GCF’s Gender Policy. Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process used to develop both
documents. Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key recommendations (how to address the
vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment. Indicate if stakeholder consultations have taken place and describe the key
inputs integrated into the action plan, including: how addressing the vulnerability will ensure equal participation and benefits from
funds investment; key gender-related results to be expected from the project/programme with targets; implementation
arrangements that the AE has put in place to ensure activities are implemented and expected outcomes will be achieved,
monitored, and evaluated.
The GGC fully adheres to the principle of country ownership, meaning that for each project that receives a guarantee, the GGC will
ensure that a Gender Assessment and Action Plan will be in place and in alignment with the requirements set out both by the GCF
and the prevailing international ratified legal frameworks, regional and national gender policies, or other public policy for gender
equality and women’s empowerment. More specifically, the GGC will ensure that:
• Project level gender assessments are conducted to inform the project design, budgeting, staffing, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation. These assessments must be underpinned by collection and analysis of sex disaggregated
data and meaningful gender sensitive stakeholder engagements, and must comply with the GCF’s Gender Policy
requirements.
• Project level action plans define the target population, and whether it is direct or indirect. Where possible, groups should
be disaggregated further (to identify vulnerable sub-groups, such as women-headed households).
• Project level risks are analyzed to ensure that activities do not exacerbate existing gender-related inequalities.
• Project owners have the requisite material, financial and human budgetary resources for the development and
implementation of project gender action plans and assessment (including resources for continued, meaningful gender-
sensitive stakeholder engagements during project implementation and operation). Where technical assistance needs are
identified to support a project owner in this regard, the GGC will look to provide such support.
Given the GGC has not yet identified a pipeline of projects, it is not possible –– to develop focused and detailed gender analyses,
assessments, and action plans that the GCF would typically require of a Full Funding Proposal. The GGC has however conducted
assessments on i) the gender-related vulnerabilities and capacities for change for each of the five results areas that GGC will look
to support; and ii) the key gender commitments, responsible institutions, and considerations (i.e., pressing issues that influence
gender equality and women’s empowerment issues) in each of the GGC’s 8 countries of focus. These assessments informed the
development of a gender framework (Table 6, Annex 8.1) that the GGC will use to identify potential gender-responsive interventions
that should be considered as part of the project design process to maximise the gender benefits of a specific project. The framework
also informed the project level quantitative and qualitative indicators that will be tracked in the GGC’s Gender Action Plan
In the context of the above, the GGC recognizes the importance of ensuring sound gender practices to avoid and/or minimize
potential financial and reputational liabilities and ensure benefits to women and girls are realized (and enhanced) through project
delivery. Consequently, the consideration of gender factors and safeguards forms an integral part of the GGC’s Transaction Selection
Process (Annex 24A) and related Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B) which is used to select transactions that ensure key gender
risks and impacts have been identified and are effectively managed throughout the transaction lifecycle. Some of the key factors

--- Table 1 on Page 71 ---
diligence on the borrower’s existing E&S documentation, processes, and systems to determine if they are compliant with
the requirements of GGC’s E&S Management Framework.
• In-country E&S specialist consultants will also be used where necessary to assist GGC in conducting ad hoc monitoring
and evaluation (M&E) of a selected transaction project, post financial-close, as well as working with a borrower to improve
their E&S Management competencies.
• A version of the due diligence report (compliant with GCF’s disclosure requirements) will be disclosed on the GGC website
and sent to GCF with a 30-day (calendar day) review period.
• Stakeholder engagement is an essential part of the Framework to facilitate the integration of gender considerations into
GGC’s financing lifecycle and decision making. In this context, stakeholder engagement denotes proactive ongoing
dialogue, information sharing and interactions between GGC and its stakeholders such as women led organizations. As
such, GGC commits to developing and implementing effective stakeholder engagement mechanisms (internally and
externally and as noted in Annex 7) to support a culture of transparency and accountability and learning and continual
improvement.
• Concerning external communication mechanisms, an important mechanism that will be implemented and maintained is a
grievance mechanism. This will support the process to effectively identify, receive, register, screen and evaluate, track, and
formally address complaints or feedback from stakeholders regarding the subproject activities.
• GGC will ensure that necessary and qualified E&S resources are employed at an organisational level to implement its
E&S Framework, and the commitments contained within.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme-level gender action plan that is aligned with the objectives
of GCF’s Gender Policy. Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process used to develop both
documents. Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key recommendations (how to address the
vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment. Indicate if stakeholder consultations have taken place and describe the key
inputs integrated into the action plan, including: how addressing the vulnerability will ensure equal participation and benefits from
funds investment; key gender-related results to be expected from the project/programme with targets; implementation
arrangements that the AE has put in place to ensure activities are implemented and expected outcomes will be achieved,
monitored, and evaluated.
The GGC fully adheres to the principle of country ownership, meaning that for each project that receives a guarantee, the GGC will
ensure that a Gender Assessment and Action Plan will be in place and in alignment with the requirements set out both by the GCF
and the prevailing international ratified legal frameworks, regional and national gender policies, or other public policy for gender
equality and women’s empowerment. More specifically, the GGC will ensure that:
• Project level gender assessments are conducted to inform the project design, budgeting, staffing, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation. These assessments must be underpinned by collection and analysis of sex disaggregated
data and meaningful gender sensitive stakeholder engagements, and must comply with the GCF’s Gender Policy
requirements.
• Project level action plans define the target population, and whether it is direct or indirect. Where possible, groups should
be disaggregated further (to identify vulnerable sub-groups, such as women-headed households).
• Project level risks are analyzed to ensure that activities do not exacerbate existing gender-related inequalities.
• Project owners have the requisite material, financial and human budgetary resources for the development and
implementation of project gender action plans and assessment (including resources for continued, meaningful gender-
sensitive stakeholder engagements during project implementation and operation). Where technical assistance needs are
identified to support a project owner in this regard, the GGC will look to provide such support.
Given the GGC has not yet identified a pipeline of projects, it is not possible –– to develop focused and detailed gender analyses,
assessments, and action plans that the GCF would typically require of a Full Funding Proposal. The GGC has however conducted
assessments on i) the gender-related vulnerabilities and capacities for change for each of the five results areas that GGC will look
to support; and ii) the key gender commitments, responsible institutions, and considerations (i.e., pressing issues that influence
gender equality and women’s empowerment issues) in each of the GGC’s 8 countries of focus. These assessments informed the
development of a gender framework (Table 6, Annex 8.1) that the GGC will use to identify potential gender-responsive interventions
that should be considered as part of the project design process to maximise the gender benefits of a specific project. The framework
also informed the project level quantitative and qualitative indicators that will be tracked in the GGC’s Gender Action Plan
In the context of the above, the GGC recognizes the importance of ensuring sound gender practices to avoid and/or minimize
potential financial and reputational liabilities and ensure benefits to women and girls are realized (and enhanced) through project
delivery. Consequently, the consideration of gender factors and safeguards forms an integral part of the GGC’s Transaction Selection
Process (Annex 24A) and related Transaction Scorecard (Annex 24B) which is used to select transactions that ensure key gender
risks and impacts have been identified and are effectively managed throughout the transaction lifecycle. Some of the key factors

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 68
F
include the appointment of an internal E&S/Gender expert and in-country gender specialists to be appointed on a project by project
basis. The gendered elements of this lifecycle are illustrated in the graphic below and elaborated in more detail in Annex 8.
In addition to this due diligence process, the GGC has made provisions for ensuring gender issues are adequately factored into, and
addressed, through the GGC’s stakeholder engagement and grievance processes. Both processes are designed to ensure that
engagement with, communication to/with, and participation of women (and other vulnerable groups) on both a project and
organizational level is suitably tailored (and transparently monitored and reported on) to local contexts as well as the GCF’s relevant
guidelines. Gender mainstreaming will be considered in all stages of the project cycle (design, formulation, implementation,
monitoring, and evaluation) by the project owner while GGC ensure that they are suitable ‘gender mainstreaming’ procedures,
checklists, and forms throughout the Environmental & Social Management System (ESMS) including checklists, gender assessment
and stakeholder consultation. GGC will also relay those projects must align to prevailing national and international strategies and
laws or other public policy for gender equality and women’s empowerment and will seek to align the project with other national
development strategies that promote equal opportunities, whether in the intervention region or the sector.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Describe the project/programme’s financial management including the financial monitoring systems, financial accounting, auditing,
and disbursement structure and methods. Refer to section B.4 on implementation arrangements as necessary.
Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention, e.g., procurement implementation arrangements and the role of the
AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken and how that will be managed by the
AE or the implementing agency. Provide a detailed procurement plan as annex 10.
All GGC’s management and reporting would be contracted to DGG. This will include delegated authority to make investment
decisions on behalf of GGC in line with a mandate approved by the GGC Board, to maintain GGC’s books of accounts, and to ensure
GGC’s policies and procedures are operationalized, including GGC’s procurement policy. This policy reflects the GGC’s commitment
to fair practices and sets out the objectives, the overall approach, key principles, and guidance for the acquisition of works, supplies
and services by GGC and related to the GGC’s activities. It is intended to control, guide, and serve as a reference for all procurement
within GGC. A copy of GGC’s proposed procurement plan is attached in annex 10.
GGC will appoint its auditor, tax advisors, fund administrators and a corporate secretary. These services will be procured in line with
GGC procurement policy and will be approved by the Board of GGC.

--- Table 1 on Page 72 ---
include the appointment of an internal E&S/Gender expert and in-country gender specialists to be appointed on a project by project
basis. The gendered elements of this lifecycle are illustrated in the graphic below and elaborated in more detail in Annex 8.
In addition to this due diligence process, the GGC has made provisions for ensuring gender issues are adequately factored into, and
addressed, through the GGC’s stakeholder engagement and grievance processes. Both processes are designed to ensure that
engagement with, communication to/with, and participation of women (and other vulnerable groups) on both a project and
organizational level is suitably tailored (and transparently monitored and reported on) to local contexts as well as the GCF’s relevant
guidelines. Gender mainstreaming will be considered in all stages of the project cycle (design, formulation, implementation,
monitoring, and evaluation) by the project owner while GGC ensure that they are suitable ‘gender mainstreaming’ procedures,
checklists, and forms throughout the Environmental & Social Management System (ESMS) including checklists, gender assessment
and stakeholder consultation. GGC will also relay those projects must align to prevailing national and international strategies and
laws or other public policy for gender equality and women’s empowerment and will seek to align the project with other national
development strategies that promote equal opportunities, whether in the intervention region or the sector. |  | 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | Describe the project/programme’s financial management including the financial monitoring systems, financial accounting, auditing, | 
 | and disbursement structure and methods. Refer to section B.4 on implementation arrangements as necessary. | 
 | Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention, e.g., procurement implementation arrangements and the role of the | 
 | AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken and how that will be managed by the | 
 | AE or the implementing agency. Provide a detailed procurement plan as annex 10. | 
 | All GGC’s management and reporting would be contracted to DGG. This will include delegated authority to make investment | 
 | decisions on behalf of GGC in line with a mandate approved by the GGC Board, to maintain GGC’s books of accounts, and to ensure | 
 | GGC’s policies and procedures are operationalized, including GGC’s procurement policy. This policy reflects the GGC’s commitment | 
 | to fair practices and sets out the objectives, the overall approach, key principles, and guidance for the acquisition of works, supplies | 
 | and services by GGC and related to the GGC’s activities. It is intended to control, guide, and serve as a reference for all procurement | 
 | within GGC. A copy of GGC’s proposed procurement plan is attached in annex 10. | 
 |  | 
 | GGC will appoint its auditor, tax advisors, fund administrators and a corporate secretary. These services will be procured in line with | 
 | GGC procurement policy and will be approved by the Board of GGC. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 69
F
There will be a clear delegation of authority to DGG which will be described in a Management Agreement and DGG will be staffed
by a dedicated team of professionals with extensive experience in writing guarantees and development impact and will be managed
by Lasitha Perera, Boo Hock Khoo and Dale Petrie with oversight and support from CD.
GGC will invest initial capital in highly rated, highly liquid securities. This would be a regulated activity within the UK; however, the
commercial intention is for GGC to outsource investment activities to fully regulated third-party investment manager (e.g., PIMCO,
Fidelity etc.). This out-sourcing model is not uncommon and would negate the need for DGG or GGC to seek direct regulatory
authorisation. Depending on the type of investments made by the third-party investment manager, GGC may also need to appoint a
custodian. GGC is yet to appoint a third-party investment manager and custodian (if required). These services will be procured in
line with GGC’s procurement policy prior to GGC being capitalised and the successful firms will be approved by the Board of GGC.
The regulatory standing of third-party providers will be reviewed as part of the tender process and suitable asset management
agreements, including a detailed investment policy, will be agreed prior to onboarding the third-party investment manager.
The DGG Executive team will meet regularly with the GGC Board to review the performance of GGC against key performance
indicators (which will include, amongst other things, delivery against GGC’s mandate and financial performance).
The Chairperson of GGC and the Managing Partner of DGG will meet regularly with GGC’s shareholders to discuss, amongst other
things, the performance of GGC and investors will have the ability to request information from DGG (with respect to GGC) as
required.
GGC and DGG will have a Code of Conduct (setting out the minimum standards of ethical behavior required of both entities) which
will be supported by a suite of operating policies and procedures to ensure compliance with the Code.
To ensure DGG acts on the delegated authority provided to it by GGC in the interest of GGC, DGG will set up four committees ((1)
Asset and Liability Committee, (2) Impact Committee, (3) Credit Committee, and (4) Risk and Audit Committee) to provide oversight
of these activities. These committees will also manage the risks that GGC will be exposed to, which could include reputational,
operational and compliance, capital and liquidity, credit, market, and political risks. All committees will have terms of references
which will be approved by the GGC Board, and the minutes of these committees will be accessible by the GGC Board. Further details
of the four DGG Committees are set out in the Operations Manual (Operating Plan) (see Annex 21).
DGG will seek to monitor and control GGC’s risk exposure through a variety of separate but complementary financial, credit,
operational and legal reporting systems, and risk management frameworks in line with GGC’s Risk Management Framework.
Further details of GGC’s Risk Management Framework are set out in Annex 26.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure for all
information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information
that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception
should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed
without prejudice or harm.
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be disclosed in
full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may not be
disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing
to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the accredited entity’s
disclosure policy, and
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
 | There will be a clear delegation of authority to DGG which will be described in a Management Agreement and DGG will be staffed | 
 | by a dedicated team of professionals with extensive experience in writing guarantees and development impact and will be managed | 
 | by Lasitha Perera, Boo Hock Khoo and Dale Petrie with oversight and support from CD. | 
 |  | 
 | GGC will invest initial capital in highly rated, highly liquid securities. This would be a regulated activity within the UK; however, the | 
 | commercial intention is for GGC to outsource investment activities to fully regulated third-party investment manager (e.g., PIMCO, | 
 | Fidelity etc.). This out-sourcing model is not uncommon and would negate the need for DGG or GGC to seek direct regulatory | 
 | authorisation. Depending on the type of investments made by the third-party investment manager, GGC may also need to appoint a | 
 | custodian. GGC is yet to appoint a third-party investment manager and custodian (if required). These services will be procured in | 
 | line with GGC’s procurement policy prior to GGC being capitalised and the successful firms will be approved by the Board of GGC. | 
 | The regulatory standing of third-party providers will be reviewed as part of the tender process and suitable asset management | 
 | agreements, including a detailed investment policy, will be agreed prior to onboarding the third-party investment manager. | 
 |  | 
 | The DGG Executive team will meet regularly with the GGC Board to review the performance of GGC against key performance | 
 | indicators (which will include, amongst other things, delivery against GGC’s mandate and financial performance). | 
 |  | 
 | The Chairperson of GGC and the Managing Partner of DGG will meet regularly with GGC’s shareholders to discuss, amongst other | 
 | things, the performance of GGC and investors will have the ability to request information from DGG (with respect to GGC) as | 
 | required. | 
 |  | 
 | GGC and DGG will have a Code of Conduct (setting out the minimum standards of ethical behavior required of both entities) which | 
 | will be supported by a suite of operating policies and procedures to ensure compliance with the Code. | 
 |  | 
 | To ensure DGG acts on the delegated authority provided to it by GGC in the interest of GGC, DGG will set up four committees ((1) | 
 | Asset and Liability Committee, (2) Impact Committee, (3) Credit Committee, and (4) Risk and Audit Committee) to provide oversight | 
 | of these activities. These committees will also manage the risks that GGC will be exposed to, which could include reputational, | 
 | operational and compliance, capital and liquidity, credit, market, and political risks. All committees will have terms of references | 
 | which will be approved by the GGC Board, and the minutes of these committees will be accessible by the GGC Board. Further details | 
 | of the four DGG Committees are set out in the Operations Manual (Operating Plan) (see Annex 21). | 
 |  | 
 | DGG will seek to monitor and control GGC’s risk exposure through a variety of separate but complementary financial, credit, | 
 | operational and legal reporting systems, and risk management frameworks in line with GGC’s Risk Management Framework. | 
 | Further details of GGC’s Risk Management Framework are set out in Annex 26. | 
 |  | 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal |  | 
 | Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure for all | 
 | information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and programme funding proposals | 
 | will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information | 
 | that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception | 
 | should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed | 
 | without prejudice or harm. | 
 | Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. | 
 |  | 
 | ☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be disclosed in | 
 | full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | ☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may not be | 
 | disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing | 
 | to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 | • full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an | 
 | explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the accredited entity’s | 
 | disclosure policy, and | 
 | • redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information. | 

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 70
H
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☒ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☒ Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, Indigenous
People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation, and insurance)
☒ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
☒ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☒ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☐ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☒ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence, or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot project
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed by
the entity
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☒ Annex 21 Operations Manual (Operating Plan)
☒ Annex 22 Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and cross cutting-
projects)29
☒ Annex 23 Guarantee Policy
☒ Annex 24A Transaction Selection Process
☒ Annex 24B Transaction Scorecard
☒ Annex 24C Example Transactions (adaptation and mitigation)
☒ Annex 25 Theory of Change
☒ Annex 26 Risk Management Framework

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
ANNEXES |  |  |  | 
H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☒ |  | Annex 3 | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 6 | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☒ Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, Indigenous
People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) | 
☒ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☒ |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation, and insurance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
 | H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☒ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence, or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot project | 
☐ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed by
the entity | 
☒ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment | 
☒ |  | Annex 21 | Operations Manual (Operating Plan) | 
☒ |  | Annex 22 | Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and cross cutting-
projects)29 | 
☒ |  | Annex 23 | Guarantee Policy | 
☒
☒ |  | Annex 24A
Annex 24B | Transaction Selection Process
Transaction Scorecard | 

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 71
H
☒ Annex 27 Treasury Policy
☒ Annex 28 Review of Green and Climate Bond and Loans Standards and Certifications
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.
29 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.

=== PAGE 76 ===
14/04/22, 11:24 SEI/ME - 23742553 - Ofício 72
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
Secretariat for International Affairs
National Designated Authority for the Green Climate Fund
Esplanada dos Ministérios, Bloco P, 2º andar, sala 219-B
CEP 70048-900 - Brasília/DF - (61) 3412-2296 - e-mail and.gcf@fazenda.gov.br
OFÍCIO SEI Nº 98050/2022/ME
Brasília, 13 de junho de 2021.
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Deputy Executive Director
Green Climate Fund
G-Tower, 24-4 Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu
Incheon City, Republic of Korea
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group (MUFG) regarding the
program "Green Guarantee Company"
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
1. We refer to the program titled "Green Guarantee Company" as included in the funding
proposal submitted by Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group (MUFG) to us on January 19th, 2022.
2. The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Secretariat for International
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Economy, the National Designated Authority of Brazil.
3. Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.
4. By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
a) The government of Brazil has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal;
b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Brazil’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;
c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
5. We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
6. We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within the scope of the programme.
7. We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
https://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador.php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=26643500&infr… 1/2

--- Table 1 on Page 76 ---
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
Secretariat for International Affairs
National Designated Authority for the Green Climate Fund
Esplanada dos Ministérios, Bloco P, 2º andar, sala 219-B
CEP 70048-900 - Brasília/DF - (61) 3412-2296 - e-mail and.gcf@fazenda.gov.br
OFÍCIO SEI Nº 98050/2022/ME
Brasília, 13 de junho de 2021.
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Deputy Executive Director
Green Climate Fund
G-Tower, 24-4 Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu
Incheon City, Republic of Korea
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group (MUFG) regarding the
program "Green Guarantee Company"
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
1. We refer to the program titled "Green Guarantee Company" as included in the funding
proposal submitted by Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group (MUFG) to us on January 19th, 2022.
2. The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Secretariat for International
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Economy, the National Designated Authority of Brazil.
3. Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.
4. By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
a) The government of Brazil has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal;
b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Brazil’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;
c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
5. We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
6. We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within the scope of the programme.
7. We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
ttps://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador.php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=26643500&infr… 1/2


=== PAGE 77 ===
14/04/22, 11:24 SEI/ME - 23742553 - Ofício 73
Best regards,
Documento assinado eletronicamente
ERIVALDO ALFREDO GOMES
Secretary for International Economic Affairs
National Designated Authority for Brazil
Documento assinado eletronicamente por Erivaldo Alfredo Gomes, Secretário(a) de Assuntos
Econômicos Internacionais, em 13/04/2022, às 18:21, conforme horário oficial de Brasília, com
fundamento no § 3º do art. 4º do Decreto nº 10.543, de 13 de novembro de 2020.
A auten cidade deste documento pode ser conferida no site
h ps://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador_externo.php?
acao=documento_conferir&id_orgao_acesso_externo=0, informando o código verificador 23742553
e o código CRC 95022E79.
Processo nº 12120.100384/2021-15. SEI nº 23742553
https://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador.php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=26643500&infr… 2/2

--- Table 1 on Page 77 ---

4/04/22, 11:24 SEI/ME - 23742553 - Ofício 73
Best regards,
Documento assinado eletronicamente
ERIVALDO ALFREDO GOMES
Secretary for International Economic Affairs
National Designated Authority for Brazil
Documento assinado eletronicamente por Erivaldo Alfredo Gomes, Secretário(a) de Assuntos
Econômicos Internacionais, em 13/04/2022, às 18:21, conforme horário oficial de Brasília, com
fundamento no § 3º do art. 4º do Decreto nº 10.543, de 13 de novembro de 2020.
A auten cidade deste documento pode ser conferida no site
h ps://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador_externo.php?
acao=documento_conferir&id_orgao_acesso_externo=0, informando o código verificador 23742553
e o código CRC 95022E79.
Processo nº 12120.100384/2021-15. SEI nº 23742553

=== PAGE 78 ===
74

=== PAGE 79 ===
75

=== PAGE 80 ===
76
MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO BUILDING 2ND FLOOR JALAN DR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710
TELEPHONE (+62 21) 3441484; FACSIMILE (+62 21) 3848049; WEBSITE www.fiskal.kemenkeu.go.id
Ref. : S-35/KF/2022 11 March 2022
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund
175, Art center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 406-840
Republic of Korea
Subject : Funding Proposal for the GCF by MUFG Bank regarding Green Guarantee
Company (GGC)
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
We refer to the program of Green Guarantee Company (GGC) as included in the funding proposal
submitted by MUFG Bank to us on 25 January 2022.
The undersigned is the Chairman of Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance as the National
Designated Authority of Indonesia.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the program as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Indonesia has no-objection to the program as included in the funding
proposal;
(b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Indonesia’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the program as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to program as included in
the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within
the scope of the program.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Yours faithfully,
Ditandatangani secara elektronik
Febrio Nathan Kacaribu
Chairman

--- Table 1 on Page 80 ---
 | MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
 | FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
 | R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO BUILDING 2ND FLOOR JALAN DR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710
TELEPHONE (+62 21) 3441484; FACSIMILE (+62 21) 3848049; WEBSITE www.fiskal.kemenkeu.go.id
 | 

--- Table 2 on Page 80 ---
Ref. | : | S-35/KF/2022 | 11 March 2022

--- Table 3 on Page 80 ---
Subject | : | Funding Proposal for the GCF by MUFG Bank regarding Green Guarantee
Company (GGC)

--- Table 4 on Page 80 ---
 | Yours faithfully,
 | Ditandatangani secara elektronik
 | Febrio Nathan Kacaribu
Chairman

=== PAGE 81 ===
77
Dokumen ini telah ditandatangani menggunakan sertifikat elektronik yang diterbitkan oleh Balai Sertfikat Elektronik (BSrE), BSSN. Untuk memastikan keaslian tanda tangan
elektronik, silakan pindai QR Code pada laman https://office.kemenkeu.go.id atau unggah dokumen pada laman https://tte.kominfo.go.id/verifyPDF

=== PAGE 82 ===
78

=== PAGE 83 ===
79

=== PAGE 84 ===
80

=== PAGE 85 ===
81

=== PAGE 86 ===
82

=== PAGE 87 ===
83

=== PAGE 88 ===
84
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Project or programme title Green Guarantee Company (“GGC”)
Existence of subproject(s) to
be identified after GCF Board Yes
approval
Sector (public or private) Private
Accredited entity MUFG Bank, Ltd.
Environmental and social
Category I-2
safeguards (ESS) category
Location – specific location(s)
Brazil, Gabon, India, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Philippines, and
of project or target country
Trinidad and Tobago*
or location(s) of programme
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on accredited
N/A
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
Other link(s) N/A
Remarks N/A
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on accredited
N/A
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
Other link(s) N/A
Remarks N/A
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on accredited
Friday, September 16, 2022
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English, Bahasa Indonesia, French, Lao, and Portuguese*
These are an/the official languages of each of the target
Explanation on language
countries.
Environmental and Social Management System
English:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/system_english.pdf
Link to disclosure
Bahasa Indonesia:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/system_indonesian.pdf

--- Table 1 on Page 88 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  | 
Project or programme title |  |  | Green Guarantee Company (“GGC”) | 
 | Existence of subproject(s) to |  | Yes | 
 | be identified after GCF Board |  |  | 
 | approval |  |  | 
Sector (public or private) |  |  | Private | 
Accredited entity |  |  | MUFG Bank, Ltd. | 
 | Environmental and social |  | Category I-2 | 
 | safeguards (ESS) category |  |  | 
 | Location – specific location(s) |  | Brazil, Gabon, India, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Philippines, and
Trinidad and Tobago* | 
 | of project or target country |  |  | 
 | or location(s) of programme |  |  | 
 | Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on accredited |  | N/A | 
 | entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Other link(s) |  | N/A | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
 | Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on accredited |  | N/A | 
 | entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Other link(s) |  | N/A | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
 | Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on accredited |  | Friday, September 16, 2022 | 
 | entity’s website |  |  | 
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English, Bahasa Indonesia, French, Lao, and Portuguese* | 
Explanation on language |  |  | These are an/the official languages of each of the target
countries. | 
Link to disclosure |  |  | Environmental and Social Management System
English:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/system_english.pdf
Bahasa Indonesia:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/system_indonesian.pdf | 

=== PAGE 89 ===
85
French:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/system_french.pdf
Lao:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/system_lao.pd
Portuguese:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/system_portuguese.pdf
ESMS Appendices
English:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/appendices_english.pdf
Bahasa Indonesia:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/appendices_indonesian.pdf
French:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/appendices_french.pdf
Lao:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/appendices_lao.pdf
Portuguese:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/appendices_portuguese.pdf
Other link(s) N/A
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
Remarks 2 programme is contained in the “Environmental and
Social Management System”.
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)
Description of
report/disclosure on accredited Friday, September 16, 2022
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English, Bahasa Indonesia, French, Lao, and Portuguese
These are an/the official languages of each of the target
Explanation on language
countries.
Gender Assessment
English:
Link to disclosure https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/assessment_english.pdf

--- Table 1 on Page 89 ---
 |  |  | French:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/system_french.pdf
Lao:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/system_lao.pd
Portuguese:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/system_portuguese.pdf
ESMS Appendices
English:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/appendices_english.pdf
Bahasa Indonesia:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/appendices_indonesian.pdf
French:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/appendices_french.pdf
Lao:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/appendices_lao.pdf
Portuguese:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/appendices_portuguese.pdf | 
 | Other link(s) |  | N/A | 
Remarks |  |  | An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
2 programme is contained in the “Environmental and
Social Management System”. | 
 | Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement |  |  | 
 | Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Description of |  | Friday, September 16, 2022 | 
 | report/disclosure on accredited |  |  | 
 | entity’s website |  |  | 
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English, Bahasa Indonesia, French, Lao, and Portuguese | 
Explanation on language |  |  | These are an/the official languages of each of the target
countries. | 
Link to disclosure |  |  | Gender Assessment
English:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/assessment_english.pdf | 

=== PAGE 90 ===
86
Bahasa Indonesia:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/assessment_indonesian.pdf
French:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/assessment_french.pdf
Lao:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/assessment_lao.pdf
Portuguese:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/assessment_portuguese.pdf*
Gender Action Plan
English:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/plan_english.pdf
Bahasa Indonesia:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/plan_indonesian.pdf
French:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/plan_french.pdf
Lao:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/plan_lao.pdf
Portuguese:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/plan_portuguese.pdf*
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
English:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/policy_english.pdf
Bahasa Indonesia:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/policy_indonesian.pdf
French:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/policy_french.pdf
Lao:

--- Table 1 on Page 90 ---
 | Bahasa Indonesia:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/assessment_indonesian.pdf
French:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/assessment_french.pdf
Lao:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/assessment_lao.pdf
Portuguese:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/assessment_portuguese.pdf*
Gender Action Plan
English:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/plan_english.pdf
Bahasa Indonesia:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/plan_indonesian.pdf
French:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/plan_french.pdf
Lao:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/plan_lao.pdf
Portuguese:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/plan_portuguese.pdf*
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
English:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/policy_english.pdf
Bahasa Indonesia:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/policy_indonesian.pdf
French:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/policy_french.pdf
Lao:

=== PAGE 91 ===
87
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/policy_lao.pdf
Portuguese:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
p andinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/policy_portuguese.pdf*
Other link(s) N/A
Remarks N/A
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
Date W ednesday, June 15, 2022
Brazil:
Banco MUFG Brazil S.A.
Av. Paulista 1274-Bela Vista, Zip code 01310-925 Sao Paulo-SP
Gabon:
National Climate Council BP3850, Libreville, Gabon
India:
5th Floor, Worldmark 2, Asset 8, Aerocity, New Delhi
110037, India
Indonesia:
MUFG Bank Jakarta Branch
Trinity Tower, Lt. 6-9, Jl. H.R. Rasuna Said Kav. C22 Blok IIB
Place Jakarta 12940, Indonesia
Lao PDR:
Bank of Ayudhya (Krungsri)
Baan Hassadi, 084/1-2 , Lane Xang Avenue, P.O. Box 5072
Chanthaboury District, Vientiane, Lao. P.D.R.
Philippines:
MUFG Bank Manila Branch 898 Ploenchit Tower, 9th Floor
Zone B1, Philippines
Trinidad and Tobago:
Ministry of Planning and Development
Level 14, Eric Williams Finance Building, Independence
Square, Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago*
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
Date of accredited entity’s
TBD
Board meeting
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, October 17, 2022
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.
*Subsequent to the disclosure of the form to the Board and active observers on 16 September
2022, the following update has been made: Bangladesh has been deleted as it has not provided
the NOL by the B.34 publication deadline.

--- Table 1 on Page 91 ---
 |  |  | https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
pandinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/policy_lao.pdf
Portuguese:
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/cor
p andinvest/gcf/ggc/pdf/policy_portuguese.pdf* | 
 | Other link(s) |  | N/A | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
 | Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
Date |  |  | W ednesday, June 15, 2022 | 
Place |  |  | Brazil:
Banco MUFG Brazil S.A.
Av. Paulista 1274-Bela Vista, Zip code 01310-925 Sao Paulo-SP
Gabon:
National Climate Council BP3850, Libreville, Gabon
India:
5th Floor, Worldmark 2, Asset 8, Aerocity, New Delhi
110037, India
Indonesia:
MUFG Bank Jakarta Branch
Trinity Tower, Lt. 6-9, Jl. H.R. Rasuna Said Kav. C22 Blok IIB
Jakarta 12940, Indonesia
Lao PDR:
Bank of Ayudhya (Krungsri)
Baan Hassadi, 084/1-2 , Lane Xang Avenue, P.O. Box 5072
Chanthaboury District, Vientiane, Lao. P.D.R.
Philippines:
MUFG Bank Manila Branch 898 Ploenchit Tower, 9th Floor
Zone B1, Philippines
Trinidad and Tobago:
Ministry of Planning and Development
Level 14, Eric Williams Finance Building, Independence
Square, Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago* | 
 | Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered |  |  | 
 | Date of accredited entity’s |  | TBD | 
 | Board meeting |  |  | 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting |  |  | Monday, October 17, 2022 | 

--- Table 2 on Page 91 ---
MUFG Bank Jakarta Branch
Trinity Tower, Lt. 6-9, Jl. H.R. Rasuna Said Kav. C22 Blok IIB
Jakarta 12940, Indonesia

--- Table 3 on Page 91 ---
Bank of Ayudhya (Krungsri)
Baan Hassadi, 084/1-2 , Lane Xang Avenue, P.O. Box 5072
Chanthaboury District, Vientiane, Lao. P.D.R.

--- Table 4 on Page 91 ---
MUFG Bank Manila Branch 898 Ploenchit Tower, 9th Floor
Zone B1, Philippines

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 88
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP200
Proposal name: Green Guarantee Company
Accredited entity: MUFG Bank, Ltd.
Project/programme size: Large
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 Impact potential Scale: medium
1. There is indisputably an urgent need to scale up climate finance in developing countries
to meet specific nationally determined contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement. Green
bonds and loans have proved to be an important option. The issuances of green bonds amounted
to USD 1 trillion in cumulative issuance from 2007 to 2020, with issuance of USD 295 billion in
2020. However, in 2020, just 8.9 billion (or just 3 per cent) was issued in developing countries. In
the past year, green bond issuances in developing countries have been static, reflecting not only
the effects of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic but also the markets’ aversion
to risks in these countries.
2. There is an opportunity to attract global capital markets as, according to the World Bank,
global investors allocate less than 2 per cent of their asset base to infrastructure investment in
developing countries, which is insufficient to meet the climate finance gap. However, global
institutional investors rarely invest in non-investment grade debt.
3. Increasing green bond and loan issuance from developing countries represents a
significant market opportunity for global investors seeking to align their investment strategies
with environmental considerations. A green bond or loan can be defined as any type of bond or
loan instrument where the proceeds will be exclusively applied to finance new and/or existing
eligible green projects, including those focused on addressing the impact of climate change.
However, as this assessment will indicate, not all green projects are climate projects, and
differentiation between these should be clear when seeking ways to ensure climate impacts.
4. One of the instruments that could attract capital markets to support climate finance is a
guarantee. The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development defines a guarantee
as “a legally binding agreement under which the guarantor agrees to pay any or all of the
amount due on a loan instrument in the event of non-payment by the borrower1”.
5. The Green Guarantee Company (GGC) will seek to provide guarantees to global investors
to catalyse their investments in green bonds and green loans issued from developing countries.
GGC is a newly created company established by three individual partners and Cardano
Development B.V. As yet the company has no track record, and therefore offers the experience of
its founding partners in managing guarantees. Since the submission of the first funding proposal
for the thirty-third meeting of the Board (B.33) and the current proposal, GGC has changed one
1 See
https://stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=5966#:~:text=OECD%20Statistics,of%20nonpayment%20by%20the
%20borrower.

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 89
of its three individual founding members. The company will work with five international banks
(origination partners) and rely on their infrastructure and standards to originate bond products,
reduce execution risk and increase opportunities to scale at speed.
6. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) understands that there is a need to have
guarantee structures focused on addressing the real climate finance gap that exists in attracting
international and national investors to support climate bonds and loans in developing countries.
Moreover, the independent TAP sees the need to solve the current key inefficacy of GCF in issuing
guarantees, owing to the lack of credit rating that only allows for a 1:1 leverage ratio on
guarantees.
7. The independent TAP evaluated the GGC proposal for B.33 and provided the proponents
with several comments on different aspects of the investment criteria. The proponents came back
shortly thereafter with a new funding proposal to be submitted to B.34, which addresses some of
the concerns raised by the independent TAP but leaves other important concerns unresolved. If
the Board chooses to go ahead and endorse the GGC programme, it must do so with the
understanding that this is a high-risk high-reward programme, with some of the risks related to
these unresolved concerns raised by the independent TAP.
8. The proponents present a step-by-step process for the GCF-funded programme, as
follows:
(a) Formation and capitalization of GGC: GGC has been formed as a private limited
company in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and will be
eventually capitalized with USD 250 million of equity. The equity will be raised in two
tranches, with an initial tranche of USD 100 million raised to enable GGC to commence
operations and the second tranche of USD 150 million raised within 24 months to
support its growth. A parent company, the Development Guarantee Group Ltd. (DGG),
also registered in the United Kingdom by the same partners, will act as the manager,
running the day-to-day operations of GGC. There will be a management agreement
between GGC and DGG which will outline the services that will be provided by the latter
party and on what terms.
(b) Secure investment grade credit rating for GGC: the funding proposal states that GGC
will need to secure an investment grade rating with any one of the three international
credit rating agencies, Fitch, Moody’s or Standard & Poor’s, to provide institutional
investors in global credit and capital markets with the assurance that GGC is a
creditworthy counterpart on whose guarantees they can rely. Responding to a question
on this from the independent TAP, MUFG Bank, Ltd. (MUFG), the accredited entity (AE),
indicated that GGC has recently secured a triple B rating from Fitch.
(c) Identify, execute and financially structure guarantees that mobilize institutional
capital in global credit and capital markets to fund climate change mitigation and
adaptation projects in developing countries: GGC will undertake the activities
outlined in figure 1 to work with origination partners to identify climate change
mitigation and adaptation projects which are aligned with the eligibility criteria outlined
in the GGC Guarantee Policy and will approve, provide financial structuring support for
and execute transactions in accordance with the guarantee process articulated in the
Guarantee Policy. The proponents are guided by a transaction scorecard, which screens
a transaction for which a guarantee could be provided against impact criteria, and the
GGC Guarantee Policy, which screens the transaction against eligibility criteria (e.g.
sector). This screening of transactions should enable GGC to ensure that guarantees are
provided with GCF funds only for loans and bonds that can demonstrate that they will
have a significant climate change adaptation and/or mitigation impact (as opposed, for
example, to a general positive environmental impact).

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 90
(d) Manage and report on portfolio of guarantees for risk management, performance
and impact: this will include providing active risk management of the guarantee
portfolio; providing support to borrowers in developing impact reporting frameworks;
regular monitoring and preparation of documentation to report performance,
environmental, social and governance issues and key climate performance indicators of
borrowers; and advocating publicly to leverage more funds, including technical
assistance funding to support borrowers.
(e) Establish commercial viability of GGC and facilitate exit for GCF, the Foreign,
Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO) of the United Kingdom and the
United States Development Finance Corporation (DFC): this involves assessing and
developing an exit strategy for GCF and other potential funders and executing the exit. It
is noted that the fund is expecting GCF to be part of GGC for 20 years but it may be
possible for the exit to be made earlier.
9. The proponents further present a structure indicating how the GGC will work in the
world, as seen in Figure 1, that needs to be revised in terms of countries involved, the inclusion
of climate change reporting instead of SDG & ESG reporting and pricing.
Figure 1: How the Green Guarantee Company will work
10. The most important priority is to ensure that in each of the above-mentioned steps, there
is a critical analysis of the climate change impacts. GGC will need to demonstrate how the loans
and bonds for which guarantees are proposed to be provided expect to have a clear adaptation
and/or mitigation impact and establish a robust structure to ensure that all relevant parties
clearly understand and ensure climate impacts. GGC must retain a strong orientation towards the
adaptation and/or mitigation logic of the investments as the basis for initial project selection and,
critically, for thorough monitoring of results over time in terms of the GCF Integrated Results
Management Framework.
11. The proponents included a list of eligible climate projects in annex 23 to the funding
proposal – GGC Guarantee Policy, with a taxonomy list derived from the Climate Bonds Standard
of the Climate Bonds Initiative (CBI), which provides general sector-specific eligibility criteria for
assets and projects that can be used for climate bonds. From the CBI standards, the proponents
included the following sectors: (1) alternative energy (solar, wind, geothermal), bioenergy and
transmission and distribution; (2) transport; (3) water; (4) buildings; and (5) waste and pollution
control. However, the screening indicators of this tool are mainly oriented towards the first
screening process and have limited indicators on greenhouse gas emissions and no adaptation
indicators. Moreover, as explained in the paradigm shift section (section 1.2 below), GGC should

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 91
be able to define its own standards and allow best practices and even combinations of standards
(European Union, Asian, CBI) for particular transactions, as the world is evolving to develop
better taxonomy systems that enable a better understanding of what is and what is not a climate
investment.
12. The proponents have also provided a transaction selection process (annex 24A to the
funding proposal), involving five core elements: climate change adaptation, climate change
mitigation, climate certification, gender and social inclusion, and environmental and social (E&S)
aspects.
13. With the CBI Climate Bonds Standard as the primary standard in the transaction selection
process, the independent TAP sees an issue with principle 5 (Mitigation Trade-offs Assessed) –
“Climate mitigation requirements may be lowered for climate resilience focused assets or
activities whose resilience benefits considerably outweigh associated emissions or serve to avoid
GHG emissions in the event of a disaster." Principle 5 indicates that a potential adaptation project
can be considered even if the proposed project may continue, or even increase, greenhouse gas
emissions. Even though principle 5 is correct, the independent TAP would recommend making
sure that in a case where planned adaptation measures will be accompanied by an increase in
emissions, relevant mitigation measures are implemented for maximum avoidance of increase or
limitation of such emissions.
14. The proponents indicate that the process of ensuring climate change impacts will have
checks and balances in each of the steps. As presented in figure 2, the process involves: (1)
origination of the transaction with key documents; (2) an initial due diligence based on submitted
documentation; (3) review and challenge, in which the screening note is assessed and it is
determined whether all seven requirements are met by in-house and external specialists as well
as the GGC Impact Committee; (4) the due diligence that will be conducted by the climate change
specialists of the Impact Team and in-country specialists, and will result in a detailed transaction
due diligence report presented to the Investment Team, including evidence of the E&S, gender
and CBI standards; (5) remediation and disclosure, in which the DGG Impact Team under the
guidance of the GGC Impact Committee will work to assist the borrower to develop a remediation
strategy to address the gaps/deviations of the project. The borrower is required to commit to
delivering on the strategy within a pre-agreed time frame. The transaction will be rejected by the
DGG Impact Team only if the borrower does not commit or expresses a clear reluctance to develop
or deliver the remediation strategy; (6) a monitoring and evaluation strategy developed by the
GGC Impact Committee in collaboration with the GGC in-country specialists, consultants and the
borrower. This is managed in parallel with the remediation step, ensuring a clear commitment by
the borrower; and (7) in the approval process, the GGC Impact Committee will review the
transaction scorecard, detailed transaction Due Diligence report, remediation strategy and
monitoring and evaluation strategy and decide to approve the transaction and pass it to the Credit
Committee, which will in turn revise the commercial and financial aspects to issue a formal
approval. If the Impact Committee has residual concerns, the credit team will be asked to go back
to step 5.
15. It remains of concern to the independent TAP that in the transaction selection process,
there seems to be little room for rejecting a project, as there is always room for remediation.
Moreover, it seems that the climate experts who form part of the DGG Impact Team could end
up as both proponent and adjudicator – participating in the process of supporting the project
proponents in improving their projects while at the same time being responsible for approving
or rejecting a project. Although the independent TAP fully recognizes the importance of a
remediation process for local capacity-building in developing countries, it still expresses
concern that criteria for rejecting a project are not yet clear and well formulated. On the other
hand, the independent TAP would like to clearly see that good projects having significant
climate change added value will not be rejected owing to weak financial components and

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 92
remediation will be dedicated to the improvement of climate change components as well as
financial aspects, making them attractive, reliable and less risky to the investors.
Figure 2: Transaction process
16. The proponents included the details of the transaction scorecard in annex 24B to the
funding proposal. The scorecard has an initial screening with four initial due diligence questions
that need further refinement. In the first question the sector categories to which a project must
be allocated are different from the ones in the GGC Guarantee Policy. The second question
requires that the documents be in place to adhere to the CBI standards, which is not a correct
initial screening demand. The scorecard covers the climate change mitigation and adaptation
scores with clear questions. However, when it comes to using the CBI standards and the required
alignment with the Rio markers for climate, the scorecard is confusing. CBI provides sector
eligibility criteria for assets and projects that can be used for climate and green bonds, and the
Rio markers, developed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, screen
climate projects for the allocation of financial flows. The independent TAP believes that the
project proponents should define their own initial eligibility criteria, in accordance with their
own definitions and their main interests, based on the market analysis of the eligible sectors in
the no-objection letter (NOL) countries. Moreover, the scorecard instructions should be clearer.
17. In terms of the expected adaptation and mitigation impacts, the proponents selected a
mock portfolio approach with reference projects. For mitigation projects, the proponents used
greenhouse gas accounting and calculation methodologies prescribed by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (2006, with the 2021 additions) and the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. The proponents estimate that GGC will have an estimated
mitigation impact of 74 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (Mt CO eq). However, since
2
the real mitigation impact will not be known until the loans and bonds have been issued and the
investment projects have been undertaken, it is vital that GGC tracks its impact, both to inform
and to improve the ongoing screening process, and to report back on this impact via MUFG to
GCF.
18. For adaptation projects, the proponents presented a rough estimate of potential direct
and indirect beneficiaries in each of the selected countries, based on a selection of very broad
adaptation results area sectors according to the country’s NDC priorities (mainly health, food,
water security, and infrastructure and buildings), using a dollar-to-beneficiary ratio, with a sex
disaggregation of 50-50. In the absence of concrete projects, the estimates of 16,295,956 direct
beneficiaries and 18,343,300 indirect beneficiaries over a 20-year time frame seem high. Once

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 93
again, it will be important to track the number of people actually benefiting from the investments
enabled by the guaranteed loans and bonds.
19. In general, the transaction scorecard is on the right track of screening potential mitigation
and adaptation transactions but will need ongoing refinement of the currently somewhat
simplistic definitions to ensure that use of the tool leads to optimal decisions on allocations of
guarantee funding to large adaptation and mitigation investments.
20. In terms of adaptation, for example, the proponents will need to develop a better sense of
the extent of the hazard, or frequency and/or timing of occurrence of the hazard, etc., and relate
these elements to the assessed adverse impacts that the proposed investment or part of it are
designed to ameliorate or reduce, by (a) reducing or addressing exposure to the phenomenon
causing the anticipated impact and/or (b) reducing the sensitivity of the phenomenon with
respect to causing the anticipated impact. Identification of all potential elements of each hazard
is important and quantification of impacts, with and without the climate change induced
hazard/physical phenomenon, is key. It is also critical to assign specific responses (direct and
indirect) to reduce the extent and/or frequency and/or timing of occurrence of the damage-
causing hazard or physical phenomenon and/or contributing to adaptive capacity, along with a
declaration of the pathways at which the response is targeted.
21. It is important to thoroughly understand the climate change component of a project. For
example, an investment in urban stormwater management may be merely a business as usual
investment that is wholly unrelated to climate change. It is shown to be part of a city’s strategy to
adapt to climate change only once it is demonstrated, for example, that the urban area and its
catchment are receiving, and are predicted to continue to receive, a much higher volume of rain
per 24-hour period on peak days in comparison with a historical baseline period, with the
changing climate thus leading to increased vulnerability to flooding, necessitating the
intervention.
22. The proponents added a new table in section 1.45 of the amended funding proposal with
potential programme interventions per country, very much concentrated in the water sector
(flood and drought control, stormwater management and drainage infrastructure, irrigation,
etc.). As the screening process evolves, the proponents should further differentiate the sectors,
technologies and approaches relevant in particular national and subnational contexts. Each of the
potential interventions are very broadly described, and their analysis requires setting priorities
of the type of investment that GGC will seek to guarantee. Ongoing refinement of the screening
process should be reported back through MUFG to GCF, as part of the annual performance
reviews.
23. The independent TAP notes that the overall governance structure now includes climate
experts throughout the transaction selection process, including an Impact Committee with
members who are climate specialists. The proposal seems to have a better balance between
involving people knowledgeable on financial instruments and guarantees and climate change
experts than that presented in the original funding proposal. However, as expressed in the
country ownership section, the proposal needs to refine the overall governance structure and
checks and balances.
24. This is especially true when analysing the role of MUFG as the AE. In the proposed
structure, MUFG primarily relies on the structure being proposed by the GGC managers (as
expressed in the country ownership section) to screen for and ensure climate impacts. Moreover,
MUFG could have a more engaged role in strengthening the climate change aspects of the project.
25. Aside from the screening process, the proponents need to ensure that the project
originators have the capacity to assess the potential for climate change adaptation and mitigation,
with processes and technical teams able to effectively assess anticipated climate impacts with and
without the interventions to be made through prospective loans and bonds. On this point, the
proponents commented that GGC will not be reliant on its origination partners to assess the

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 94
potential for climate change adaptation or mitigation and will be doing this in-house. To ensure a
high-quality pipeline, however, the independent TAP believes that the originators should also
have the capacity to screen and originate climate transactions, and that GGC would be
strengthened by having a wider set of in-country and international originators. As such, the
programme will need to undertake ongoing efforts to add to the pool of originators, including
originators with a solid track record on climate change. Reputational risk will also need to be
managed, if any of the origination partners receive media attention over allegations of
‘greenwashing’ or financial mismanagement.
26. Moreover, since GGC will hire consultants at the national level, it would be important to
establish partnerships in advance with specialized climate change entities in each of the countries
that are able to support the process. The proponents provided examples of the type of entity they
could work with, but these are mostly from the global North. Enormous value can be added by
supporting the capacity in the participating developing countries with local consultants who
know their own countries and markets. There are many knowledgeable entities in all of the target
countries with the capacity to originate transactions and provide support in the climate change
assessments of the investments.
27. Overall, the independent TAP believes that the proponents need to continue developing
robust climate change screening criteria and an assessment process, ensuring the upfront
capacity of the originators to understand climate change projects and advancing the
establishment of arrangements with relevant consultants or entities, both at the central company
level of GGC and at in-country level, to provide climate change technical soundness to the
proposed GCF project.
28. The funding proposal has a weak baseline assessment of the climate finance needs per
country. This poses risks of (i) failure to assess correctly the most appropriate financial product
or service to be offered and (ii) failure to prioritize the most urgent needs to access finance for
the most vulnerable countries, thus rendering the GGC offering ineffective. In the absence of the
climate finance assessments which the independent TAP has been requesting, it is difficult to
know what the uptake of the GGC guarantee will be in the targeted countries, especially those
which have already issued green bonds (i.e. Brazil, Indonesia and Philippines). In some cases, the
triple B-rated GGC guarantee may be seen only as another cost layer on transaction costs and not
needed, as these countries already have investment grade ratings (Philippines is already BBB+,2
Indonesia is BBB3 and Brazil is BBB-4). The GGC guarantee may be best used for the countries that
urgently need climate finance but do not have the required investment grade. The funding
proposal needs a more in-depth assessment of the target countries’ finance and investment
sectors.
1.2 Paradigm shift potential Scale: medium
29. Developing guarantees is not new to the financial markets. However, there could be a
paradigm shift in increasing the volume of guarantees provided to private sector investors in the
participating developing countries to accelerate climate change adaptation and mitigation
finance. Guarantees could de-risk private sector investments and attract much-needed private
capital. The use of guarantees to mobilize finance, if implemented successfully, has the potential
to outstrip the mobilization impact of other less efficient interventions (grant funding,
2 Source: Tokyo-based debt watcher Rating and Investment Information Inc.
https://www.philstar.com/business/2022/04/20/2175310/philippine-investment-grade-rating-affirmed-
anew#:~:text=(R%26I)%20has%20affirmed%20the%20BBB%2B,and%20a%20stable%20banking%20sector.
3 See S&P REVISED OUTLOOK INDONESIA’S SOVEREIGN CREDIT RATING TO STABLE; AFFIRMS RATING AT BBB
(INVESTMENT GRADE).
4 See Standard & Poor’s and Fitch Ratings raise Brazil to Investment Grade.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 95
concessional debt, etc.). Guarantees can maximize the climate finance impact of concessional
funds while maintaining sufficient flexibility to adjust to changing markets and sectors to avoid
over-subsidization.
30. GGC positions itself as the first ever guarantee company to exist in the global credit and
capital markets with the sole objective of providing guarantees for climate change bonds and
loans in developing markets. However, it is important to remember that several financial entities
with an investment grade are currently providing guarantees to different projects around the
world and could expand their facilities to guarantee climate change investments.
31. The independent TAP enquired about the need to create a special vehicle to provide
guarantees, considering that GCF has provided guarantees through blended vehicles with
different AEs in concrete and tangible climate change projects. Both the Secretariat and the
proponents responded that since GCF does not have a credit rating, it must set aside cash for the
full value of the portfolio it is guaranteeing. This means that GCF is providing a 1:1 leverage ratio
on guarantees. With the triple B credit rating (or possibly higher), GGC can leverage at least 10
times its equity for its portfolio of climate bonds.
32. Notwithstanding the positive potential of guarantees, the independent TAP notes that this
project does not provide any analysis of the climate finance sectors or the guarantee structures
available in the selected NOL countries. With the very broad spread of types of economies
targeted, and only seven so far on board, the resultant set of countries seems random: having
countries like Brazil, India, Indonesia and the Philippines with advanced financial institutions and
companies with investment grades together with countries like Gabon, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, and Trinidad and Tobago with less developed financial markets does not
make obvious sense or lend itself to the development of a coherent portfolio. In the view of the
independent TAP, the selection of the countries should include an in-depth analysis of the
regulatory and institutional frameworks in place and the opportunities to develop a strong
climate change portfolio of investments to attract international and national private sector
investment. Moreover, it would propose that going forward the GCF consider guarantee
approaches that could leverage GCF equity in a more targeted manner. There is a need to carry
out more in-depth analysis, and possibly issue requests for proposals to identify a range of
potential global players in this space that could effectively leverage GCF funds for climate finance
guarantee products.
33. As explained in the impact potential section (section 1.1 above), one of the biggest
challenges is to ensure the climate change impacts of the investments, as there is still no single
and uniformly implemented international standard around the definitions of what is considered
to be ‘green’, ‘sustainable’ and/or ‘climate’. Only a few countries or regions have developed green
taxonomies that are starting to be used by the financial investors. In the case of green bonds, some
institutions have developed Green Bond Principles reflecting those developed by the
International Capital Market Association. These become standard procedures to verify (i) use of
proceeds (i.e. what eligible green projects will be financed); (ii) process for project evaluation and
selection; (iii) management of proceeds; and (iv) reporting.
34. However, even though there could be ‘second-party opinions’ with entities that
investigate the purpose of the investments and verify the use of proceeds, it is very difficult for
countries and investors to account for the real climate impacts behind bond issuances, and also
to avoid double accounting. Moreover, several green bond issuances have refinanced existing
projects, without really accounting for additionality in terms of new green or climate investments.
35. Therefore, instead of just continuing to follow standard procedures, which does not create
a paradigm shift, the proponents should aim to guarantee climate bond issuances that prove their
impact, providing additional support to the issuers in developing countries to demonstrate the
real investments behind the climate bonds, and bring additionality in terms of new projects.
Otherwise, there could be a potential risk of greenwashing.

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 96
36. In this regard, the proponents explain that GGC will focus on supporting new capital
expenditure in relation to climate projects but may consider a refinancing, subject to two
conditions being met: (1) the refinancing is a component of a larger financing that includes new
capital expenditure or where refinancing is a pre-agreed component of a shorter-term financing
to bridge a construction period; and (2) the refinancing is mobilizing global institutional investors
that would otherwise not have invested in a climate project in a developing country. However, as
stated above, more than just mobilizing capital is the necessity of ensuring that the underlying
project has a real climate impact.
37. As explained in the climate impact potential section, the proponents will rely solely on the
CBI standard, having carried out research and analysis of the different existing standards.
However, more and more robust national taxonomies are being developed across the world and
there are very good standards like the European Union and Asian standards that could be used
by investors; or it may even be possible to use a combination of such standards depending on the
bond/loan characteristics. As this is only the entry point to screen a project, the main observation
will be to align the standards with a much more robust analysis throughout the transaction
selection process.
38. On the other hand, the project presents a theory of change and has revised its impact
objective: “IF the GGC receives equity capital from the GCF, THEN significant private debt capital
will be mobilized towards mitigation and adaptation projects across the globe, and effective
climate knowledge generation will be transferred to participating countries, providing
pioneering examples of mobilizing global capital towards climate initiatives, BECAUSE DGG
provides [a] de-risking mechanism in the form of credit guarantee as well as associated risk
management impact reporting and due diligence assistance services that will advance access to
climate finance.”
39. This is not about receiving capital from GCF, and possibly others, to provide a service. The
project should instead have a more far-sighted goal than simply receiving the capital from GCF
and should have the vision to maximize the opportunity to support innovative and effective
climate change projects in developing countries through guarantees. The statement should be
reframed to state that if GGC is able to mobilize global capital towards climate initiatives, then
several innovative climate projects will be able to ensure their financial closures and provide
climate impacts, ensuring knowledge transfer. The whole point of the programme is to ensure
climate impacts, not just to mobilize financial capital through guarantees.
40. In several of their answers to the independent TAP, both written and during the question-
and-answer session, the proponents assured it that the success of GGC is derived mostly from the
experience of the funding partners of GGC in developing guarantees. However, it is important that
this project is not solely dependent on the role and experience of the three partners and company
managers of GGC and DGG; rather it should include the development and a detailed description
of a more robust structure that involves the overall governance of the company, the role of
entities around the structure, including the partner originators, institutions that could technically
support climate change considerations and the necessary authorities and institutions involved in
climate change finance in the selected countries, as well as the investors.
41. Since B.33, one of the three funding members, namely Jean-Pierre Sweerts, has left the
company. This kind of change could possibly happen again, since GGC and DGG are both start-ups,
which by definition have no track record and no solid institutional capacity. When the
independent TAP asked MUFG about the need to have the assurance of a more solid governance
structure, the AE responded that Cardano Development had a track record and could back up the
sustainability of the company. However, Cardano Development, as an incubator of climate finance
initiatives, should not be the organization that ensures the stability of GGC. The stability of the
company becomes, in the eyes of the independent TAP, the main risk of this transaction.

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 97
42. The project is relying on five originators (MUFG, DBS, Deutsche Bank, Standard Chartered
and Shinhan Bank) that have not necessarily been active banks in the selected NOL countries.
Moreover, the proposal does not present their proven record in climate change finance. GGC could
potentially have more international and national originators as, in countries like Brazil and
Indonesia, there is a strong financial ecosystem with the capacity to originate projects. In their
response to questions of the independent TAP on this, the proponents stated that they will invest
in providing training to their origination partners on their Guarantee Policy, but this is not
reflected in the funding proposal or the budget, which remains the same.
43. Moreover, one of the objectives of GGC should be to share the knowledge and support the
enabling conditions for developing blended finance options through guarantees in developing
countries. In their response to the independent TAP concerning knowledge-sharing and capacity-
building, the proponents indicated that they will set up a working group which will include
representatives from the national designated authority (NDA) and other relevant stakeholders in
the NOL country (e.g. Capital Markets Authority) to identify priority climate transactions, to
facilitate knowledge-sharing and capacity-building (e.g. lessons learned from successful and/or
failed transactions sponsored by other developing countries in global credit and capital markets)
and to support the development of local regulatory frameworks in local credit and capital markets
by offering access to international best practice in global capital markets.
44. However, these objectives should ideally have been further explained and developed in
the project proposal, providing a basic analysis of these aspects in the selected countries and
including budget and human resources to maintain these working groups. There are country-
specific risks, especially related to the ability to enforce credit terms and other rights in local
courts, regulatory risk and ability to build and enforce transaction-specific risk mitigation
packages (construction insurance, parent guarantees, etc.) and policy gaps that need to be further
analysed through the working groups.
45. In terms of scalability, the project could certainly identify more countries interested in
the benefits from guarantees and more transactions in the selected countries, as the model proves
feasible. However, the origination of innovative climate deals takes time, and the project should
contribute to enabling policies and processes in each of the selected countries. Moreover, the
countries and institutions involved in the green guarantee scheme should feel confident in the
role of GGC to deliver on the goals proposed in the funding proposal. But this will only be possible
if the proponents ensure more country engagement, as expressed in section 1.4 below.
46. Finally, it is important to mention that one of the main drivers of GCF being part of this
company should be the opportunity to open the doors to other global and national initiatives
willing to use guarantees and other financial instruments to scale climate finance at large.
Therefore, the aspiration of GGC to be the first ever guarantee company to exist in the global credit
and capital markets with the objective of acting as the market champion and mobilizing greater
private sector climate finance into developing countries, should include leading by example and
encouraging many new champions at the international and national level to scale climate finance
options.
1.3 Sustainable development potential Scale: medium to high
1.3.1. Environmental and social co-benefits
47. The proponents have developed a transaction selection process in which they analyse the
wider positive and negative impacts of the transactions to which the company seeks to provide a
credit guarantee. The approach is to measure the impacts on (i) climate change adaptation and
climate change mitigation; (ii) climate certification; (iii) gender and social inclusion; and (iv) E&S
standards.

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 98
48. It is difficult to anticipate the E&S co-benefits at this stage. However, there could be
environmental benefits in delivering alternative energy, bioenergy, transmission and
distribution, transport, water, buildings, and waste and pollution control in several aspects such
as protection of biodiversity and natural resources, water availability, pollution prevention, bio-
innovation and efficient use of resources.
49. In terms of social benefits, the projects could provide health benefits related to better air
quality and clean water availability, support for fair labour and work conditions, and improved
livelihoods though sustainable economic alternatives.
50. However, there could also be risks of maladaptation that need to be screened in each of
the transactions. Even though GGF will not invest in high-risk projects based on conventional E&S
standards, the proponents should include indicators in the score card and integrated review
process to avoid maladaptation risks.
1.3.1. Economic co-benefits
51. The programme is intended to increase access to guarantees and access to private capital
for implementing climate change projects that otherwise could have difficulties in ensuring a
financial closure. In this respect, the economic co-benefits could include an increase in financial
revenues for project developers, confidence of the private sector in developing climate change
projects, sectoral innovation, reduction in prices of energy, water and transport in selected
territories, and job creation.
1.3.2. Gender-sensitive development
52. The funding proposal provides a gender action plan with gender action principles that the
project proponents should ensure are respected prior to the issuance of a guarantee and that
should be applicable during the investment process (compiling relevant gender analysis or
documents) as well as project implementation (e.g. reporting on progress).
53. A gender assessment was conducted in the absence of a project pipeline, and therefore
the proponents explain that it is a living document that will be regularly updated to reflect key
developments.
54. This information essentially provides a baseline of what GGC knows with regard to the
selected countries and results areas with respect to gender, including vulnerabilities and
capacities for change. The findings from these sector and country assessments have been used to
develop a framework that GGC will use to identify potential gender-responsive interventions that
should be considered as part of the project design process to maximize the gender benefits of a
specific project.
55. Basically, the assessment is a matrix showing challenges faced by women in the different
sectors of the project, highlighting countries where the challenge may be significant or highly
significant. The matrix presents an example of how to use the assessment in which proponents
should first present the country context, then the sectoral context and finally the potential
impacts that should be addressed in each intervention.
56. The assessment reflects the point of departure at which GGC would require a project
investor, developer or owner to provide a more detailed, context-specific gender analysis, an
assessment and an action plan that aligns with the GCF Gender Policy and related requirements.
The gender documentation will be reviewed during the seven steps of the transaction selection
process, including a Red, Amber of Green checklist on gender as part of the screening process.
57. The proponents also acknowledge the challenges of assessing gender aspects in green
bond issuances, including the lack of data, the lack of predictable modelling capabilities, the
higher transaction costs of preparing gender plans and the perceived lack of urgency. In fact, few

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 99
issuances in the world have had a gender lens. The proponents propose to require gender-
responsive requirements as part of the project design, including, for example, a gender
assessment and risk analysis, and the allocation of sufficient resources to improve gender equity
considerations. This is welcomed by the independent TAP.
58. The proponents explain that the issuers should report on both the gender criteria used to
select projects and the actual gender impacts. Reporting should be conducted at least annually
and should be verifiable by third parties. The independent TAP notes that these procedures will
depend on the type of projects behind the bond issuances and the real capacity of GGC and the
originating partners to ensure that the bond issuers align with the gender requirements.
59. Finally, the proponents propose to undertake training on gender issues with the
originating partners and to have an internal gender specialist within the GGC team. The
independent TAP considers that the proponents have presented a satisfactory gender approach,
but that the implementation will need to be carefully considered, especially in the case of bond
issuances.
1.4 Needs of the recipient Scale: medium to high
1.4.1 Vulnerability of the country and vulnerable groups
60. The proponents have NOLs from Brazil, Gabon, India, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, the Philippines and Trinidad and Tobago and are expecting to receive an
NOL from Bangladesh. During the question-and-answer session the proponents explained that
they are expecting to work in other countries such as Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Kenya, Morocco,
Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania, as well as Cambodia,
Pakistan and Viet Nam. Some of the proposed countries are big emerging markets with
reasonably sophisticated financial systems while others need support to encourage private
investment.
61. The selection of target countries does not appear to have a clear logic behind it. In
response to a question by the independent TAP, the proponents stated that they are using two
criteria to select countries: (1) the country has a large population and is likely to experience
significant negative climate impacts if not supported to transition; and/or (2) the country has
export industries earning hard currency which enables projects to access that currency to repay
debt raised in global capital and credit markets. The first criterion seems not aligned with GCF
principles, by which all countries (small and large) have climate change risks and impacts, not
solely due to the size of the population. In their responses to the independent TAP, the proponents
argued that there is a need to focus on countries that GGC felt had the most potential to access
global capital markets to maximize the impact of GGC at inception, and that the additional
inclusion of countries reflects the desire to include examples of GCF priorities such as the least
developed countries, small island developing States and African countries.
62. The project presents a country climate change analysis report for each of the 19 countries
in which GGC expects to work, showcasing the historical climate change trends, current emission
profiles and future climate trends. In each of the reports, the analysis presents a desk review of
the climate commitments and enabling environments of each country. However, the climate
change analysis does not include a market and policy analysis relating to the advances in climate
finance and more solid information on the potential portfolio of climate projects in need of
guarantees.
63. The independent TAP has done an analysis of the situation of some of the NOL countries
and notes that in general, all of the countries have struggled during recent years due to the COVID-
19 pandemic but are gradually recovering. This analysis explores briefly the capability of some of

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 100
the selected countries’ financial systems to issue green bonds and loans at scale without the need
for guarantees, using their institutions to originate climate change transactions.
64. Brazil’s economic performance has been varied at best since the onset of the pandemic.
In the second half of 2020, after the devastating first wave of COVID-19, Brazil witnessed a
rebound in economic activity, but then came subsequent waves of infection and a surge in global
inflation, which have dampened that recovery.5 Inflation and unemployment remain high and
consumption growth is weak. Brazil’s government has reduced its forecast for growth of the
country’s gross domestic product in 2022 from 2.1 to 1.5 per cent. For 2023, the predicted 2.6 per
cent growth was maintained.6
65. It is worth mentioning that the conflict between the Russian Federation and Ukraine and
its global economic ramifications have different implications for the different country economies.
For example, global commodity prices seem to work well for Brazil, where oil, soybean and iron
ore account for 40 per cent of total merchandise exports.
66. According to a reference given by the proponents from a report of the German Agency for
International Cooperation, in Brazil, from January 2015 to September 2020, 10 green bonds, one
transition bond and one sustainability-linked bond were placed in the foreign market, totalling
USD 6.4 billion. Even though foreign currency securities represent the smallest portion of
issuances (22 per cent), they have raised an amount of resources that is almost three times as
large as domestic issuances. The GGC proponents justify the need for guarantees based on the fact
that in Brazil one in five green bonds was issued in a global capital market but mobilized three
times more finance than the four local capital market transactions collectively. The independent
TAP believes that it would be interesting to analyse the underlying green impacts of the bond
issuances as a factor of success.
67. Indonesia is the world’s fourth most populous nation and tenth largest economy in terms
of purchasing power parity. Indonesia’s economy is now recovering and the country’s gross
domestic product growth is projected at 5.1 per cent in 2022, supported by growing commodity
exports and accommodative fiscal policy to weather the pandemic.7
68. Indonesia has issued 17 green, social and sustainability bonds to the value of USD 7.7
billion. In 2022, green bond issuances by two major energy State-owned enterprises are
anticipated, namely PLN and Pertamina. These will be used to finance renewable energy assets.
Moreover, the Government of Indonesia issued a (sharia compliant) bond worth USD 1.25 billion
in February 2018. It was the world's first sovereign bond exclusively aimed at funding climate
change initiatives in a manner whereby financing is compliant with Islamic law.8
69. The Philippines has been one of the most dynamic economies in the East Asia and the
Pacific region. Average annual growth increased to 6.4 per cent between 2010 and 2019 from an
average of 4.5 per cent between 2000 and 2009. With increasing urbanization, a growing middle
class and a large and young population, the Philippines’ economic dynamism is rooted in strong
consumer demand supported by a vibrant labour market and robust remittances. Growth
contracted significantly in 2020 owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, but the economy has started
to recover with a 5.6 per cent year-on-year expansion in 2021.9
70. Commercial banks in the Philippines have issued around USD 2.9 billion worth of
sustainable bonds since 2017. More recently, the Government of the Philippines announced its
5 See <www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/economy/americas/brazil-economic-outlook.html>.
6 See <agenciabrasil.ebc.com.br/en/geral/noticia/2022-03/government-cuts-gdp-growth-forecast-21-15>.
7 See www.worldbank.org/en/country/indonesia/overview#1.
8 See www.climatefinance-developmenteffectiveness.org/sites/default/files/Indonesia-CS.pdf.
9 See www.worldbank.org/en/country/philippines/overview#1.

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 101
first green bond offer of USD 500 million to raise funds for clean energy projects to comply with
its ambitious climate change target.10
71. Trinidad and Tobago is expected to grow in 2022, from a very broad-based economy. In
the energy sector, higher gas and oil prices will support the growth. Higher prices, particularly
imported inflation, will, however, pose a challenge with specific pressure on prices of
international agricultural commodities.
72. As mentioned, Brazil, Indonesia and the Philippines are very large economies with well-
established financial systems capable of issuing green bonds and loans on a large scale without
the need for guarantees. Moreover, there are banks with good ratings in these economies able to
originate climate change transactions and to use their own guarantees to support transactions.
73. The proponents argue that even though there have been issuances of green bonds in the
above-mentioned countries in global capital markets, the majority of issuers are unable to access
global capital markets. They explain that GGC serves the interest of a developing country by
creating a pathway for climate projects in that country to access international investors that only
operate in global capital markets and not in local capital markets.
74. However, in the large economies, GGC will be able to gradually guarantee some
transactions but will not make a big difference in terms of shifting the climate change
performance of the selected sectors in each of these countries. The countries have been able to
make a difference in financing climate projects with their own sovereign issuances. On the other
hand, it is also noted by the proponents that statistical data from the international rating agencies
suggest that the risk associated with a climate project in a developing country is not materially
higher than a similar climate project in a developed country; however, investors do not see this
and simply assume that the risk is much higher. The proponents therefore argue that a guarantee
from GGC gives the investor confidence to enter a developing country.
75. In terms of countries like the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and Trinidad and Tobago,
with smaller economies and less developed financial systems, GGC could make a difference in
supporting the entrance of private capital for climate change projects. Therefore, the independent
TAP recommends that GGC prioritize countries that have no investment grade and developed
financial systems, applying a minimum portfolio allocation approach.
76. In any event, the project proponents have not presented any analysis of the climate
finance system in each of the selected countries, even though it was one of the main points of the
independent TAP in the earlier assessment. The proponents should work to develop a more
comprehensive market analysis of the existing demand for guarantees in line with the selected
countries’ climate financial strategy and start developing a prospective pipeline of possible
projects that could be guaranteed, with a special emphasis in the least developed NOL countries.
77. Finally, in the case of adaptation needs, the vulnerability of the communities and sectors
benefiting from each of the transactions will need to be analysed as part of the overall assessment
of each of the transactions to ensure that the proposed investments have a real climate impact in
the selected contexts. The analysis will need to consider the specific means to be used in achieving
increased resilience of the most vulnerable people and communities; health and well-being; food
and water security; infrastructure and built environment; and ecosystems and ecosystem
services. The current transaction selection process could also benefit from further screening on
this aspect, as well as on the need to ensure that there is no maladaptation.
1.5 Country ownership Scale: low to medium
10 See https://www.senecaesg.com/es/insights/the-philippines-to-issue-at-least-usd500m-green-bonds-to-
european-investors/.

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 102
1.5.1 Alignment with national climate strategy
78. The proponents have involved seven countries that have issued NOLs, providing country
climate change analysis reports, including analysis of the past, present and future climate, and
explaining the climate commitments and enabling environments. They have carried out short
desk reviews on climate market analysis, but they have not provided any analysis of the climate
financial strategies, or any relevant documentation demonstrating that there has been
engagement with national authorities beyond the NDC focal ministries or with financial
institutions to assess their interest in and need of the GGC guarantees.
79. The independent TAP noted that if GGC intends to stimulate financial markets in all the
participating countries, in terms of unlocking greater volumes of guaranteed finance to de-risk
private sector investments in climate change mitigation and adaptation in selected sectors, there
should be some sort of market analysis of the type of transactions for which guarantees are
sought. In response, the proponents argued that investors in global capital markets are looking
for a very simple guarantee of the payment obligations of a climate project and this is what GGC
will provide, and that any climate project looking for climate finance is eligible, subject to it being
accepted as a GGC transaction via the GCF-approved transaction selection process. It is very
important for the independent TAP and GCF that GGC tries to guarantee the best possible
transactions in each of the countries and not just any project claiming to have a climate change
related impact.
80. Moreover, there are national and international financial institutions with investment
grades that issue guarantees in the selected countries that could be potentially interested in
leveraging resources to support their existing systems to boost climate finance. The proof of
concept of GGC should be established, engaging national and international institutions interested
in exploring guarantees to support climate change. On this point, the proponents explained that
“It is possible for a national guarantor to be rated investment grade on a local rating scale but less
so on an international rating scale, unless the sovereign has an international investment grade
rating and owns the guarantor fully and will support all its obligations. The proponents are not
aware of national guarantors in developing countries that are providing guarantees in global
capital markets.” However, the independent TAP observation is around complementarities and
pathways to ensure combined efforts with national and international financial institutions.
81. Having an NOL is an important first step but it needs to be accompanied by a thorough
country engagement process, analysing in depth the alignment with national climate finance
procedures and strategies which GGC could support. Establishing a working group in each of the
countries will take time, money and effort, and efforts should be made before inception of the
programme to establish the willingness of the relevant entities in each country to develop such
an arrangement and to further engage in the proposal to use an international guarantee company
that could support their efforts.
82. In most countries strategies are being put in place by relevant institutions to accelerate
climate finance. These could benefit from having direct conversations with the GGC proponents,
in order to align purposes and to gain support in the origination of climate change transactions.
Therefore, the proponents should engage with relevant public and private institutions in each of
the selected countries to ensure real country engagement.
1.5.2 Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver
83. The proposal is structured under a complex set of arrangements between GCF, MUFG, GGC
and DGG. The funding proposal submitted to the independent TAP stated that MUFG, as AE, will
oversee and monitor the project implementation and will ensure project compliance with the
relevant MUFG policies as well as from the perspectives of GCF interest in the project. MUFG will
execute a subsidiary agreement (implementation agreement) with the executing entities (EEs)

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 103
(DGG, GGC, GCF Holdings and GCF Holdings Manager) and this agreement passes down the GCF
requirements relevant for execution to the executing entities. In line with the legal arrangements,
the AE will remain responsible for all the oversight and supervision obligations of the AE under
the accreditation master agreement and the funded activity agreement.
84. In order for GCF not to be a direct shareholder of GGC, MUFG will incorporate a special
purpose company (GCF Holdings) along with a Holdings Manager. Both GCF Holdings and the
Holdings Manager will be EEs.
85. MUFG highlighted its role in putting in place the legal agreements with DGG and GGC and
in acting as a partner originator but did not provide a clear sense of how it would apply its
capacity to support the climate impacts of GGC as a GCF project. The responses from the AE to
this fundamental question from the independent TAP have been weak, leaving the impression
that the AE retains some ambivalence about making a strong commitment to an active oversight
role that will ensure that the adaptation and mitigation potential of the proposed company, and
the GCF investment in it, will be maximized across the 20-year lifetime of the project.
86. According to the proponents, MUFG will hire an external legal counsel who has reviewed
past GCF transactions by MUFG (FP115 and FP128) and will ensure that only the appropriate
clauses are incorporated in the subsidiary agreement. MUFG will monitor and enforce the
fulfilment of the contractual obligations of EEs. A clear assurance that the AE will play the full role
described in its accreditation master agreement with GCF would be important to avoid any
misperception of an AE simply being used as a ‘pass-through’ vehicle to enable other institutions
to access resources from GCF.
87. MUFG will assign a qualified individual to the GGC Board of Directors who will exercise
rights on behalf of GCF as a shareholder of GGC. However, this individual will not sit on the GGC
Impact Committee. On the other hand, it is proposed that the MUFG Emerging Markets Team,
based in London, will be one of the originating partners for GGC. It is the view of the independent
TAP that there is a potential for real or at least perceived conflict of interest in this structure, since
the division of MUFG that is originating deals will aim to maximize their guarantee coverage,
while the division of MUFG that is playing the oversight role will aim to review all deals critically,
rejecting those which are not contributing clearly to climate change adaptation and/or mitigation.
The funding proposal also points out that MUFG is in discussion with its affiliate company to
become the third-party investment managers of GGC, subject to a procurement process, raising
further questions about how the various roles of MUFG will be balanced, and conflict of interest
avoided.
88. In response to the concerns of the independent TAP, the proponents responded that they
understand that as a member of the GGC Board of Directors and a major shareholder of GGC,
MUFG may experience a potential conflict of interest when also becoming engaged in execution,
for example as a deal originator. They say that MUFG has an internal policy for managing conflicts
of interest which is a requirement under banking law in Japan. They argue that any risk in this
regard would be minimized, since the MUFG Emerging Markets Team is based in London and
there is no operational information-sharing system (computer drives, files, etc.) between
different divisions within MUFG, with a strict firewall maintained.
89. However, in the view of the independent TAP the issue is not about sharing information
systems, but about actual responsibilities, mandates and the differentiated roles of the AE, the
EEs (GGC overall governance) and the originating partners, which should be clearly distinct and
defined, with the structure set up in order to maximize the effectiveness of the GCF investment.
90. Both GGC and DGG are newly created companies established in 2021 in the United
Kingdom. Since neither of these companies has a track record, the proponents provided the
résumés of the shareholders and founding members of the companies.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 104
The first funding proposal stated that DGG Ltd. was founded by Boo Hock Khoo, Jean Pierre
Sweerts and Lesitha Perera and incorporated at Companies House (United Kingdom) in February
2021, with Lesitha Perera owning 75 per cent of the shares. It was noted by the independent TAP
that the DGG founding partner, Jean-Pierre Sweerts, according to the proposal submitted to B.34,
had been replaced by new partner Dale Petrie. The AE reassured the independent TAP of Mr
Petrie’s expertise, highlighting that he was formerly Finance Director of GuarantCo Management
Company, a subsidiary of Cardano Development which had the contract to manage GuarantCo, a
guarantee company funded by seven governments belonging to the Group of 20. However, it is of
concern to the independent TAP that none of the three current partners has a strong background
in environmental matters or climate finance, as was the case with Mr. Sweerts.
Moreover, the independent TAP remains concerned about the fact that the stability of GGC
depends on the small group of partners, any one of whom could at any point decide to leave the
company. During the latest call with the independent TAP, the AE explained that the stability will
be given by Cardano Development, a company with a track record as an incubator and fund
manager, which supports its scale-up funds and a number of start-ups with ongoing management
services, financial support and corporate governance oversight. According to the proponents, the
ownership structure of DGG will evolve ahead of financial close to be 60 per cent owned by the
management team (Lesitha Perera, Dale Petrie and Boo Hock Khoo) and 40 per cent owned by
Cardano Development. DGG will be the manager running the day-to-day operations, with a
management agreement between it and GGC outlining the services that DGG will provide.
91. Cardano Development provides DGG with governance oversight (it will be the Chair of the
Board), risk management services (it will be present on all DGG internal committees) and
operational services (it manages DGG banking and audit arrangements), as well as access to its
network in developing countries. Cardano Development will also have one representative who
sits on the Investment Committee for GGC, the DGG Asset and Liability Committee and the DGG
Risk and Audit Committee, bringing their own significant emerging market investment and risk
management experience to the table.
92. As stated above, there is a risk to GCF in accepting the past experience in the financial
sector of the three individual founding partners of GGC as an assurance of success. First, because
companies and institutions should not rely on individuals, who could, for any reason, ultimately
not respond to the purpose of the company or its long-term commitments. Second, because GGC
is highly dependent on Cardano Development to support the founding members, the overall
governance depends heavily on their active role in the company, even more than the role of the
AE. Third, there is no individual funding member with experience in climate change, and again
the responsibility relies on the experience of Cardano Development.
93. In terms of the GGC governance, the proposal stated that the role of the Board of Directors
will be to review, challenge and approve the annual strategy and budget for GGC proposed by the
Manager and to monitor and review the performance of the Manager in delivering on the strategy
and budget. Four of these directors are to be appointed by the holders of the ordinary shares with
the remaining Board seat to be appointed by MUFG in its capacity as AE to GCF. Moreover, there
will be a five-member Impact Committee comprising independent climate change adaptation,
climate change mitigation, gender and E&S experts, with the two senior climate experts on the
Committee also acting as advisors to the GGC Board. There will also be an Investment Committee
or Credit Committee (both titles are used in the proposal), which will opine on the material,
financial and commercial aspects of the transactions and approve the transactions that have been
first approved by the Impact Committee.
94. The independent TAP observed on the previous version of the funding proposal that the
roles of the Board seemed very detached from the most important objective of GGC and DGG,
which is to guarantee effective climate change projects, and was concerned about the fact that the
Board will have no veto or decision-making power on the approval of the guarantees, leaving the

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 105
decision to the GGC Impact Committee and the Investment/Credit Committee. The proponents
responded that they understand these concerns and have proposed a different governance
arrangement.
95. The proponents had initially stated that the GGC Board will have up to five members to
allow for a mix of experience, with the majority of the members expected to have relevant climate
impact experience. Moreover, the Board will be supported by a cohort of four senior advisors,
who will be appointed by GGC shareholders and be independent members of the GGC Impact
Committee, reviewing and challenging the DGG Impact Team’s assessment of potential climate
projects, and having a veto over which projects are progressed to final approval. The anticipated
profiles of the senior advisors are provided in the transaction selection process (annex 24A to the
funding proposal).
96. Based on feedback of the independent TAP (in written questions and during a call with
the AE) the governance structure has been altered to have a five-member Board, of which three
members will have climate expertise (and over whose identity GCF will have a veto) and will be
voting members of the Impact and Investment Committees, removing the senior advisor
construct. DGG and the AE agree with assessment of the independent TAP that this will be a
cleaner structure for GGC and create an important link between the Board and the GGC Impact
Committee.
97. The proponents explain that they will work with local consultants to support the project
assessments in the countries. The environmental/climate institutions with which GGC is actively
engaging include (i) Pegasus; (ii) CBI; (iii) CBI-approved verifiers (including Sustainalytics and
Ernst & Young); (iv) climate experts of the funders and prospective funders of DGG and GGC
(Cardano Development, GCF, DFC); and (v) climate consultancy companies and experts (including
Impact Value, Arabesque, DOB Ecology, Wolfs Company, Pollination). The independent TAP
noticed that most of these climate consultancies are from the global North, mainly based in the
United Kingdom or the Netherlands. In response to the suggestion of the independent TAP that it
would be valuable to work with national consultants who know the countries and build domestic
capacity, the proponents stated that their intention is to prioritize working with local climate
consultants in the NOL countries.
98. In terms of the role of GCF as a funding partner of GGC, the proponents explain that they
see GCF as a strategic partner from which they can seek advice and support on climate strategy.
GCF will have a veto over all appointments to the GGC Board and as such will be able to ensure
that the selected members of the Board, alongside MUFG as AE, are aligned with GCF expectations
and interests. However, it is not clear to the independent TAP whether the other shareholder
members, including possible investors such as FCDO, will have the same veto.
99. GCF will also have observer rights to sit on the GGC Impact Committee and provide advice
on transactions from a climate impact perspective. The GGC Board cannot change the GGC
Guarantee Policy, transaction selection process and transaction scorecard without explicit GCF
approval. In addition, the GCF Secretariat will have a veto over the identity of the Head of Impact
at DGG, which in turn means that GCF has a veto over all of the climate experts involved in the
project selection process. It is not entirely clear to the independent TAP whether such an
intensive engagement over a long period by the Secretariat is feasible or appropriate. Ideally, if
the AE were well equipped to represent GCF interest, it would play these roles itself. Moreover,
since GCF has vested interests in the creation of GGC as a founding member, it will be difficult to
be judge and be part of the overall performance of the company.
100. In terms of the origination partners, namely MUFG, Deutsche Bank, Standard Chartered,
DBS and Shinhan Bank, the funding proposal does not present any information on their capacity
to originate climate change projects and their track record in working in the selected countries.
On this concern, the proponents explain that the origination partners have been selected because
they, unlike local financial institutions, have the expertise and regulatory licences to arrange

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 106
transactions for global capital markets. They further clarify that GGC will run training workshops
for all the origination partners to improve their understanding of what kinds of loan and bond
would have the necessary climate impact to qualify to receive a guarantee from GGC. The
independent TAP recommends that the capacity of the originators to select climate transactions
be assessed, as the basis for such training.
101. A process should also be put in place to bring on board additional originators with
experience in both global capital markets and climate change, and real connections with the
selected NOL countries. It is important to include the national financial institutions in originating
transactions, as they could act with greater knowledge of the opportunities to guarantee
innovative transactions. As highlighted above, economies like Brazil, Indonesia and the
Philippines have very strong institutions capable of originating and structuring guarantees, which
could partner with international organizations in the global capital markets.
1.5.3 Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders
102. The project proposal has not included concrete evidence of consultations in the countries,
involving not only NDAs but all relevant stakeholders in the climate finance space in each of the
countries.
103. The proponents explain that engagement with stakeholders in a target country will be a
continuous and ongoing process for GGC and that guarantee transactions will be undertaken in
consultation with the NDA and relevant local stakeholders as well as considering each country’s
NDC and country programme.
104. The funding proposal states that to date, GGC, in partnership with its AE, MUFG, has begun
consultations with Bangladesh, Brazil, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Kenya, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, the Philippines, Rwanda, South Africa, Trinidad and Tobago, and Uganda.
The proponents explain that several of these consultations have involved local stakeholders
alongside the NDA. However, the outcomes of these consultations are not presented in the
funding proposal or its annexes.
105. The proponents explain that in each of the transactions, they will engage with local
stakeholders, including vulnerable communities (e.g. indigenous peoples) and vulnerable groups
(e.g. women). To ensure that the local perspective on a potential climate project is understood,
GGC will seek to engage in-country consultants where necessary to help it to communicate
effectively with local stakeholders, including non-governmental organizations and civil society
organizations where appropriate.
106. The proponents commit to developing a grievance mechanism and to formally address
complaints or feedback from stakeholders regarding the subproject activities, including publicly
advertising procedures, and taking into consideration cultural and language differences.
107. In the stakeholder engagement plan, the proponents propose to establish a working
group (including representatives from the NDA and local private sector) to ensure that any
interventions are complementary to the countries’ existing approved and pipeline projects, as
well as to communicate with relevant AEs with both approved and pipeline projects in these
countries, to ensure this complementarity. They explain that the working group will be a forum
for GGC to enable capacity-building, support development of regulatory frameworks in local
credit and capital markets, and to solicit feedback and make improvements. However, there is no
explanation of how GGC will structure or coordinate the working groups, including responsible
persons, budget and agreements, in their proposed roles in the different countries.
108. The independent TAP had already suggested in the previous assessment that GGC should
develop further consultations in the selected countries before presenting a revised funding
proposal to GCF, ensuring that the proposal is aligned with current climate financial strategies
and needs in each country, as well as regulatory frameworks and opportunities to provide

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 107
guarantees, including the best way to originate a portfolio of innovative climate change projects
with the support of national stakeholders. However, the proponents did not present any evidence
that further consultations had been developed.
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness Scale: medium
Cost-effectiveness and cost-efficiency
109. The programme will use USD 82.5 million from GCF in equity, up to a rolling portfolio of
USD 4 billion or 48 times leverage. GGC expects to leverage the first tranche of USD 100 million
of equity capital provided by GCF (USD 40 million), FCDO (USD 50 million) and DFC (USD 10
million) which, multiplied by 10, could create an initial guarantee capacity of USD 1 billion.
110. The GGC business plan envisages leveraging USD 400 million of capital (split between USD
250 million of cash equity to be raised initially and a further USD 150 million of callable capital to
be raised later) to provide guarantees to mobilize USD 4 billion of green bonds and loans from
global credit and capital markets for climate finance in developing countries over a 10-year
period.
111. For GGC, it has been established that a leverage multiple of 10 will allow it to maintain an
investment grade credit rating, and so a capital of USD 400 million equals USD 4 billion of
guarantee capacity. GGC will provide guarantees at scale – USD 50 million to USD 200 million per
project. This means that GGC will be looking to support around 20 to 30 projects over the 10-year
lifetime of the business plan, to meet its objective of building a USD 4 billion portfolio by year 10.
112. Overall, USD 82.5 million of GCF funding will deliver mitigation benefits at USD 1.95 per t
CO eq (GCF contribution/expected lifetime emission reductions).
2
113. According to the proponents, if taking into account revolving use of GCF equity
contribution to support a revolving guarantee portfolio (maturing and/or amortized guarantees
recycled to support new guarantees), the efficiency ratio improves further. On the assumption
that each guarantee amortizes 10 per cent per year and based on a conservative build-up of the
portfolio in the initial years, GGC is expected to issue USD 4.9 billion of guarantees in total over
the first 10 years. From this 22.5 per cent increase in total guarantees issued against the USD 4
billion guarantee portfolio limit on a rolling basis, GGC has the potential to deliver mitigation
benefits at USD 1.59 per t CO eq (GCF contribution/expected lifetime emission reductions based
2
on total guarantees issued (64 million x 1.225)).
114. Taking into account total project costs, the programme will support projects that will
deliver climate change mitigation benefits at an estimated USD 89.2 per t CO eq (total project
2
costs of USD 5.71 billion if debt is USD 4 billion/expected lifetime emission reductions), based on
the same assumptions used as well as a 70:30 debt to equity ratio for the subprojects supported.
If calculated on total guarantee issued basis of USD 4.9 billion, the total investment costs of
benefits reduce to USD 72.8 per t CO eq.
2
115. Little detail is provided, however, in annex 22 to the funding proposal with the climate
impact calculations on the rationale behind the assumptions and calculations. The independent
TAP notes that, given the uncertainty of the possible transactions, this mitigation benefit is just a
rough estimate.
116. GGC will guarantee both listed and unlisted debt, allowing flexibility to mobilize global
investors to provide climate finance. GGC will work with international and regional banks that
have a licence to arrange bonds and loans and sell them to global investors (which is a regulated
activity). As explained above, GGC is proposing to work with five origination partners, and
possibly with others, that will use their networks in the target countries to identify suitable
climate change mitigation and adaptation transactions. The independent TAP believes that there

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 108
should be a stronger connection with the national institutions supporting the acceleration of
climate finance in the selected countries. Moreover, it is crucial that the due diligence efforts look
at the broader market risks associated with the enabling environment of the relevant country.
117. GGC is expected to be a self-sustaining programme with no defined lifespan, but it
presumes that GCF would remain an investor for 20 years. In response to a question raised by the
independent TAP about the rationale for this time frame and the exit strategy, the proponents
explained that the intention is to migrate GGC from public sector ownership to private ownership
(either through a listing on a stock exchange or sale to a private sector third party) as soon as
possible. However, the question of time frame and exit strategy remains, as there is no certainty
on whether this is achievable in a shorter term or whether there are other exit strategies such as
some form of refinancing or an orderly winding down of GGC.
118. Guarantees will be executed only if they are needed. Once the guarantee process has been
completed and a guarantee has been issued, there is no immediate flow of funds from GGC but
rather from the guaranteed investors to the borrower via a debt instrument, as would occur in a
conventional financing.
119. Since guarantees are unpredictable and ad hoc in nature, GGC cash equity is invested in
highly liquid investment grade debt instruments by a professional third-party fund manager (e.g.
Pacific Investment Management Company) on behalf of GGC. This allows GGC to earn an income
on these investments, which contributes to covering its operating expenses as it builds its
guarantee portfolio.
120. The proponents explain that origination partners’ profit motive means that they cannot
invest the time and resources needed in ‘marginal’ climate projects. With the availability of a
guarantee from GGC, global investors will be more comfortable entering into a transaction on the
basis that GGC has evaluated the financial structure and expressed its comfort by choosing to
provide the guarantee.
121. The GGC default resource strategy combines two elements. First, GGC will primarily
guarantee senior secured debt and be expected to benefit from access to the security package
made available to senior lenders. GGC will also control the investors’ ability to accelerate a loan
by having the option to repay the investor as per the original amortization schedule of a debt
instrument. This ensures that GGC can protect its own liquidity position while creating sufficient
time to assess the situation in relation to a payment default by a borrower and decide how best
to protect its position and recover any capital that has been paid out under a guarantee.
122. On the other hand, GGC will also typically have a recourse agreement with the borrower
in which it will seek to have the necessary checks and balances as well as controls to ensure that
it is aware of a potential default well in advance of the default happening and has the ability to
take action to protect its position. In the view of the independent TAP, GGC will be using public
resources and will therefore need to ensure concrete measures in the case of default, involving
all relevant parties.
123. In terms of the performance fee and the overall costs of creating a specialized company to
provide guarantees, this seems very costly. In the first funding proposal DGG was proposing to
apply a fee cap based on a percentage of portfolio. Fifty per cent of the fee cap is payable as a fixed
fee (to cover fixed costs related to permanent staff) with the balance being a variable fee to cover
variable costs related to overheads, third-party consultants and other costs such as regulatory
costs, etc.
124. In response to the independent TAP remark on the costs, the AE clarified that it
understands that DGG fees include several costs which would typically be covered by the fund
and not the manager, such as monitoring and evaluation costs and consultancy costs linked to
transaction work (e.g. in-country climate, gender and/or E&S consultants). These costs had
originally been included in the management fee to simplify the cost structure of GGC.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 109
125. DGG is in discussion with GCF with reference to the current fee proposal. The Secretariat
(a combination of the Private Sector Facility, Finance and Risk divisions) are leading on the
management fee discussion with DGG, with a clear focus on ensuring value for money and
alignment of interests, supported by FCDO, which has provided technical assistance funding to
hire a team of external expert advisors, including PWC, to advise the GGC investor group.
126. The project proponents did not present a new budget, and therefore the independent TAP
understands that since this is a final assessment, the former budget for B.33 remains. The budget
presents a breakdown in management fees for the first seven years, estimated as USD 73,164,327,
represented in staff costs, consultants, regulatory capital and other regulatory costs, overheads,
etc., to (i) build a network of origination partners; (ii) provide financial structuring support to
origination partners and borrowers to build a pipeline of potential guarantee transactions; (iii)
progress transactions through the GGC guarantee process; (iv) execute transactions; (v) provide
risk management; (vi) provide support to borrowers to develop impact reporting frameworks;
(vii) advocate publicly in industry events: (viii) identify sources of technical assistance funding to
support borrowers in accessing global credit and capital markets; and (ix) assess and develop an
exit strategy for GCF, FCDO and DFC.
127. Even though the costs are indicative and follow discussion with various service providers,
it has been assumed that there is no cost increase over the 10-year horizon because it is
anticipated that, in the early years, the costs of managing a small portfolio (about USD 200
million) will be roughly the same as managing a portfolio of around USD 4 billion.
128. The proponents explain that any underspend could be returned to GGC; however, DGG
will have the ability to keep some, if not all, of this underspend via a performance incentive
mechanism that is yet to be agreed. It is also proposed that DGG will be given a long-term
performance incentive in the form of a share of equity (to be agreed but expected to be between
3 and 5 per cent) at listing.
129. It is further explained that linking the performance incentive to the unused variable fee
encourages DGG to focus on creating efficiencies, recovering transaction costs wherever possible
and ensuring that all outsourced services are demonstrating value for money.
130. It is noted that the amount of the overall investment by GCF is relatively small and could
provide support in proving the guarantee concept for climate change projects, allowing other
guarantors, including national and international entities, to become aware of the benefits of the
scheme and potentially replicate or create an in-country approach. However, the level of
concessionality needed from GCF and others is unclear, even though the proponents state that
they will apply the principle of minimum concessionality. Moreover, it is important to analyse the
overall costs of the GGC and DGG companies, especially because the use of public resources from
GCF should ensure maximum value for money and the expected fees and overall costs seem very
high. It is also critical to ensure country ownership and to potentially reduce overall costs by
involving institutions in the countries that are able to originate transactions and to gradually
adopt guarantee structures to accelerate climate finance. Finally, in the absence of a revised
budget, the independent TAP cannot accurately assess the programme’s likely performance in
terms of the investment criterion of efficiency and effectiveness, which is thus given a medium
rating.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
131. The independent TAP recognizes the value of this transaction aiming to enable GCF, as a
shareholder of a newly created guarantee company (i.e. GGC), to potentially leverage its equity
tenfold – mobilizing much larger amounts of private sector climate finance to selected countries
via guarantees than would typically be possible via direct investment models.

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 110
132. The Board has been asking the Secretariat for several years to seek alternative models for
guarantees to support climate finance. The concept is important and conceptually worthy of GCF
funding and support. However, the Secretariat has never put together a request for proposal to
receive alternative options and partners to address the guarantee needs, which the independent
TAP sees as a missed opportunity. The current proposal provides one alternative, but GCF could
have benefited from an open call for proposals with other options.
133. As explained in the first section of the assessment, the independent TAP evaluated the
GGC proposal for B.33 and provided the proponents with several comments on different aspects
of the investment criteria. The proponents came back shortly thereafter with a new funding
proposal to be submitted to B.34, resolving some of the concerns observed by the independent
TAP, but leaving some important concerns not wholly addressed.
134. Climate impact: the core purpose of GCF is to support interventions that have a clear
climate purpose and result in beneficial climate impacts, whether mitigation or adaptation. The
proponents have advanced in developing a transaction selection process, including the screening
criteria and overall proposed methodology to assess the climate impacts of the loans and bonds
that will qualify for guarantees. However, the proponents need to develop their own screening
criteria, avoiding the potential confusion from relying on standards and taxonomies from other
entities (e.g. CBI, the contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the Rio Markers Handbook11). Moreover, the
proponents could further refine the process, as the definitions in the screening criteria are too
simplistic, especially considering that this tool will eventually lead to decisions regarding large
adaptation and mitigation investments. Special attention should be given to adaptation project
screening, refining the guidance to analyse climate impacts and hazards, and effective
interventions for resilience.
135. Additionally, the independent TAP recommended that the project proponents develop a
due diligence process with the origination partners, to ensure that they have the capacity and
knowledge to support the origination of transactions. The proponents resolved this issue,
explaining that they will run training programmes and workshops for origination partners to
ensure that they can effectively assess what is a suitable transaction to introduce to GGC. The
independent TAP recommends that such capacity-building be based on an upfront assessment of
their real expertise on climate change capacity, and recognized experience in working in the
selected geographies.
136. Administration and governance: the revised proposal has made considerable advances
in proposing the involvement of significant numbers of role players in key positions, including
the GGC Board of Directors and the GGC Impact Committee, which have the capacity to support
critical climate change analysis. In response to the suggestion of the independent TAP to have a
Board with a veto on the transactions, the proponents agreed to have three knowledgeable Board
members with climate change experience who will also be part of the Impact and Credit
Committees, with veto power. However, the final governance structure needs to be further
revised and accounted in terms of human resources, roles and investment resources.
137. One of the main concerns of the independent TAP is that GGC and DGG are both start-ups,
which by definition have no track record. GGC is trying to demonstrate the capacity to achieve its
goals on the basis of the curricula vitae of the three individual founding members and Cardano
Development. However, since the independent TAP evaluated the first assessment, one of the
founding members with expertise on environment and sustainability left the company,
demonstrating that this could continue to happen at any point. Moreover, the stability of the
11 See https://www.oecd.org/dac/environment-
development/Revised%20climate%20marker%20handbook_FINAL.pdf

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 111
company is heavily dependent on one individual founding member who owns 70 per cent of the
shares of DGG, and on Cardano Development, posing risks for GCF investment.
138. Although it is difficult to establish a clause of permanence, GCF should be able to decide
on the legal procedures to ensure that the partners of the GGC commit to sustaining the company,
and if the individual partners decide to leave the company, make proper arrangements with
Cardano Development on the permanence or exit strategy of the structure. The independent TAP
also recommends that the Secretariat consider incorporating a key person provision into its
agreements with DGG and GGC considering the concentrated ownership structure of GGC and its
small founder team.
139. The independent TAP remains concerned about the role of MUFG as AE, which will have
only one seat on the Board of Directors and has not described a clear process through which it
will apply its capacity to support the overall objectives of GGC. Moreover, as one of the five banks
that will originate transactions, MUFG is putting itself in a situation of potential conflict of interest
that needs to be carefully managed.
140. The GCF legal team should draft a firewall policy and governance procedures on improper
use of, sharing and discussing material and non-public information within GGC, especially
between and among the teams that conduct project selection, assessment and appraisal and the
investment decision makers (i.e. Credit Committee, GGC Board), and between MUFG as AE, DDG
as EE and GGC. This will prevent any potential collusion or perception thereof.
141. Country ownership: as the programme evolves, the proponents need to develop a much
stronger analysis of the market, policies and institutional capacities to support guarantees and
general blended structures in the selected countries. So far, they have provided a short market
analysis for each of the countries, which will need deepening. It is critical to ensure a real
engagement process with the national private and public institutions that could potentially be
involved in supporting climate guarantees and with the climate finance actors that could provide
support both in originating transactions and in providing financial support. The NOLs are
important but are only one point of entry to a much stronger analysis of the capacities and needs
within countries to use guarantees to support their NDC goals, and engagement with in-country
institutions.
142. In offering GGC products and services to NOL countries, GGC should prioritize those that
have no investment grade and developed financial systems, and a minimum portfolio allocation
approach should be developed. For example, a weighted percentage of the countries’ population
to the total population benefiting from the GGC product, whichever is appropriate, as this
reference to population is the criterion GGC is using in selecting countries. This will ensure that
less attractive countries will be able to secure much-needed climate finance in support of their
NDC commitments in a timely manner.
143. Cost-effectiveness: if guarantees are to be proved to work, it is critical that they should
be available at an affordable cost. In the end, guarantees will only be used in the case of default
by the loan or bond issuers; in the meantime, the money will be located with a fund administrator
such as Pacific Investment Management Company until it is needed. The overall structure and
costs associated with GGC seem very high, as there are staff costs, consultants, regulatory and
transactional costs and overheads all the way from the origination to actual delivery of the
guarantee. The independent TAP understands that the use of public resources from GCF and other
potential investors could be subject to risk in order to prove the guarantee model, but it is also
important to analyse the minimum level of concessionality needed and whether the proposed
cost structure of the project promotes maximum cost-effectiveness. As the independent TAP has
not been able to review the final budget and fee schedule it is difficult to ascertain whether the
requested management fees and overhead costs are appropriate. The independent TAP notes the
process currently underway in which the Secretariat and DGG are discussing the management

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 112
fee, with a clear focus on ensuring value for money, supported by FCDO and a team of external
expert advisors, including PWC.
144. Notwithstanding the above-mentioned concerns, the independent TAP endorses this
funding proposal for approval by the Board, acknowledging the high-risk high-reward nature of
the transaction.
145. In order to minimize the risks, the independent TAP further recommends that any
approval of this funding proposal by the Board is made subject to: (a) the following condition
precedent to the second disbursement to the AE under the funded activity agreement (“FAA”);
and (b) the inclusion of the following covenants in the FAA:
146. Inclusion of the following condition precedent to second disbursement under the FAA:
147. Delivery to GCF Secretariat by the AE of the final version of the programme operations
manual, duly approved by the AE and including the content referred to in paragraphs (a) to (h)
below, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat:
(a) A final version of the GGC Guarantee Policy (in the form delivered as a condition
precedent to first disbursement under the FAA), including a revised transaction selection
process that sets out the GGC approach to providing guarantees, with reference to GGC´s own
procedures. The GGC Guarantee Policy will include a more robust adaptation and mitigation
section, with indicators for each of the selected sectors involved in the funding proposal. This
shall be accompanied by a robust measurement, reporting and verification system that can
serve for the duration of the programme;
(b) A final version of the document that details the process and criteria for selecting the
origination partners and the actions that GGC will take to build the origination partners’
capacity on climate change;
(c) A clear description of the revised governance structure of GGC, with at least three
members of the Board of Directors having climate change expertise and who are also members
of both the Impact and Credit Committees. The description should also detail the roles of all
parties involved in the transaction selection process, the climate advisors, the composition and
role of the DGG Impact Team and the functions to be fulfilled by in-country climate change
consultants;
(d) A firewall policy and governance procedures on improper use of, sharing and discussing
material non-public information within GGC, especially between the teams that conduct project
selection (origination partner, borrower/client), screening or initial due diligence during the
transaction selection process (DGG Impact Team, consultants), project assessment (i.e. GGC
Board, DGG Impact Team, consultants), project appraisal/fact-finding missions (DGG Impact
Team, local stakeholders with respect to gender, social safeguards, environmental and legal
matters, etc.), and the investment decision makers (i.e. Credit Committee, GGC Board);
(e) An operations and business plan for conducting in each Host Country which has
provided an NOL: (i) stakeholder consultations among the targeted sectors, potential project
sponsors and the national private and public institutions that could potentially be involved in
supporting climate guarantees, originating transactions or providing financial support; and (ii)
an in-depth financial and market sector assessment covering an analysis of the climate finance
market, policies and institutional capacities to support guarantees and general blended
structures, with a pipeline of GGC projects that will support each of the Host Countries’ NDC
goals;
(f) A final budget with the appropriate cost and management fees payable by GGC;

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 113
(g) A management continuity plan for GGC (the “Management Continuity Plan”), including
key person provisions, given the risk of personnel and/or institutional/company ownership
structure changes over the 20-year period, with such plan to be approved by the holding
company established by the Accredited Entity to hold GCF’s indirect interest in GGC (“GCF
Holdings”), in its capacity as a shareholder of GGC, as a Shareholder Reserved Matter in
accordance with the process set out in the GGC Shareholders’ Agreement. The plan will include
the design of business processes, formulation of policies on personnel and exit strategies and
must be consistent with the GGC Shareholders’ Agreement and Management Agreement; and
(h) A system of quotas which ensures that a minimum percentage of the total GGC portfolio
of Guarantees will be allocated to a specific group of countries: Host Countries that are below
investment grade or with no credit rating.
148. Inclusion of the following covenants in the FAA:
(a) The Accredited Entity shall implement appropriate measures to manage and to deter,
mitigate and/or correct any conflicts of interest, actual or perceived, between the Accredited
Entity on the one hand and the Accredited Entity and its affiliates on the other hand which may
be involved in other activities relating to GGC, including without limitation:
(i) a firewall policy and governance procedures on improper use of, sharing and discussing
material non-public information received in connection with GGC; and
(ii) appropriate information barriers between the personnel of the Accredited Entity
involved in its origination function (including acting as an origination partner under the
programme) and the personnel of the Accredited Entity involved in carrying out the functions of
the Accredited Entity under the AMA and FAA;
(b) The Accredited Entity shall ensure that DGG implements appropriate measures to
manage and to deter, mitigate and/or correct any conflicts of interest, actual or perceived,
between DGG on the one hand and DGG and its affiliates on the other hand which may be
involved in other activities relating to GGC, including without limitation, a firewall policy and
governance procedures on improper use of, sharing and discussing material non-public
information received in connection with GGC;
(c) The Accredited Entity shall deliver to the GCF, once every two years following the
effective date of the FAA, a report containing a benchmarking and survey of management fees
and costs (including staff, operations, consultants, regulatory) payable by GGC, relative to the
prevailing market costs of similar guarantee facilities;
(d) The Accredited Entity shall deliver to the GCF, once every two years following the
effective date of the FAA, an updated Management Continuity Plan, to be approved by GCF
Holdings, in its capacity as a shareholder of GGC, as a Shareholder Reserved Matter in
accordance with the process set out in the GGC Shareholders’ Agreement; and
(e) The Accredited Entity shall maintain a team of personnel at all relevant levels, each
having the required capacity, skills, knowledge and expertise to act in such capacity, so as to
enable the Accredited Entity to fulfil its obligations under the AMA and the FAA with respect to
the implementation of the programme.

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 114
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel assessment
findings
Proposal name: The Green Guarantee Company
Accredited entity (“AE”): MUFG Bank, Ltd.
Impact potential
The AE would like to thank the ITAP for its review of the impact potential of the Green
Guarantee Company and its acknowledgment of the importance of developing the green
bonds and green loans markets and the high impact potential of guarantees to scale up
climate finance into these markets.
The AE also would like to thank the ITAP for its recognition of the Guarantee Policy,
Transaction Selection Process and Transaction Selection Scorecard as the key tools for
filtering opportunities to ensure impact potential is maximised.
The AE welcomes the ITAP's suggestions to further improve the Guarantee Policy, the
Transaction Selection Process and the Transaction Selection Scorecard.
Paradigm shift potential
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of the paradigm shift potential of the Green Guarantee
Company, and it welcomes the suggestions to further strengthen the paradigm shift potential
through refinements to the Guarantee Policy, Transaction Selection Process, Transaction
Scorecard, governance arrangements, and the implementation of a management continuity
plan.
Sustainable development potential
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of the sustainable development potential of the Green
Guarantee Company, and it notes ITAP’s suggestion that the Transaction Selection Process
and the Transaction Scorecard should be refined to be able to screen for risks of
maladaptation.
Needs of the recipient
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of the needs of the recipient for the Green Guarantee
Company, and for its acknowledgement that the initial list of target countries has been
selected to include examples of GCF priorities such as the least developed countries, small
island developing states and African countries.
The AE welcomes ITAP's suggestion that an operations and business plan for each target
country is developed.

--- Table 1 on Page 118 ---
Impact potential
The AE would like to thank the ITAP for its review of the impact potential of the Green
Guarantee Company and its acknowledgment of the importance of developing the green
bonds and green loans markets and the high impact potential of guarantees to scale up
climate finance into these markets.
The AE also would like to thank the ITAP for its recognition of the Guarantee Policy,
Transaction Selection Process and Transaction Selection Scorecard as the key tools for
filtering opportunities to ensure impact potential is maximised.
The AE welcomes the ITAP's suggestions to further improve the Guarantee Policy, the
Transaction Selection Process and the Transaction Selection Scorecard.
Paradigm shift potential
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of the paradigm shift potential of the Green Guarantee
Company, and it welcomes the suggestions to further strengthen the paradigm shift potential
through refinements to the Guarantee Policy, Transaction Selection Process, Transaction
Scorecard, governance arrangements, and the implementation of a management continuity
plan.
Sustainable development potential
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of the sustainable development potential of the Green
Guarantee Company, and it notes ITAP’s suggestion that the Transaction Selection Process
and the Transaction Scorecard should be refined to be able to screen for risks of
maladaptation.
Needs of the recipient
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of the needs of the recipient for the Green Guarantee
Company, and for its acknowledgement that the initial list of target countries has been
selected to include examples of GCF priorities such as the least developed countries, small
island developing states and African countries.
The AE welcomes ITAP's suggestion that an operations and business plan for each target
country is developed.

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.07/Rev.01
Page 115
Country ownership
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of country ownership for the Green Guarantee
Company, and it welcomes ITAP's suggestion to continue engagement with relevant public
and private sector institutions in each target country to align purposes and to gain support in
the origination of climate change transactions.
Efficiency and effectiveness
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of the efficiency and effectiveness of the Green
Guarantee Company, and it welcomes the suggestions to further strengthen the efficiency and
effectiveness.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
The AE would like to thank the ITAP for its review and assessment of the Green Guarantee
Company against the GCF investment criteria and notes with thanks its positive
recommendation to the GCF Board to approve the Green Guarantee Company. The AE concurs
with the sentiments of the ITAP that while the Green Guarantee Company’s innovative and
ground-breaking approach does present areas of uncertainty this is adequately mitigated by
the significant and unparalleled potential of the Green Guarantee Company to leverage a
modest equity contribution from the GCF to mobilise USD billions of climate finance from
global credit and capital markets.
The AE is confident that the presence of Cardano Development, an established fund manager
with a 15-year track record of investing in developing countries and USD 3 billion of capital
under management will, as a significant shareholder of the Development Guarantee Group,
ensure the management continuity and good governance that ITAP rightly highlights as being
essential to the future success of the Green Guarantee Company. The AE also takes comfort
from the fact that Cardano Development and the management team of the Development
Guarantee Group have collectively successfully developed and scaled six guarantee
companies focused on developing countries, a track record that is unmatched in the market
and as such ensures that GCF is working with the most experienced team possible on the
Green Guarantee Company.
The AE further confirms its agreement with the principles of the recommendations of the
ITAP for development of the Green Guarantee Company and will work with the GCF
Secretariat to integrate these principles into the operational and constitutional
documentation of the Green Guarantee Company.

--- Table 1 on Page 119 ---
Country ownership
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of country ownership for the Green Guarantee
Company, and it welcomes ITAP's suggestion to continue engagement with relevant public
and private sector institutions in each target country to align purposes and to gain support in
the origination of climate change transactions.
Efficiency and effectiveness
The AE thanks the ITAP for its review of the efficiency and effectiveness of the Green
Guarantee Company, and it welcomes the suggestions to further strengthen the efficiency and
effectiveness.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
The AE would like to thank the ITAP for its review and assessment of the Green Guarantee
Company against the GCF investment criteria and notes with thanks its positive
recommendation to the GCF Board to approve the Green Guarantee Company. The AE concurs
with the sentiments of the ITAP that while the Green Guarantee Company’s innovative and
ground-breaking approach does present areas of uncertainty this is adequately mitigated by
the significant and unparalleled potential of the Green Guarantee Company to leverage a
modest equity contribution from the GCF to mobilise USD billions of climate finance from
global credit and capital markets.
The AE is confident that the presence of Cardano Development, an established fund manager
with a 15-year track record of investing in developing countries and USD 3 billion of capital
under management will, as a significant shareholder of the Development Guarantee Group,
ensure the management continuity and good governance that ITAP rightly highlights as being
essential to the future success of the Green Guarantee Company. The AE also takes comfort
from the fact that Cardano Development and the management team of the Development
Guarantee Group have collectively successfully developed and scaled six guarantee
companies focused on developing countries, a track record that is unmatched in the market
and as such ensures that GCF is working with the most experienced team possible on the
Green Guarantee Company.
The AE further confirms its agreement with the principles of the recommendations of the
ITAP for development of the Green Guarantee Company and will work with the GCF
Secretariat to integrate these principles into the operational and constitutional
documentation of the Green Guarantee Company.

=== PAGE 120 ===
116
Annex 8.1 | Gender Assessment
[4th Review]
September 2022
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft i

=== PAGE 121 ===
117
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 5
1.1 The Green Guarantee Company ....................................................................................................... 5
1.2 Background to the assessment ......................................................................................................... 5
1.3 General Principles ............................................................................................................................. 7
2 Gender Assessments ............................................................................................................................... 8
2.1 Sector/Results Area Assessments .................................................................................................... 9
2.2 Country Assessments ...................................................................................................................... 24
2.3 Findings from Country and Sector Assessments ............................................................................ 37
2.4 Concluding remarks ......................................................................................................................... 43
3 Programme Application ......................................................................................................................... 44
3.1 Roles and Responsibilties (AE and EE) .......................................................................................... 44
3.2 Operational Procedures ................................................................................................................... 45
3.3 Monitoring and Evaluation (Implementation) ................................................................................... 54
3.4 Gender Responsive Project Design ................................................................................................ 55
3.5 Grievance mechanism and stakeholder engagement ..................................................................... 57
3.6 Recommended resources for project owners .................................................................................. 61
4 References .............................................................................................................................................. 62
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change – Energy and power generation ............................ 10
Table 2. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change - Transport ............................................................. 13
Table 3. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change - Buildings, cities, industries and appliances ......... 16
Table 4. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change – Health, food and water security .......................... 19
Table 5. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change – Infrastructure and the built environment ............. 22
Table 6. Potential sector-specific interventions to address identified challenges ........................................... 39
Table 7. Indicators used to assess level of challenge in each country ........................................................... 42
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Four core elements of TSP ............................................................................................................... 45
Figure 2 Process Flow Diagram ...................................................................................................................... 46
Figure 3 TSP Process ...................................................................................................................................... 46
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft ii

=== PAGE 122 ===
118
Figure 4 What’s is a gender analysis? ............................................................................................................. 47
Figure 5 What is a gender assessment by an expert? .................................................................................... 51
Figure 6 What is a gender responsive results framework ............................................................................... 52
Figure 7 Specialists ......................................................................................................................................... 53
Figure 8 TSP flow diagram .............................................................................................................................. 54
Figure 9. Example of a Grievance Mechanism ............................................................................................... 59
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft iii

=== PAGE 123 ===
119
Acknowledgement
The following document is submitted in accordance with the submission of the Full Funding Proposal by the
Green Guarantee Company to the Green Climate Fund in line with their submission of the Project Preparation
Facility (PPF) Application dated 13 October 2021. The team responsible for the compilation of the document
are as follows:
• Development Guarantee Company
• Green Guarantee Company
• Pegasys Limited
• IBIS Consulting
• SR Consulting
The contributions by each of the organisations as well as the independent consultants was pivotal. Although
we cannot specially recognize the individuals named below for their expertise, dedication, energy, and
generosity, their role in the compilation of the annex is well noted. The impact of this Annex will be the product
of their collective contributions.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 4

=== PAGE 124 ===
120
1 Introduction
1.1 THE GREEN GUARANTEE COMPANY
Green Guarantee Company (GGC) is a guarantor for green and climate bonds and loans. GGC’s mission is
to help developing countries gain access to global capital for climate financing by transferring its investment-
grade rating via a guarantee onto the developing country borrower. The guarantee on the bond or loan
removes the default risk on interest and principal payments by having GGC as a backup payer if the borrower
is unable to fulfil its obligation to the lender. Guarantees provided by GGC will help credit enhance climate
change projects in developing countries, improving their sub-investment grade credit ratings to investment
grade so that they become eligible for investors from global capital markets to consider them for investment.
Green financial products and instruments will play a key role across all climate mitigation and climate
adaptation sectors. These include green bonds and green loans that allocate the use of proceeds to eligible
climate investments.
GGC’s guarantees will credit enhance bonds and loans to allow the global capital market to invest in green
and climate bonds and loans from developing countries - prioritizing decarbonization and low-carbon pathways
across emerging markets. GCC’s objective is to use guarantees to deliver climate mitigation projects which
help deliver a net-zero carbon economy and climate adaptation projects which deliver environmental and social
sustainability.
Rebuilding emerging economies today to be green tomorrow can help avoid climate-borne financial and
economic crises, protect today’s investment in recovery, and produce lasting economic gains. A recent study
by the IFC (2021) showed that green recovery measures across 21 major emerging-market economies
(representing 62 percent of the world’s population and 48 percent of global emissions) in selected sectors
could generate $10.2 trillion in investment opportunities, create 213 million cumulative new direct jobs and 4
billion tons CO2e reduction in GHG emissions annually between 2020-2030. GGC's portfolio covers 8 of these
countries.
In addition to considering the positive impact associated with the finance being provided, GGC also recognizes
the importance of ensuring sound gender and environmental and social (E&S) practices to avoid and/or
minimize potential financial and reputational liabilities. Consequently, the consideration of gender factors and
safeguards forms an integral part of GGC’s decision making and transactional processes to ensure key risks
and impacts are effectively managed throughout the transaction lifecycle.
1.2 BACKGROUND TO THE ASSESSMENT
The GGC fully adheres to the principle of country ownership, meaning that for each project that receives a
guarantee from GGC, a Gender Assessment (Annex 8.1) and Action Plan (Annex 8.2) will be in place and in
alignment with the requirements set out both by the GCF (GCF & UNWOMEN 2017) and the prevailing
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 5

=== PAGE 125 ===
121
international ratified legal frameworks, regional and national gender policies, or other public policy for gender
equality and women’s empowerment.
The project-level Gender Assessments and Action Plans will ensure that each project is designed and
implemented in support of / alignment with other national development strategies that promote equal
opportunities, poverty reduction and sustainable use of natural resources from a national, regional and sector-
specific perspective. This will include analysis of the gender equality landscape and data relevant to the host
country and in the targeted sector(s), including Nationally Determined Commitments (NDCs) and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
This Annex serves as the foundation for the GGC’s responsiveness – through their guarantees – to supporting
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and to monitoring the links between gender equality, climate
mitigation and adaptation, and environmental sustainability.
The Annex is informed by review of existing literature and secondary databases, as well as expert input and
case study analyses, and is considered a living document that will be regularly updated. It comprises three
sections:
1. Chapter 1: This introduction to the gender assessment, including general guiding principles.
2. Chapter 2: Narrative descriptions of i) key gender issues and considerations for each of the five
results areas (sector) that the GGC will look to support projects in, building on the GCF’s
vulnerabilities and capacities for change; and ii) a high-level description of key gender considerations
and commitments in each of the GGC’s 8 focus countries. The intention of this section is to
demonstrate the GGC’s broad understanding of critical gender issues per results area and country,
which will support investment decision-making, inform the development of indicators for the Gender
Action Plan (Annex 8.2), and be explored in greater depth once a project is under consideration by
the GGC.
3. Chapter 3: A more detailed description of the GGC’s approach to practically ensuring projects are in
alignment with the GCF’s approach to project-level gender mainstreaming.
This Gender Assessment will be used by the GGC1, the AE2 as well as project owners to ensure compliance
with GCF’s fiduciary principles and standards, environmental and social safeguards standards and Gender
Policy.
1 GGC is responsible for executing or carrying out the GCF-funded programme and will review the gender action plans, assessment and Climate Impact
reports as and when they submitted by the borrowers
2 The Accredited Entity is responsible for overseeing and monitoring that the GGC is in compliance with the GCF fiduciary principles and standards,
environmental and social safeguards standards and Gender Policy (all of which are standards for GCF accreditation), and other relevant GCF policies
and requirements, in accordance with the relevant legal agreements (accreditation master agreements and funded activity agreements).
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 6

=== PAGE 126 ===
122
1.3 GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Prior to the issuance of a guarantee, a project owner should be aware of the following gender guidelines which
are applicable during the investment process (compiling relevant gender analysis or documents) as well as
project implementation (for example reporting on progress):
• The project proposal considers key issues and requirements of gender sensitive design and
implementation.
• The project is aligned with existing country policies and strategies and best practices (in the gender
assessment, a policy, legal and regulatory review must be undertaken by the project owner).
• The project is aligned with national development strategies that promote equal opportunities, whether
in the intervention region or the sector.
• The project owner considers international legislation including discursive text issued by the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).
• The project owner will conduct stakeholder consultations and engagements in line with Annex 7.
• Sufficient budget is allocated to conduct the gender assessment and compile the action plan.
• The project owner will direct/support an expert where required to support the gender safeguards
process that considers the project type, scale and context.
• The project owner should attempt to align the project with the Sustainable Development Goals and
commit to gender equality and women’s empowerment (SDG 5) as well as relevant cross cutting
themes.
• The project owner should establish meaningful gender performance indicators for the project (gender
indicators are established to measure and compare the situation of women and men over time).
Gender indicators can refer to quantitative indicators (based on statistics broken down by sex) or to
qualitative indicators (based on women’s and men’s experiences, attitudes, opinions and feelings),
and these indicators must feed into the GGC’s overarching Gender Action Plan (Annex 8.2) so that
the portfolio of project’s gender-related progress can be aggregated and tracked.
By undertaking these guidelines, the project owner can build evidence of the gender gaps in markets and
institutions and apply this to their project approach. GGC thus encourages its stakeholders to understand key
gender constraints as well as opportunities, that will seek to narrow gaps, lift constraints, support opportunities
and feed into a more active and engaged dialogue with stakeholders on key levers for sustainable and inclusive
change.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 7

--- Table 1 on Page 126 ---
By undertaking these guidelines, the project owner can build evidence of the gender gaps in markets and
institutions and apply this to their project approach. GGC thus encourages its stakeholders to understand key
gender constraints as well as opportunities, that will seek to narrow gaps, lift constraints, support opportunities
and feed into a more active and engaged dialogue with stakeholders on key levers for sustainable and inclusive
change.

=== PAGE 127 ===
123
2 Gender Assessments
The following section provides narrative descriptions of key gender issues and considerations per results
area, building on the GCF’s vulnerabilities and capacities for change, as well as a high-level description of
key gender considerations and commitments in each of the GGC’s 8 focus countries. The intention of this
section is to demonstrate the GGC’s broad understanding of critical gender issues per results area and
country, which will support investment decision-making, inform the development of indicators for the Gender
Action Plan (Annex 8.2), and be explored in greater depth once a project is under consideration by the GGC.
The assessments were conducted in the absence of a project pipeline and is a living document that will be
regularly updated to reflect key developments.
As has been described upfront in the Full Funding Proposal, the GGC has not yet identified specific projects
nor institutions that they will work with. Rather, they have committed to considering the issuance of guarantees
to climate projects in 8 select countries3, that fall within one or more of five results areas4. Until such time as
the GGC is approached by a project investor / developer / owner with a specific project proposal, it is not
possible – nor useful – to develop focussed and detailed gender analyses, assessments and action plans that
the GCF would typically require of a Full Funding Proposal. It is however important for the GGC to possess
and demonstrate a broad understanding of:
i. The nexus between gender and green bonds (elaborated further in Chapter 3);
ii. Gender-related vulnerabilities and capacities for change for each of the five results areas, that broadly
pertain to the developing countries that the GGC will look to support projects in; and
iii. Each of the 8 countries’ status quo with respect to key gender commitments, responsible institutions and
considerations (i.e., pressing issues that influence gender equality and women’s empowerment issues).
This information essentially provides a baseline of what the GGC knows with regards to the select countries
and results areas with respect to gender, and importantly, reflects the point of departure at which the GGC
would require a project investor / developer / owner to provide a more detailed, context specific gender
analysis, assessment and action plan that aligns with the GCF’s Gender Policy and related requirements. The
findings from these sector and country assessments have been used to develop a framework that the GGC
will use to identify potential gender-responsive interventions that should be considered as part of the project
design process to maximise the gender benefits of a specific project. The framework summarises the most
pressing gender challenges in each country relevant to climate change projects, and the sector-specific
interventions which are most likely to address each challenge. This information thus serves as a basis for the
GGC and the project owner to identify the types of gender issues that a project in a specific country, within a
specific sector, should seek to address.
3 Indonesia; Phillipines; Brazil; Trinidad and Tobago; India; Rwanda; Lao; and Gabon
4 energy access and power generation; low emission transport; buildings, cities, industries and appliances; health, food and water security;
infrastructure and the built environment
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 8

--- Table 1 on Page 127 ---
 | The following section provides narrative descriptions of key gender issues and considerations per results | 
 | area, building on the GCF’s vulnerabilities and capacities for change, as well as a high-level description of | 
 | key gender considerations and commitments in each of the GGC’s 8 focus countries. The intention of this | 
 | section is to demonstrate the GGC’s broad understanding of critical gender issues per results area and | 
 | country, which will support investment decision-making, inform the development of indicators for the Gender | 
 | Action Plan (Annex 8.2), and be explored in greater depth once a project is under consideration by the GGC. | 
 | The assessments were conducted in the absence of a project pipeline and is a living document that will be | 
 | regularly updated to reflect key developments. | 

=== PAGE 128 ===
124
2.1 SECTOR/RESULTS AREA ASSESSMENTS
These assessments are desk-based and serve to elaborate on the GCF’s gender-related vulnerabilities and
capacities for change. In doing so, this information describes the type of vulnerabilities that specific project-
level gender assessments should expand on and investigate further, as well as the types of solutions (i.e.,
capacities for change) that should be integrated into project design and delivery processes.
2.1.1 ENERGY ACCESS AND POWER GENERATION
The GCF’s results area Energy Access and Power Generation is key to reducing reliance on fossil fuels,
and thereby addressing greenhouse gas emission as well as driving economic growth. Projects under this
area fall look to: generate energy from renewable sources such as wind, solar, geothermal, hydro, and
sustainable bioenergy; efficiently and reliably transmit, distribute and store energy; and promote access to
clean energy in a way that promotes sustainable development and climate resilience while reducing emissions.
The on-grid energy sector, particularly in the developing world, has traditionally served urban and industrial
hubs and underserved rural areas, thereby failing to meet the needs of the poor – especially women and
women headed households. The mode of transmission of energy and its distribution has also created gender
inequalities in terms of employment and consumption, with women being negatively impacted. Therefore, while
it is universally accepted that access to energy is a catalyst for economic development, a driver for poverty
alleviation, as well as a vehicle for women and girls empowerment, opportunities to increase access for women
have not yet been fully explored. SDG 7 responds to this, by ensuring “access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all” – linking closely with SDG5a on provision of equitable access to
economic and natural resources. However, the developing world is still far from meeting SDG 7. In 2015, 1.2
billion people had no access to electricity and 85% of them were in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. In addition,
one third of the world lacked access to clean cooking energy. In the past 10 years, significant strides have
been made to shift power generation from fossils to renewable energy with the result that significant increases
were attained in 2018 to 2020, with as much as 31.6% of the total generation in OECD being from renewable
sources (IEA 2020). Investment in RE has increased access to energy to previously under-served communities
and reportedly created more jobs than in the fossil fuel generation and services. Despite these achievements,
today over 700 million people worldwide still lack access to electricity.
The issues mentioned above necessitate energy sectors worldwide to transition to low or no carbon solutions,
and to transform the economic, social and gendered aspects of the sector that have contributed to skewed
and unequal development. Lack of electricity and energy services is directly correlated to poverty and related
elements such as access to education and health. Further, energy poverty disproportionately affects women,
making them more vulnerable to poverty, simply due to the fact that female-headed households are
overrepresented among the people living in poverty (Cagatay 1998). Energy access is therefore pivotal to
economic empowerment. Recognizing the gender-energy-poverty-nexus in planning and implementing
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 9

--- Table 1 on Page 128 ---
These assessments are desk-based and serve to elaborate on the GCF’s gender-related vulnerabilities and
capacities for change. In doing so, this information describes the type of vulnerabilities that specific project-
level gender assessments should expand on and investigate further, as well as the types of solutions (i.e.,
capacities for change) that should be integrated into project design and delivery processes.

--- Table 2 on Page 128 ---
and unequal development. | Lack of electricity and energy services is directly correlated to poverty and related

=== PAGE 129 ===
125
development programs can contribute to meaningful results that benefit women and address gender energy
vulnerabilities such as those identified by GCF (along with capacities for change):
Table 1. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change – Energy and power generation
Vulnerabilities Capacities for Change
• Share of women and women-headed households • Roles of women in household supply / use
without energy access • Share of women and in the energy labour market and
• Impacts women are experiencing due to lack of energy type of occupation
access • Policies and institutional framework to promote gender
equality in energy / power generation
This discussion on vulnerabilities is generalized for GGC’s countries of focus. It refers to vulnerable women in
poor households in rural areas as well as those in urban areas. Women have different energy needs compared
to their male counterparts as a result of their different access levels to resources; their restricted access to
decision making in the home and in the community; and their limited sphere of influence to processes and
resources allocation. In terms of energy, women’s roles are limited to energy provision and their sphere of
influence being domestic (predominantly the kitchen). Yet decisions for household purchases and prioritization
are the purview of men. Men would typically prioritise entertainment appliances, TVs and radios above labour
saving appliances. These gender roles manifest into gender vulnerabilities that impact women negatively.
These gender energy vulnerabilities broadly fall into five intertwined areas:
Energy Poverty. Energy poverty5 is a result of poor incomes and is cyclic in nature such that, unless there
are targeted interventions, this will go on unabated for generations. Low incomes are associated with energy
inefficient dwellings, lack of modern appliances, lack of modern lighting and cooking facilities. As a result,
people in energy poverty households perform poorly in terms of quality of living and tend to degrade the
environment more than others due to their reliance on biomass for their dwelling construction and for cooking.
Women and girls spend a huge portion of their time gathering and collecting firewood compared to those who
have better incomes. The security of women and girls in these situations tends to be compromised.
Education. Girls who have access to energy in their homes get a head start in life. Young girls are able to
read at night, women are able to help their children after sunset and are generally safer from sexual violence.
Children from homes with access to energy achieve much better in comparison to those without.
Health. Poor energy access or energy poverty has a huge toll on women’s health. Worldwide 2.5 million
premature deaths are linked to household air pollution arising from cooking smoke (IEAb 2020). In sub-
Saharan Africa almost 490 000 premature deaths per year are related to household air pollution from the lack
5
Energy poverty has been defined as the absence of sufficient choice in accessing adequate, affordable, reliable, high
quality, safe and environmentally benign energy services to support economic and human development (Reddy, 2000).
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 10

--- Table 1 on Page 129 ---
 | Vulnerabilities |  |  | Capacities for Change | 
• Share of women and women-headed households
without energy access
• Impacts women are experiencing due to lack of energy
access | • Share of women and women-headed households |  | • Roles of women in household supply / use
• Share of women and in the energy labour market and
type of occupation
• Policies and institutional framework to promote gender
equality in energy / power generation | • Roles of women in household supply / use | 
 | without energy access |  |  | • Share of women and in the energy labour market and | 
 | • Impacts women are experiencing due to lack of energy |  |  | type of occupation | 
 | access |  |  | • Policies and institutional framework to promote gender | 
 |  |  |  | equality in energy / power generation | 

=== PAGE 130 ===
126
of access to clean cooking facilities (IEAb 2020). Due to their roles and responsibilities of preparing meals,
mothers and children are the worst affected. Lack of energy also affects food storage and quality. Due to lack
of refrigeration, foods easily go bad before being consumed in poor households. Ill health affects learning for
children and productivity for the women. Without appliances, women have to manually carry out all the
households chores which is physically straining, and in turn compromises their health.
In remote health facilities, refrigeration of vaccines and other medication is crucial to maintain the medications’
shelf life. The Covid pandemic exposed the vulnerability of communities with non-electrified health centres as
vaccines could not be stored in these centres. Maternal mortalities have been reported to be better among
communities that have electricity at their health centres.
Inability to access capital for RE or for own enterprises. Women have challenges in accessing capital for
their own enterprises and in most cases end up in informal and low economic return economic activities. .
An estimated 70% of women-owned small and medium-sized enterprises in the formal sector in developing
countries lack access to capital, resulting in a global financing gap estimated at $300 billion (IFC n.d.). In
Kenya, women own half of all small and medium enterprises, but they experience less growth than male-
owned businesses due to a lack of support and resources (Hassan et al 2013). The limited growth is also due
to lack of capacity, poor access to technology or capital to purchase technology and reliance on animate
labour.
To adequately address these gender energy vulnerabilities, there is need to a global shift in provision of energy
services that applies a gender lens, to achieve gender equality and sustainable results as follows:
1. Empowerment through choices. Women need to be able to make choices on what energy they need
and how to use it. Having choices is a result of economic empowerment arising from better income and
knowledge. It therefore follows that the provision of energy services would facilitate the ability of women
to earn more through:
a. Energy provision that aims to provide sufficient and affordable energy to meet both women’s
productive energy needs (cooking, food processing and water hauling), and strategic energy
needs (lighting for evening study, safety in the community, women’s enterprises, information for
empowerment and emancipation goals); and
b. Electricity supply which makes it possible for women to establish and run small businesses, in
particular those that are rural based.
2. Reforming gender blind policies. Reviewing national policy frameworks and ensuring that energy
generation is clean, affordable and appropriate to serve all, including rural and poor communities. It is
critical that policies are introduced that address challenges or barriers that are faced by women
entrepreneurs, and that address women’s practical and strategic needs.
Currently, most of those impacted by lack of energy services are in the rural areas, with the result that
these current energy structures, policies and strategies are gender blind and fail to meet the requirements
or to address the constraints that rural women face. The structures focus on investment in electricity
generation that largely target those in urban areas, leaving out the poor.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 11

=== PAGE 131 ===
127
3. Enabling income-generating opportunities. Effective energy programs/projects should aim to increase
income in the rural communities. This includes increasing farm yields, improving product quality and
enabling the farmer to demand and receive fair prices for their produce. Energy is also a catalyst for
creating entrepreneurial opportunities that women and youth can participate in, and it enables substitution
of animate (human and animal) labour energy with mechanical technology to improve production and food
security e.g. provision of irrigation water; improving food processing and storage for example with use of
refrigeration.
4. Ensuring sustainability through local initiatives. To ensure the sustainability of off grid RE schemes in
rural areas, there is a pressing need to promote of the establishment of locally based rural agencies to
provide technical support in the RE sector such as in solar battery charging, micro hydro installation and
supply of spare parts, and installing and repairing energy hardware. This thrust can go further to capacitate
small scale, self-supporting local technicians and businesses run by women and set in the rural areas.
Examples of how these types of interventions have been integrated into existing GCF energy and
power generation:
P178: Desert to Power G5 Sahel Facility. The Desert Sahel Project (which covers the countries of Burkina
Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and Niger) aims to improve energy access and security for women and men, and
directly benefit 3.5 million people (out of which 1.75 million are women). More than 700, 000 women and men
will also indirectly benefit from the project. To ensure effective gender mainstreaming, the project will address
institutional and financial barriers focusing on opening opportunities for women. Specifically, it will provide
training to the staff of financial institutions and banks to capacitate their staff to integrate gender in their
systems and service provision. Furthermore, the project will assist the five Sahel countries to develop gender-
responsive regulatory frameworks.
FP168: Leveraging Energy Access Finance (LEAF) Framework. This program (covering Nigeria, Kenya,
Ghana, Guinea, Ethiopia and Tunisia) seeks to unlock local currency debt capital to scale up decentralized
and distributed renewable energy in the five African countries. LEAF aims to provide access to clean and
reliable energy for 1.18 million households (directly benefitting 2.95 million women) by unlocking financing for
Decentralized Renewable Energy companies to deploy Solar Home Systems (SHS), Green Mini-Grid (GMG)
and Captive Power solutions. The Program will facilitate access to credit to women for SHS, GMG and captive
power solutions, and is estimated to create 15,600 jobs for women during the scale-up of DRE companies.
2.1.2 LOW EMISSION TRANSPORT
The GCF’s Transport results area focuses on increasing access to low-emission transport by supporting low-
and zero-emission public and private transport systems. Such schemes typically fall under country or city-wide
cross-cutting GCF projects that support Green Cities or Resilient Urban Systems, with the inclusion of climate
resilient connectivity options. Such projects are aligned with SDG 11 “Sustainable Cities and Communities”,
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 12

=== PAGE 132 ===
128
which includes a specific target (11.2) that commits countries to providing “access to safe, affordable,
accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public
transport, with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with
disabilities and older persons”. In doing so, this target enables the attainment of SDG 5’s (Gender Equality)
commitments to support women in receiving equal rights to economic resources. It is within this context that
the GCF has defined transport-specific vulnerabilities and capacities for change (Error! Reference source
not found.).
Towards creating meaningful change for women and girls who rely on transport for economic, educational,
domestic and recreational activities, GGC will seek to ensure that any low-emission transport projects that it
supports, contribute to unlocking and enabling these capacities for change.
Table 2. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change - Transport
Vulnerabilities Capacities for Change
• Share of women among users of public transport, share • Roles of women in the community/family with regard to
of women without access to public transport transport patterns
• Impacts women and men are experiencing due to lack • Share of women and men in the transport labour market
of or poor quality of transport and type of occupation
• Policies and institutional framework to promote gender
equality in transport sector
With transport being one of the leading contributors of GHG emissions, there has been a global push to
promote investment in sustainable systems that support a move away from private motoring to focus on low
emission public transport, walking and cycling (World Bank 2021). As part of many national responses to build
back better in the wake of COVID-19, many countries have seen this as an opportune time to make shifts in
transport design, planning and operations. COVID-19 has deepened and widened the existing inequalities in
the transport sector, “entrenching transport-disadvantage, poverty and social exclusion” where women’s needs
and rights have historically been largely overlooked, and women are significantly underrepresented in transport
investment and decision-making (Jennings 2020). This undermines progress against SDG 5 and SDG 11,
amongst others.
Therefore, the impact and sustainability of shifts and improvements in transport systems will largely depend
on the degree to which women and other vulnerable groups’ needs are taken into consideration, as a basis for
influencing and informing investment and design decisions. As a starting point, it is important to consider
existing differences in transport patterns and travel behaviour of men and women, and how existing systems
respond, or fail to respond, to these.
Differences in travel behaviour. Women’s travel is considered ‘multi-purpose’ due to the gender-based
division of work in most households, which means that women require transport for their more varied
obligations – ranging from formal and informal employment, to domestic tasks and caregiving (i.e.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 13

--- Table 1 on Page 132 ---
 | Vulnerabilities |  |  | Capacities for Change | 
• Share of women among users of public transport, share
of women without access to public transport
• Impacts women and men are experiencing due to lack
of or poor quality of transport | • Share of women among users of public transport, share |  |  | • Roles of women in the community/family with regard to | 
 | of women without access to public transport |  |  | transport patterns | 
 | • Impacts women and men are experiencing due to lack |  |  | • Share of women and men in the transport labour market | 
 | of or poor quality of transport |  |  | and type of occupation | 
 |  |  |  | • Policies and institutional framework to promote gender | 
 |  |  |  | equality in transport sector | 

=== PAGE 133 ===
129
accompanying children and elderly relatives to school, clinics, etc.) (International Transport Forum 2019)
(Jennings 2020). While social characteristics (such as income status, age, number of dependents, etc.)
influence women’s transport decisions, their travel typically comprises shorter distances, with more complex,
multi-leg trips that often take place during off-peak hours. Trips are also often multi-modal to allow for more
flexibility (International Transport Forum 2019). This means, that despite women predominantly having have
less access to all means of transport than men, they tend to make more frequent (often shorter) trips required
for health, food and caring responsibilities – in addition to the transport they require for income-generating
activities (Jennings 2020).
Gender CC also identified a set of gendered impacts on human health in the transport sector, whereby women
face greater risks and challenges than men. These include: “women's transportation of heavy loads over long
distances; inadequate road safety for pedestrians; contamination through air pollution; sexual violence against
women in transport systems and remote areas; and speeding in cars.” (Gender CC n.d.) Jenning’s assessment
of whether post-COVID-19 transportation systems in sub Saharan Africa were serving the needs of women
highlighted similar physical risk factors, which are often compounded by cultural restrictions that limited the
way in which women move (time away from home, locations they may travel to, mode of transport, need for
chaperone etc.).
Access to opportunities. Gendered mobility barriers hinder women’s access to income generating
opportunities – a concern that was highlighted in a 2017 ILO report, which identified “lack of transport as the
greatest challenge to the female labour force”. This is a clear contributing factor to the fact that, in 2021, only
49% of women participated in the formal workforce globally, compared with 75% of men (World Bank 2021).
Female entrepreneurs are also stifled by transport costs, which often limit their access to income, opportunities,
services and markets (Jennings 2020).
Underrepresentation of women in the transport sector. Despite the above findings, mobility plans rarely
consider the safety, security, comfort, accessibility and affordability needs of women and girls (UNEP 2020).
This is partially linked to the underrepresentation of women in the transport sector globally, which has led to
the marginalisation of women’s interests and needs (UNEP 2020).The sector is highly gendered, where
women are predominantly employed into low(er) paid/low(er) status jobs with few, if any, opportunities for
career development. One of the biggest barriers to women’s entry into the transport labour force is the high
rate of violence against transport workers; this affects the ability to encourage women to qualify and work in
the sector and affects retention of female employees (ILO 2013).
Research has shown that women are vital to a low-carbon economy transition, which includes a more
integrated mobility sector. Improving gender equality and safety in transport will lead to higher levels of uptake
of low emission public transport, biking and walking (Saunders 2019). Achieving this requires a range of
interventions, from policy reforms to targeted and meaningful engagement with women, and capacity building
– both for transport agencies and operators, and women working in the sector. These capacities for change
will be integrated (as appropriate) into projects that GGC seeks to support (Saunders 2019):
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 14

=== PAGE 134 ===
130
1. Development of gender-informed transport policies, strategies and regulations, that draw on up-to-
date social and gender analyses and participatory planning (i.e. gender inclusive consultations) with both
female and male beneficiaries.
2. On-going routine analysis, and evaluation and reporting, of gender and transport issues during
transport planning, implementation and operations to identify physical, economic and social risk
factors that affect affordability and access of transport for different population groups. This includes
monitoring user patterns, to ensure services respond to specific mobility needs of women and girls, who
utilise transport to access health services, education and economic opportunities.
3. Awareness-raising and capacity-building for transport agencies and service operators to ensure
systems are in place to actively manage and respond to gender issues both internally (with employees)
and externally (with users).
Examples of how these types of interventions have been integrated into existing GCF Transport
projects are described below:
FP166: Light Rail Transit for the Greater Metropolitan Area (GAM). To address the significant
underrepresentation of women in Costa Rica’s transport sector, the project has committed to generating direct
and indirect jobs for women through i) the hiring and provision of spaces for women entrepreneurs to be part
of the tertiary service providers that the electric light rail transit system acquires; and ii) rolling out of a program
to attract women to join the train’s workforce by committing to supporting equal opportunities, and protect
female employees through the development of develop protocols to prevent sexual harassment in the
workplace.
FP085: Green BRT Karachi. Towards developing a zero-emissions bus rapid transit (BRT) system that is
safe and accessible to all, the project has committed to conducting periodic ridership surveys to track changes
in (i) size and diversity of riders, and (ii) their satisfaction level, the results of which will feed into decision-
making regarding routes, pricing, peak and off peak hours etc. An awareness raising program will also be roll-
out out to addressing all forms of harassment, violence, bullying, theft, and other security concerns, with all
employees trained to handle and record incidents of sexual harassment and other crimes.
2.1.3 BUILDINGS, CITIES, INDUSTRIES AND APPLIANCES
Cities as hubs for growth and with their large carbon footprints, offer opportunities for addressing climate
change with potential to achieve high positive impacts overall. Thus, the GCF has identified Buildings, cities,
industries and appliances as one of the eight key result areas. This result area by its nature is cross-cutting
and overlaps in scope with four other result areas; namely a) Energy generation and access, b) Transport, c)
Infrastructure and built environment and d) Health Food and water security. The “Buildings, Cities, Industries
and Appliances” result area focuses on the adoption of better technologies, energy efficiency, energy efficient
designs and introduction of incentives that change behaviour to help reduce energy use.
The result area also responds to a number of sustainable development goals, in particular SDG 11
“Sustainable Cities and Communities”, SDG 7.3 “Energy efficiency”, SDG 9 “Industry, Innovation and
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 15

=== PAGE 135 ===
131
Infrastructure”, and SDG 5 “Gender Equality”. This result area specifically talks to SDG 11b by seeking to
adopt and implement integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation and
adaptation to climate change and resilience to disasters. This is particularly pertinent in many countries where
women are the primary users and consumers of energy. In developing and implementing projects under this
results area, it is therefore critical to understand and address the gendered vulnerabilities relevant to this space
(such as those identified by the GCF in Error! Reference source not found. below). In doing so, women-
centred opportunities (i.e. capacities for change) can be introduced into project designs.
Table 3. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change - Buildings, cities, industries and appliances
Vulnerabilities Capacities for Change
• Share of women among building occupants, users of • Roles of women in the buildings, cities, industries with
public/communal infrastructure, users of appliances regard to resources/energy use patterns
• Share of women in energy/fuel poverty • Share of women and men in the relevant labour market
• Impacts women and men are experiencing due to and type of occupation
inefficient patterns of resource use in buildings, cities, • Policies and institutional framework to promote gender
industries and/or by appliances (health, poverty) equality in buildings, cities, industries
Key determinants of vulnerability in urban setups have been identified as:
• individual assets (in particular income, and also housing and employment);
• collective assets (location, services, and infrastructure); and
• institutional factors (in particular knowledge, governance practices and urban planning).
Each of these manifest and impact women and men differently:
Housing, shelter and health risks. Housing provision for cities in the developing world is insufficient and
inadequate, with better housing and living spaces being accessed by the more affluent members of the
society. 40% of the poorest households in urban areas are headed by women (IIED 2021), meaning a large
proportion of women headed households live in poor housing conditions, including slums and informal
settlements. These have various shelter deprivations that include energy inefficient appliances or no
appliances at all, poor ventilation, and lack of or unreliable water and sanitation supplies. Disregarding
women’s needs in basic services such as electricity in the household, water provision and sanitation in cities
leads to extremely time consuming and physically onerous burdens for women in terms of water collection,
severe health risks from indoor pollution from firewood, coal or kerosine stoves, and diseases arising from
untreated water. Moreover, since many urban households do not earn enough to purchase all the food that
they need, they often supplement their food supply through urban agriculture activities. However, land
availability in cities for such practices is limited and can be costly, and some city bye-laws restrict crop
production in open spaces. Food quality and shelf life is also reduced by poor storage space and the lack
of appropriate appliances in these poor homes.
Employment and productive time. Availability of lighting has the opportunity to increase working and
studying hours, leading to increased productivity. To qualify for employment, women have to have the right
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 16

--- Table 1 on Page 135 ---
 | Vulnerabilities |  |  | Capacities for Change | 
 | • Share of women among building occupants, users of |  |  | • Roles of women in the buildings, cities, industries with | 
 | public/communal infrastructure, users of appliances |  |  | regard to resources/energy use patterns | 
 | • Share of women in energy/fuel poverty |  |  | • Share of women and men in the relevant labour market | 
 | • Impacts women and men are experiencing due to |  |  | and type of occupation | 
 | inefficient patterns of resource use in buildings, cities, |  |  | • Policies and institutional framework to promote gender | 
 | industries and/or by appliances (health, poverty) |  |  | equality in buildings, cities, industries | 

=== PAGE 136 ===
132
qualifications, get the information on available jobs and time to apply, as well as means of submitting their
applications. In Brazil a study was carried out which showed that when other factors like education are
controlled, women with electrical appliances in their homes were more likely to get jobs than those who did
not (Deloitte 2015). It was considered that they had a competitive edge by obtaining information on job adverts
much more easily because they had access to communication appliances and because they spend less time
carrying out manual tasks had comparatively more time to access information.
Access to capital. These issues impede women from earning enough to support their children or to get out
of poverty, causing them to continue using energy inefficiently or resort to polluting through use of unclean
energy and inadequate waste disposal options.
Gender violence and safety. The danger of gender-based violence is very real in many cities, as dimly lit
streets, lonely transport stations, desolate areas and crowded transport make sexual harassment and violence
against women very likely. Women still face lengthy, expensive and often dangerous routes as they go about
their daily business. Urban violence against women limits women’s movement and their use of public space,
particularly among the most poor and marginalised (Nesbitt-Ahmed et al 2015). The restrictions potentially
curtail women’s economic, educational and social opportunities, exposing women to health and stress risks
and creating severe infringements on women’s rights to the city.
Power relations and decision making. Inequitable power relations in cities and an underrepresentation of
women in governing bodies and key sectors means that women generally have much less influence over policy
and development planning decision making than men. An example is in the construction industry, where men
plan, design and construct houses, schools, shops, streets, drainage facilities and other spaces without always
adequately addressing the specific needs of women and girls. This can contribute to increased fatalities
amongst women, for instance if women cannot evacuate buildings easily due to the physically structure that
do not cater well for cases of emergencies (H Jabeen 2014).
Economic resources and employment. Employment is one area where the gender gap remains huge, with
women occupying lower earning jobs compared to their male counterparts, even when women hold
professional qualifications and experience. Tacoli found out that 54% of women employed in 14 urban centres
in ten countries across Africa, Asia and Latin America, were street vendors, home-based workers and waste
pickers and that when there is an economic crisis this group is immediately negatively impacted (Tacoli 2012).
The nature of jobs that women take (even in formal sectors, like the manufacturing industry, food industry and
other light industries) makes them vulnerable in terms of labour rights, security of employment, inadequate
and unequal pay, exploitation and tortuous promotion pathways. This results in women not having the same
opportunities for economic empowerment, hence denying them a chance for building resilience.
Cities offer several opportunities to address these vulnerabilities and create more resilient, inclusive
communities, such as:
1. Gender equitable policies, programming and planning in cities and urban areas. Bye-laws, policies
and standards need to be implemented to: ensure women can access fairly priced rentals with secure
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 17

=== PAGE 137 ===
133
tenure agreements; social protection programs are properly funded and rolled out for the most vulnerable;
and green housing standards are designed to consider women’s needs; amongst others.
2. More inclusive and efficient city decision-making. Gender equality in local, regional and national
decision making improves the ability of women to influence policies and politics. Including women in the
decision-making process leads to better informed decisions on how to design services and use resources
more efficiently and equitably. The power to make decisions in the built environment based on gender
roles, can contribute significantly to the capacity to adapt to climate extremes.
3. Inclusive transport systems. As described under the Transport Results Area, city transport should not
only cater for example, a bus system that links neighbourhoods to economic centres (thereby addressing
men’s needs) but should also address women’s needs as caregivers, who require better connections to
from home to the market or childcare centres. Transport networks also need to connect poorer areas with
residential areas, for use by women who provide domestic services.
4. Improving access and affordability of appliances and green buildings: Increasing access to
affordable electricity also addresses time poverty in enabling use of energy efficient and affordable
appliances by women. It has been shown that use of appliances enables women to achieve more
economic goals, reduce use of dirty energy and saves time. This also includes Upgrading water heating
and cooling appliances and retrofitting with energy efficient parts.
5. Improving city-wide safety: Careful design of open spaces, parks, lighting, the siting of markets and
latrines and the provision of safe transportation, including the training of drivers and conductors, are all
areas that could contribute to greater safety for all – and in particular, women, children and other vulnerable
groups.
The following GCF projects aim to reduce emissions from buildings, cities, industries and appliances
by supporting policies, standards and technologies that reduce the need for energy.
FP068. Green City Facility. This program aims to enable cities to transition to low-carbon, climate-resilient
urban development. In doing so, the Facility will help the target cities to mainstream gender to ensure that
equal opportunities are afforded to women through employment and participation in decision-making forums
to ensure that gender sensitive infrastructure and services become the norm. Through training it will build the
capacity of women to participate in policy dialogue activities and promote gender equality in access to services
and employment through information sharing.
FP103 Promotion of Climate-Friendly Cooking: Kenya and Senegal. This project aims to accelerate the
growth of Improved Cook stoves (ICS) markets in Kenya and Senegal and significantly increase the level and
quality of ICS production and sales, in rural areas and poor urban areas. The project is estimated to directly
benefit 11.23 million people, mostly women as consumers and users of cook stoves. The project will also
create income generation opportunities from manufacturing of cook stoves and ensure the involvement of
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 18

=== PAGE 138 ===
134
women in the initiatives. Furthermore, the project intends to empower women and build their confidence in
accessing finance, procurement and other support opportunities.
2.1.4 HEALTH, FOOD AND WATER SECURITY
With the population projected to reach 9.7 billion by 2050, there is a pressing need to increase food production
by 50% (Rainforest Alliance 2020). This global food security crisis requires significant scaling up in both the
quantity and quality of food produced, while also ensuring the sector’s environmental footprint is reduced within
the context of climate change. Recognising this, the GCF’s Health, Food and Water Security results area
seeks to support resilient, low emissions agricultural and food systems towards a three-fold paradigm shift: 1)
Promoting resilient agriculture; 2) Facilitating climate informed advisory and risk management services; and
3) Reconfiguring food systems. In doing so, GCF projects under this results area directly serve to support
several critical targets under SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote
sustainable agriculture. Specifically:
• SDG 2.1: “end hunger and ensure access by all people, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable
situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and sufficient food all year round”
• SDG 2.2: “end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the internationally agreed targets on
stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent
girls, pregnant and lactating women and older persons”
• SDG 2.3: “double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular
women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal
access to land, other productive resources and inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and
opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment”.
These three targets are all directly linked to SDG 5 on Gender Equality, and collectively point to the
fundamental role that women play in supporting a shift in global shift agricultural practices. However, while
women make up at least half of the world’s agricultural workforce, they do not get a fair share of the assets,
resources and services that farmers need to sustainably operate (IFAD 2020). This is due to a variety of
challenges and vulnerabilities that they face, which collectively place women – and their dependents – at
greater risk of water or food insecurity or health-related hazards (as identified by the GCF, see Error!
Reference source not found. below).
Table 4. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change – Health, food and water security
Vulnerabilities Capacities for Change
• Share and number of women with increased exposure • Roles of women in targeted communities
to water or food insecurity or health-related hazards • Share of women and men in relevant labour markets
and type of occupation
• Policies and institutional framework to address
vulnerabilities
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 19

--- Table 1 on Page 138 ---
 | Vulnerabilities |  |  | Capacities for Change | 
• Share and number of women with increased exposure
to water or food insecurity or health-related hazards | • Share and number of women with increased exposure |  | • Roles of women in targeted communities
• Share of women and men in relevant labour markets
and type of occupation
• Policies and institutional framework to address
vulnerabilities | • Roles of women in targeted communities | 
 | to water or food insecurity or health-related hazards |  |  | • Share of women and men in relevant labour markets | 
 |  |  |  | and type of occupation | 
 |  |  |  | • Policies and institutional framework to address | 
 |  |  |  | vulnerabilities | 

=== PAGE 139 ===
135
Whilst these vulnerabilities manifest differently based on country-specific contexts, the following overarching
challenges prevail in many developing country contexts.
Differences in roles and responsibilities. In addition to making up a significant component of the global
agricultural workforce – where women are more likely than men to take on part-time, seasonal or low wage
work – women are also responsible for the vast majority of unpaid labour: house chores, cooking, livestock
rearing, childcare and caring for the elderly (S. Huyer et al 2021). In bearing these responsibilities, women are
often more likely than men to spend their money on health-related items for their families– such that, when
women are able to generate income and have more control over household budgets, communities are
generally healthier and more resilient (Rainforest Alliance 2020).
Impacts of climate change. Women’s on-going domestic and livelihood related responsibilities are further
compounded by the increasing prevalent impacts that climate change is having on water and food security
(UN 2019). Women are significantly more vulnerable than men to the effects of climate change due to their
strong reliance on natural resources; these vulnerabilities manifest in many ways –water scarcity increases
the time required by women and girls to collect water, malnutrition and ill health result from food and water
insecurity and poor water quality, and rates of gender-based violence increase as households become more
resource constrained (IFAD 2020) (IUCN 2020). Women also tend to be poorer, meaning their options to act
in times of climate stress are limited (Rainforest Alliance 2020).
The agriculture sector – where the poorest rural women overwhelming work – is hardest hit by droughts, flood
and heatwaves (IFAD 2020) and without access to critical resources (described below), women lack the
adaptive capacity to recover from, and respond to, such shocks and stressors.
Access to resources (land, finances, skills and technology). Women own substantially less land –
including agricultural land (15% versus 85%) – than men, and even in instances where country’s recognize
women’s right to own and use land, discriminatory customary laws mean that in many countries these rights
are not guaranteed (IFAD 2020) (UNWOMEN 2021). Increasing women’s tenure security will increase their
productive capacity, and can also be used as collateral to access finance. However, challenges in accessing
such forms of collateral are often coupled with limited financial products adapted to women’s needs, meaning
women are unable to shift from subsistence to higher value market oriented production, nor invest in more
efficient, resilient, low carbon systems and technologies (S. Huyer et al 2021). FAO research has shown, that
giving women equal access to natural and financial resources, education and land, leads to increased farm
productivity (by as much as 30%) and improvements in family nutrition.
It is therefore critical that agricultural projects focused on enhancing health, food and water security outcomes
be carefully designed to address gender-based constraints, as this is key to unlocking productivity, improving
food and nutrition security, reducing poverty, and enhancing resilience (FAO, IFAD & World Bank 2015). Such
approaches for doing so, include (UNWOMEN 2021):
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 20

=== PAGE 140 ===
136
1. Unlocking bottlenecks for women’s participation in rural value chains, by supporting policy reforms
and identifying measures that improve women’s land rights, establishing and capacitating women
cooperatives and women-owned micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, and enabling access to
appropriate financial and insurance products.
2. Climate smart agriculture skills upliftment and technology transfer to support women farmers and
cooperatives with shifting from traditional practices to CSA approaches through the introduction of climate
resilient agroecological techniques and the incorporation of renewable and energy-efficient technologies
across value chains.
3. Access to climate information and early warning systems, in a timely manner and in appropriate
formats (i.e., language, use of images, use of media / cellphone technology etc.) to ensure women farmers
are able to make decisions and implement disaster preparedness measures in advance of extreme events
so as to protect produce, homesteads, and farming implements / infrastructure.
Examples of how these types of interventions have been integrated into existing Health, Food and
Water Security projects are described below:
FP175: Enhancing community resilience and water security in the Upper Athi River Catchment Area,
Kenya. In establishing a modernized hydro-meteorological observation, monitoring, and testing system for the
catchment area, the project has committed to ensuring that gender focal points within relevant ministries are
engaged in the installation and rehabilitation processes, and that the percentage level of women’s access to
and utilization of the network systems be closely monitored to ensure equitable access.
FP179: Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme. The project has
set ambitious targets with respect to providing targeted financial solutions and products (loans, guarantees
and insurance) and technical assistance to women farmers, to support development and adoption of climate
change adaptation technologies and solutions. This includes the development of women-dedicated credit line
options guarantee solutions that integrate women-specific interests. The project will also seek to ensure that
80% of local financial institutions, financing agriculture activities, are sensitized to lending and guarantee
providing to female farmers.
2.1.5 INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Developing countries are exposed to worsening climate related hazards, storms, tropical cyclones, floods, sea
level rises and droughts as well as secondary hazards such as famine and pandemics. The majority of human
and direct economic losses from natural hazards occur as a result of damage to the built environment
(Kachana Ginige et al 2014). In so far as infrastructure is concerned, the damage caused by extreme weather
events results in huge sums of money being directed to repairs, damage control, rubble clearing, resettlement
of displaced people and humanitarian assistance; inevitably pushing governments into debt crises, bankrupting
businesses and impoverishing individuals. A significant number are not able to recover without external
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 21

=== PAGE 141 ===
137
assistance. And obviously gender is a key aspect affecting vulnerability and capacities to cope with the climate
induced disasters.
On the other hand, infrastructure is crucial in mitigating and adapting to climate change. It is the backbone of
growth and development and is interlinked and interdependent with almost all sectors including transport,
energy, agriculture, telecommunication, industry, housing and water and sanitation, among others. This
interdependency creates another layer of challenges as failure of certain infrastructure have a causal effect on
the rest. For example, when storms damage power lines, the water supply system, transport systems and
energy needs in buildings and appliances are all affected. Despite the importance of infrastructure there is a
significant gap in infrastructure provision in the developing world. Specifically, there is a gap in new
infrastructure and more important in climate resilient infrastructure.
Due to its critical role in climate adaptation and mitigation Infrastructure and built environment is one of the
GCF’s 8 key result areas. The goals for this results area are advanced across four “transition” areas, namely:
i) built environment ii) energy and industry, iii) human security, livelihoods and wellbeing and iv) land-use,
forests and ecosystems. GCF aims to build new infrastructure and also retrofit old traditional infrastructure to
climate proof it.
This results area aligns with SD 9 “Industry, innovation and infrastructure” and is also linked to SDG 11
“Sustainable cities and communities”, SDG 6 “Clean water and sanitation” and SDG 7 “Affordable and clean
energy”. Due to its cross-sectoral nature, it is apparent that provision of climate resilient infrastructure has
huge potential in addressing climate change and in building climate resilient cities and communities. And since
climate induced disaster events disproportionately negatively impact women and the poor, far more than men
and the affluent; mainstreaming gender in provision of infrastructure is critical. Examples of vulnerabilities that
women and men experience due to conventional infrastructure that is not climate resilient are outlined below
(building on those identified by the GCF in Error! Reference source not found.).
Table 5. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change – Infrastructure and the built environment
Vulnerabilities Capacities for Change
• Share and number of women lacking access to adequate • Roles of women in the design and maintenance of
infrastructure (water supply, sanitation, flood protection, infrastructure and the built environment
housing, energy access, etc.) • Share of women and men in relevant labour markets and
type of occupation
• Policies and institutional framework to promote equal
access to adequate infrastructure
Slow evacuations causing fatalities. Poor and vulnerable households (women headed households,
including the elderly and those living with disabilities) tend to evacuate much slower than others in times of
extreme events thus suffering more fatalities (S. Kottegoda 2011). Some fail to get early warnings due to lack
of communication gadgets or time to read and listen to news.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 22

--- Table 1 on Page 141 ---
 | Vulnerabilities |  |  | Capacities for Change | 
• Share and number of women lacking access to adequate
infrastructure (water supply, sanitation, flood protection,
housing, energy access, etc.) | • Share and number of women lacking access to adequate |  |  | • Roles of women in the design and maintenance of | 
 | infrastructure (water supply, sanitation, flood protection, |  |  | infrastructure and the built environment | 
 | housing, energy access, etc.) |  |  | • Share of women and men in relevant labour markets and | 
 |  |  |  | type of occupation | 
 |  |  |  | • Policies and institutional framework to promote equal | 
 |  |  |  | access to adequate infrastructure | 
 |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 142 ===
138
Loss of homes due to poorly constructed buildings. Once more, women headed households and the poor
are affected most as their structures are cheaply constructed and not robust to withstand extreme weather
conditions. They become even more vulnerable and are generally unable to replace their losses.
Food insecurity and famine. Women and specifically, women household heads, rely on subsistence
agriculture to produce their food needs. They generally practice rain-fed agriculture in low lying lands or along
river banks. These fields are prone to flooding events and when that occurs, the poor fail to supply their families
with food and have to resort to humanitarian aid. Famine is common in African countries as a result of
prolonged drought periods. Famine is a slow killer and robes women of their dignity.
Disruption of local security and safety nets. Climate-related disasters such as flood, drought or famine may
disrupt local security safety nets, leaving women and children unaccompanied, separated or orphaned due to
the erosion and breakdown of normal social controls and protections. Lack of social cohesion is much felt in
built areas and the little that exists can dissipate as people seek different shelters during disasters.
Unsafe shelters or camps. After a natural disaster, economic and security challenges may lead women who
are in charge of households and livelihoods to seek temporary relief, shelter and amenable living conditions
in acutely insecure contexts, making them potential targets for exploitation and human trafficking. Disasters
that lead to increased physical, social and economic insecurity, and affect women and children, are among
some of the push factors that give rise to human trafficking.
Responses to these vulnerabilities should seek to provide climate resilient infrastructure solutions that
specifically look to strengthen women’s resilience to external shocks. Approaches that incorporate women’s
knowledge and perspectives into disaster risk reduction in the built environment have proven to be impactful
in minimizing women’s vulnerabilities (Kachana Ginige et al 2009). Such interventions include the following:
1. Coordination of infrastructure development policies, ensuring climate and gender mainstreaming.
Due to the multi-sectoral nature of the built environment, it is critical that all relevant sectors are part of the
policy development process towards ensuring policies are harmonized. Therefore, a systematic
coordination of development policies relating to infrastructure within government sectors and inclusion of
climate and gender considerations is crucial in contributing towards cohesive resilience at national and
subnational scales.
2. Development of inclusive building codes and standards. Construction industries in the developing
world have varying capacities, and levels of regulation are also variable. Hence, in some cases, building
standards are weak or not adhered to. These structures cannot withstand extreme events. For
communities that live in informal settlements including slums, there are no building standards that are
enforced. Slums are frequently wiped out during disaster events. Countries need to assess and revise
their building codes and standards to ensure both climate proofing and gender mainstreaming is
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 23

=== PAGE 143 ===
139
incorporated. To varying extents there may be need for individual certification of builders and retraining
of construction contractors.
3. Building gender sensitive shelters for the communities. Shelters are important to serve those affected
by natural disasters during periods of need. Shelters should offer security and be amenable to basic living
standards thus offering some comfort to the vulnerable. Gender sensitive shelters should be constructed
to ensure women and girls are safe and have access to critical basic services.
4. Early warning and disaster management communication. Gender responsive communication tools
should be designed to target men and women differently, based on their different needs. Training should
be offered to ensure that people understand and appreciate disaster management, understand early
warning ratings and have knowledge of location of shelters should they need them. Governments should
work with vulnerable communities to develop and mainstream gender into early warning systems and
climate information services.
5. Empower women. It’s crucial that countries establish an enabling environment that supports increased
participation and substantive inputs of women in decision and policy-making at all levels. Adaptation
programs should have long-term goals of increasing gender and social security needs, safety nets and
active participation of women in governance at every level through participatory policies and targets, and
capacity strengthening, development of leadership and technical skills, and clear recognition.
Examples of how these types of interventions have been integrated into existing GCF Infrastructure
and Built Environment project are described below.
FP133 Resilience to hurricanes in the building sector in Antigua and Barbuda. GCF is supporting a
robust multisectoral intervention that includes “climate-proofing critical public service and community
buildings, mainstreaming climate resilience into the building sector and financial mechanisms and
strengthening climate information services”. The GAP for the project ensures that women are involved in
governance structures, are extensively consulted and participate in decision and implementation of the project.
SAP008 Extended Community Climate Change Project-Flood (ECCCP-Flood) in flood-prone areas of
Bangladesh. This project aims to increase the resilience of poor and marginalized communities in flood-prone
areas of Bangladesh. Increased flooding impacts poor households and their ability to produce enough food for
their families. This is an example of an adaptation project that focuses on community-led and gender-sensitive
solutions. The project will prioritize female-headed households in the targeted project areas.
2.2 COUNTRY ASSESSMENTS
It should be noted that these assessments are desk-based and have not involved direct engagement with the
relevant gender and / or women’s ministries detailed below. This is because it would be premature to engage
with such government institutions until such time that there is a specific proposal or project under consideration
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 24

--- Table 1 on Page 143 ---
It should be noted that these assessments are desk-based and have not involved direct engagement with the
relevant gender and / or women’s ministries detailed below. This is because it would be premature to engage
with such government institutions until such time that there is a specific proposal or project under consideration

=== PAGE 144 ===
140
that would be of interest and importance to them. GGC and the AE’s approach to engaging with these bodies
is described at a high level in 3.5.2, and elaborated in Annex 7.
2.2.1 INDIA
Key national gender policies, institutions and commitments that mainstream gender considerations
or will influence projects’ enabling environment
• India – like most of the South Asia countries – still faces high levels of gender discrimination in families,
schools and workplaces. While India is reported to have achieved a slight decline in early marriages due
to the 2006 Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, it still is reported to have the highest numbers of early
marriages worldwide (OECD 2014).
• The Ministry for Women and Child Development in India is the key government institution tasked with
advancing policies that address gender issues in the country. Its mission is to create an effective
framework to enable the process of developing policies, programmes and practices which ensure equal
rights and opportunities for women in all spaces.
• The Indian Constitution guarantees equality to all persons within India; it also prohibits discrimination by
the State on the grounds of sex. In 2001, the National Policy for the empowerment of Women (NPEW),
was formulated and it laid down a comprehensive progressive policy for the advancement, development
and empowerment of women with appropriate policy prescriptions and strategies.
• While the Constitution guarantees non-discrimination, in most cases this works in cases of abuse by the
State. Legislation is inadequate to protect individuals against discrimination on the grounds of sex from
non-state actors. Moreover, most of the institutions in India (private or public) rest on the cultural and
traditional discriminatory norms. A few institutions have modernized to incorporate positive irreversible
change regarding gender relations.
• As a result, India’s achievements against the gender goals such as SDG5 have been below par. For
example, 2019 Voluntary Review showed no progress in gender equality. India still faces challenges in
terms of ratio of male to female in the labour force. There was no improvement regarding female to male
mean years of education received as well as the number of seats held in the national parliament. Overall,
India’s progress towards attaining SDG 5 targets has stagnated.
• Several reports indicate that India lacks adequate legislation to address gender concerns and accelerate
the attainment of gender equality in the country (UNICEF, WB and ILO). This is despite the country having
ratified CEDAW and other International Human Rights Protocols.
National overview
India’s GGI for 2021 was 0.625 (best score 1 and least is 0) ranking 140 out of 156 countries. In South Asia,
India is ranked 6th out of 8 countries. The score shows that females are 37.5% less likely to have the same
opportunities as men. India’s gender gap was largest in the category of Health and Survival, and Economic
Participation and Opportunity, ranking 155 and 151 out of 156 countries, respectively (World Economic Forum
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 25

--- Table 1 on Page 144 ---
that would be of interest and importance to them. GGC and the AE’s approach to engaging with these bodies
is described at a high level in 3.5.2, and elaborated in Annex 7.

=== PAGE 145 ===
141
2021). In terms of Political Empowerment, it ranked 57 out of the 156 countries (World Economic Forum 2021),
its best measure out of the four categories.
India’s Gender Inequality Index (GII) was 0.488 in 2019, ranking 123 out of 162 countries (UNDP 2020). The
Key statistics that informed this result include (UNDP 2020):
• 13.5% of parliamentary seats held by women;
• 27.7.0% of adult women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 47.0 percent
of their male counterparts;
• For every 100,000 live births, 133 women die from pregnancy related causes;
• Female participation in the labour market is 20.5 percent compared to 76.1 for men.
The World Bank’s Women, Business and the Law (WBL) 2022 Index gives India a rating of 74.4 (out of a
possible 100). India performs well in mobility, workplace, and marriage. Areas of concern include pay, and
parenthood:
• Pay, whereby certain industries such as mining and manufacturing factories have legislations that are
discriminatory against women (e.g. Mines Act 1952). In addition, the laws do not mandate employers to
give equal remuneration for equal work.
• Parenthood, whereby there is no paid leave for fathers nor is there paid parental leave. Sadly, the law
also does not prohibit dismissal of pregnant women.
More broadly, India faces high incidences high profile rape cases and related gender based domestic violence
matters. It has poor mechanisms for supporting victims’ access to justice, and the country needs considerable
support to strengthen gender responsive legislative frameworks and to mainstream gender in social
institutions.
2.2.2 PHILIPPINES
Key national gender policies, institutions and commitments that mainstream gender considerations
or will influence projects’ enabling environment
• The Philippines has had an active and aggressive legislative agenda to protect women’s rights and ensure
gender equality. Some of the most significant laws of the last decade include (David, Albert and Vizmanos
2018):
o Magna Carta of Women (MCW) also known as Republic Act (RA) 9710 – which is the
encompassing act that operationalises the country’s commitment to the CEDAW.
o Responsible Parenthood and RH Act (RA 10354)
o Domestic Workers’ Act (RA 10361)
o Anti-Child Pornography Act (RA 9775)
o Anti-Violence Against Women and their Children (VAWC) Act (2004)
o Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act (2003)
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 26

=== PAGE 146 ===
142
o Solo Parent’s Welfare Act (2000)
• The empowerment of women to engage in economic opportunities and to fully utilise their civil liberties
has been a strength for the Philippines. There has been greater representation by women in the
government in national parliament (12.44% in 2000 to 29.45% in 2018) as well as local government
(17.16% to 21.3% from 2000 to 2018), though such levels are far from parity.
• Nearly half (48.9%) of managerial positions in the country are women, suggesting a relatively level playing
field in career mobility between the sexes.
• There has been a significant decrease in violence towards women, including physical (from 7.5% in 2008
to 4.3% in 2017) and psychological violence (4.9% in 2008 to 2.2% in 2017).
• Gender issues persist given indicators on early marriages which is a driver of teen pregnancy and a form
of violence against girls, with around 16.5% and 2.2% of women married before the age of 18 and 15,
respectively (Reyes, et al. 2019).
National overview
The Philippines is the second best in the East Asia and the Pacific region (after New Zealand) in terms of their
Gender Gap Index (GGI) score in 2021, with a score of 0.784 (out of a best possible score of 1), placing it 17th
out of 156 countries. Not only has Philippines virtually closed both its Educational Attainment and Health and
Survival gaps, but it is also among the 18 countries in the world that have closed at least 79.5% of their
Economic Participation and Opportunity gaps. This result is due in part to the fact that the Philippines is one
of the few countries that has closed at the same time its gender gap in senior roles, and in professional and
technical roles. However, women should be incentivised to participate more in the broader labour force. Only
49.1% of women are in the job market, corresponding to a gap closure of just 65.3% on this indicator. Similarly,
income and wage gaps persist. On average, 22% of the wage gap and 31% of the income gap have yet to
close. When it comes to Political Empowerment, only 36.2% of this gap has been closed so far. Despite having
a woman as head of state for over 15 of the past 50 years, there are still too few seats in the parliament held
by women (28%) and even fewer women among ministers (13%) (World Economic Forum 2021).
The Philippines has a GII value of 0.430, ranking it 104 out of 162 countries in the 2019 index. In the Philippines
key metrics that informed the GII rating were (UNDP 2020):
• 28 % of parliamentary seats are held by women
• 75.6% of adult women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 72.4% percent
of their male counterparts.
• For every 100,000 live births, 121 women die from pregnancy related causes
• The adolescent birth rate is 54.2 births per 1,000 women of ages 15-19.
• Female participation in the labour market is 46.1% compared to 73.3 for men
The World Bank’s Women, Business, and the Law (WBL) 2022 Index focuses specifically on statistics relating
to the Philippines’ main business city of Quezon City. With an overall Index rating of 78.8 (out of a possible
100). From an equality perspective the Philippines is performing higher than the regional average observed
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 27

=== PAGE 147 ===
143
across the region, particularly in the workplace, pay, and entrepreneurship categories. However, when it
comes to constraints on freedom of movement, constraints related to marriage, laws affecting women's work
after having children, gender differences in property and inheritance, and laws affecting the size of a woman's
pension, Philippines could consider reforms to improve legal equality for women. For example, one of the
lowest scores for Philippines is on the indicator measuring constraints related to marriage (the WBL2022
Marriage indicator). To improve on the Marriage indicator, Philippines may wish to consider allowing women
to obtain a divorce in the same way as a man and giving women the same rights to remarry as men (World
Bank 2022).
Beyond these indices, recent literature also highlights some of the pressing gender-related vulnerabilities
experienced in the Philippines. Work still needs to be done in the Philippines to achieve gender equality. 66.7%
of legal frameworks that promotes, enforces, and monitors gender equality under the SDG indicator, with a
focus on violence against women, are in place. In 2018, 5.9% of women aged 15-49 years reported that they
had been subject to physical and/or sexual violence by a current or former intimate partner in the previous 12
months. Moreover, women of reproductive age (15-49 years) often face barriers with respect to their sexual
and reproductive health and rights. In 2017, 56% of women had their need for family planning satisfied with
modern methods. As of December 2020, only 48.3% of indicators needed to monitor the SDGs from a gender
perspective were available, with gaps in key areas, in particular: unpaid care and domestic work and key labour
market indicators, such as the gender pay gap (UN Women 2022).
Women and girls faced heightened levels of gendered violence in the regions most affected by Super Typhoon
Haiyan in 2013. This was found not to be a result of the disaster alone, but rather rooted in the inherent
inequalities in the social construction of gender prior to the catastrophe, which then become sharpened as
efforts to survive become more urgent (Nguyen 2019).
The findings of the Gender and Inclusion Assessment of the impacts of the Covid-19 Pandemic indicate that
the pandemic worsened the situation of many women and girls across vulnerable subgroups. Even before the
pandemic hit, increasing gender inequality has been documented in the Philippines as the country dropped
from 8th in the Gender Equality Index to 16th within a span of three years. Filipina women are being
economically marginalized, politically subordinated, and restrictions put on their reproductive decisions.
Women and girls experience multiple and disproportionate burdens of care work, and suffer from gender
stereotyping, stigmatization, and sexual shaming. One out of four ever-married Filipina women report enduring
physical, sexual, or emotional violence (UNFPA 2021).
Although the Philippines has achieved several milestones advancing gender equality in the country, there are
some areas that could benefit from interventions. One such area is the moderate female participation in the
labour market, which has hardly improved in the last 26 years (Bayudan-Dacuycuy 2019).
2.2.3 LAO
Key national gender policies, institutions and commitments that mainstream gender considerations
or will influence projects’ enabling environment
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 28

=== PAGE 148 ===
144
• The share of women is relatively high in the Lao National Assembly, but low in other decision-making
positions.
o The share of women in the National Assembly / Parliament is 27.5 %;
o The President and Vice-President of the National Assembly are also women;
o Women account for 31.5% in provincial assemblies;
o However, the share of women in leadership and management-level positions is 5%;
o In 2017, women represented 45% of civil servants overall, few in senior positions;
o In 2015, 1,7% and 7.2% respectively of village chiefs and deputy village chiefs were female.
• Women and girls lag behind in access to education and health.
o Gender Parity Indices (GPI) especially for secondary education and literacy show that women
(79% in 2015), are behind men (90% in same period).
o Lao PDR has high rates of early marriage and adolescent births in the region, 32.7% of young
women aged 20-24 were married before 18, compared to 10.8% of men.
o The adolescent birth rate is 83 per 1,000.
• The Constitution of the Lao PDR guarantees equality between men and women in politics, economy,
culture, and society
o The Lao Women’s Union (LWU) was established in 1955 mandated to represent women of all
ethnic groups
o The National Commission for the Advancement of Women, Mothers and Children, established
since 2003, mandated to define national policy for the advancement of women as well as
mainstreaming gender in all sectors.
o Women Parliamentarian Caucus formed in 2002, responsible for organising female leadership
trainings and for gender training workshops for parliamentarians.
• In 2014 Lao National Survey on Women’s Health and Life Experiences (LNS-WHLE) indicated that Lao
PDR does not have systems yet to monitor female ownership or secure rights over agricultural land.
• The Government of Lao PDR is prioritising the following strategies:
o National gender equality laws, policies and instruments
▪ Enforcing the existing family law which does not allow marriage before the age of consent
▪ Gender output in the 8th NSEDP
▪ 2016-2020 Women’s Development Plan
▪ National Gender Equality Development Plan
▪ Second National Strategy on Gender Equality (2016-2025)
▪ National Law on Preventing and Combatting Violence against Women and Children
▪ Implementation of CEDAW
• Strengthening national capacity
o In 2000, Prime Minister’s Office issued Directive on the inclusion of sex-aggregated statistics in
policy and planning (Government of the Lao People's Democratic Republic 2018).
National overview
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 29

=== PAGE 149 ===
145
Lao PDR ranks 3rd among 20 countries in the East Asia and the Pacific region in terms of their Gender Gap
Index (GGI) score in 2021, with a score of 0.750 (out of a best possible score of 1), placing it 36th out of 156
countries. The score implies that females are 25% less likely to have the same opportunities as males in the
country. Lao PDR is the best performer in the world for the Economic Participation and Opportunity at 91.5%
and scored highly in Educational Attainment (0.965) and Health and Survival (0.975). It is also one of only 22
countries that has closed at least 80% of the gap in managerial roles. Lao PDR has improved its score by over
53 percentage points, reflecting better results in 2017 compared to 2010. The Political Empowerment subindex
score is low at 0.146, making gender parity in politics an area of development for Lao PDR (World Economic
Forum 2021).
Lao PDR has a GII value of 0.459, ranking it 113 out of 162 countries in the 2019 index. In Lao PDR, key
metrics that informed the GII rating were (UNDP 2020):
• 27.5% of parliamentary seats are held by women
• 35.1 % of adult women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 46.2% of their
male counterparts.
• For every 100,000 live births, 185 women die from pregnancy related causes
• The adolescent birth rate is 65.4 births per 1,000 women of ages 15-19.
• Female participation in the labour market is 76.7 % compared to 80.2% for men
The World Bank’s Women, Business, and the Law (WBL) 2022 Index focuses specifically on statistics relating
to Lao PDR’s main business city of Vientiane, with an overall Index rating of 88.1 (out of a possible 100).
From an equality perspective Lao PDR is performing higher than the regional average observed across the
region, particularly in the mobility, workplace, marriage, entrepreneurship, and assets categories. However,
when it comes to laws affecting women's pay, and laws affecting the size of a woman's pension, Lao PDR
could consider reforms to improve legal equality for women. (World Bank 2022).
Beyond these indices, recent literature also highlights some of the pressing gender-related vulnerabilities
experienced in Lao PDR. Despite several achievements, gender inequality in Lao PDR is still a challenge. The
cultural norms associated with a patriarchal society like Lao PDR make efforts toward gender equality
strenuous. The evolving forms of human trafficking, with girls and women being the main victims, makes it
challenging to implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. The absence of gender indicators
disaggregated by sex leads to incomprehensive monitoring mechanisms which might result in gender-blind
policy making processes (Lao Women's Union 2019).
Lao PDR has the highest teenage pregnancy rate in southeast Asia and a high maternal mortality ratio. A
study in two rural districts showed that residents were more likely to lack autonomy. Although marriage was
described as an autonomous decision, 40.4% lacked autonomy regarding marriage. Among sexually active
adolescents, 35.2% used contraception. Boys and girls were said to be equal, yet education access and
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 30

=== PAGE 150 ===
146
gender roles favoured boys. Additionally, violence was more justified by husbands against their wives
(Phongluxa, et al. 2020).
The traditional lifestyles of lowland rice farmers of the southern provinces of Lao PDR are rapidly changing
due to the modernisation and commercialisation of farming and the diversification of livelihoods. Women were
more focused on non-farming practices and considered engaging in the modern, non-traditional, economy
more so than men. Women also reported experiencing greater challenges when engaging and trading in the
agricultural marketplace (Moglia, et al. 2020).
2.2.4 RWANDA
Key national gender policies, institutions and commitments that mainstream gender considerations
or will influence projects’ enabling environment
• Gender equality and the empowerment of women is set out in Rwanda’s Constitution of 2003 (revised in
2015). The Constitution requires that there is at least 30% female representation in decision-making
positions (Gender Montioring Office 2019).
• The National Gender Policy of 2010 was developed to mainstream gender issues and enable development
that is equally inclusive of men and women. To realise the policy objectives set out in the National Gender
Policy, Sector Gender Mainstreaming Strategies were developed and adopted by various sectors to guide
strategic interventions that promote gender equality and women empowerment.
• Rwanda’s Vision 2020 (now Vision 2050) is the country’s development agenda which considers gender
equality and women empowerment as a cross-cutting key element required for the country to achieve its
developmental targets. The agenda commits to creating a gender-sensitive legal and policy framework to
protect and empower women.
• This development agenda informed the current National Strategy for Transformation (2017 – 2024) which
has 3 pillars: Economic Transformation, Social Transformation, and Transformational Governance. Each
pillar has a set of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), and the Gender Monitoring Office (GMO),
established in 2003 by the Constitution, monitors and evaluates the country’s progress across the key
gender-sensitive indicators across all 3 of the National Strategy for Transformation (NST) pillars.
• The Government of Rwanda has also established the National Women Council with over 100 000
committee members from across the country who mobilize and empower women to participate in all
national development programs (UN 2019).
• Rwanda has shown commitment to at least 13 regional and international instruments on gender equality
and women empowerment, including: CEDAW, the Beijing Declation and Platform for Action, the
Convention on the Political Rights of Women, the Declaration on the Elimination of violence Against
Women, and the SDGs (UNDP 2018).
• Rwanda’s Voluntary National Review Report of 2019 revealed that Rwanda is globally renowned for
making significant progress towards targets due to strong political will and institutional and policy
frameworks. However, there are opportunities for improvement and accelerating progress particularly in
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 31

=== PAGE 151 ===
147
improving the participation of women in the labour market and increasing engagement from men in family
planning and other activities traditionally seen as women only issues (UN 2019).
National overview
Rwanda ranked 7th globally (out of 156 countries), and 2nd in Sub-Saharan Africa in 2021, for the GGI with a
score of 0.81 (World Economic Forum 2021). Rwanda is one of the top nine countries to have closed at least
80% of their gender gap. In the dimension of Economic Participation and Opportunity, Rwanda has doubled
the share of women in senior and managerial roles from 2014 to 2019 (from 14,1% to 28.6%). More than 80%
of women in Rwanda participate in the labour force, which is similar to the share of men also participating in
the labour force. Rwanda has also fared well in Political Empowerment with full gender parity achieved in the
representation of women in ministerial positions and parliamentary positions.
In 2019, Rwanda ranked 92 out of 162 countries for the GII, with a score of 0.402 (UNDP 2020). Performance
across the dimensions was as follows:
• 55.7% of parliamentary seats are held by women
• 10.9% of adult women have reached at least secondary education compared to 15.8% of male
counterparts
• For every 100 000 live births, 248 women die in pregnancy related causes
• Female participation in the labour force is 83.9% compared to 83.4% for males.
Focussing on the capital, Kigali, Rwanda has a WBL Index of 83.8 (World Bank 2022). Rwanda has fared well
in Mobility, Workplace, Pay, Marriage and Assets categories, while a key area of concern is Parenthood. On
average, women are entitled to less than 14 weeks of paid maternity leave, and the Government does not
administer all maternity leave benefits in this time. Furthermore, there is no law in place that explicitly prohibits
dismissal of pregnant workers.
As observed with the GGI and GII, Economic Participation of women is similar to that of men, however,
substantial gender gaps remain in earnings as 83.4% of women work in the informal sector, and/or are in low-
wage occupations, leading to the average income of women being 60% of the average income of men (World
Economic Forum 2021). In terms of Educational Attainment, although 95.7% of the gender gap has been
closed, the percentages of girls and boys enrolled in schools are relatively low and educational opportunities
need to be enhanced for all. Only 10.9% of females in Rwanda have a secondary education, this is less than
half of the Sub-Saharan Africa average of 28.8%, and similar statistics are observed for men.
Furthermore, despite the significant strides in political empowerment, some journalists have reported that
“ministers have very little power and can barely make decisions concerning their own budgets, for instance…
And in parliament, women have failed to weigh in on legislative changes on topics like parental leave.” This
suggest that although there are advances in representation of genders politically, stifling pre-existing structures
may be limiting women in influencing policies and budgets (Cascais 2019).
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 32

=== PAGE 152 ===
148
2.2.5 INDONESIA
Key national gender policies, institutions and commitments that mainstream gender considerations
or will influence projects’ enabling environment
• A Presidential Instruction was given in 2000 on Gender Mainstreaming in National Development and is
the main policy for gender mainstreaming requiring gender-sensitive planning, budgeting, implementation
and monitoring in every ministry with the aim of closing the gender gap.
• The State Ministry of Women Empowerment is implementing to the Presidential Decree through various
activities and programs, such as capacity building of relevant officials.
• The Government of Indonesia also makes a call for the equality of all persons in the Constitution of
Indonesia, and the National Development Planning Framework (2005 – 2025).
• The Government of Indonesia has shown its commitment to gender equality by ratifying CEDAW and the
SDGs.
• The Voluntary National Review 2021 revealed that although some strides had been made in developing
gender-sensitive policy and legal frameworks, challenges still persist in violence against women, childhood
marriage, and increasing women’s representation in politics as decision makers (Republic of Indonesia
2021).
National overview
Indonesia ranked 101st globally (out of 156 countries) in the 2021 GGI, and 10th in East Asia and the Pacific,
with a GGI of 0.69 (World Economic Forum 2021). Overall, Indonesia has closed 68.8% of its gender gap, and
has fared well in dimensions of Health and Survival and Educational Attainment. However, wider gaps are
being observed in the dimension of Economic Participation and Opportunity, primarily driven by a sharp
decrease in the share of women in senior roles which dropped from 54.9% to 29.8% in one year. In the
dimension of Political Empowerment, the representation of women in parliament increased from 17.4% in 2019
to 21% in 2021, however, this is offset by the widening gap in representation of women in ministerial positions.
Indonesia had one of the largest drops in the share of ministerial positions occupied by women (from 23.5%
to 17.1%) from 2019 to 2021.
In 2019, Indonesia ranked 121 out of 162 countries for the GII, with a score of 0.480 (UNDP 2020).
Performance across the dimensions was as follows:
• 17.4% of parliamentary seats are held by women
• 46.8% of adult women have reached at least secondary education compared to 55.1% of male
counterparts
• For every 100 000 live births, 177 women die in pregnancy related causes
• Female participation in the labour force is 53.1% compared to 81.9% for males.
Focussing on the capital, Jakarta, Indonesia has a WBL Index of 64.4 (World Bank 2022). Indonesia has fared
well in the Mobility and Pay, while key areas of concern are:
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 33

=== PAGE 153 ===
149
• Marriage, as the legal frameworks prevent women from heading households the same way as men, and
from having the same rights to remarry as a man.
• Parenthood: On average, women are entitled to less than 14 weeks of paid maternity leave, and not all
maternity leave benefits are administered by Government in this time.
Child marriage is still prevalent in rural areas of Indonesia. Challenges in preventing child marriage include a
lack of awareness and knowledge on the health implications on children, unequal power dynamics that exist
between parents and children and the absence of a legal tool that prohibits child marriage (Republic of
Indonesia 2021). As observed in the WBL Index, Indonesia performs poorly in the Marriage dimension because
despite a high-level policy commitment, laws such as the Marriage Act reinforce traditional gender roles. The
Marriage Act of 1974 affirms men as the head of the household and women as subservient. Although women
are often symbolically valorised as “ruling the household”, the reality is that a majority of women are not in a
position to make personal or economic decisions, especially regarding business, selling personal assets and
borrowing without a man’s permission.” With high rates of early marriage, this implies young girls are further
entrenched in existing systems of inequality much earlier.
2.2.6 BRAZIL
Key national gender policies, institutions and commitments that mainstream gender considerations
or will influence projects’ enabling environment
• The Ministry of Women, Family and Human Rights (MMFDH), which falls directly under the Federal
Presidency, is the government institution responsible for supporting the implementation of public policies
that aim to eliminate all forms of discrimination and violence against women, to enforce women’s rights
and promote women’s participation in all aspects of development.
• Two pieces of legislation namely, the National Policy on Addressing Violence Against Women and the
Maria da Penha Law are intended to reign in sexual exploitation of girls and adolescents, VAW and the
traffic of women, as well as promoting women’s sexual and reproductive rights and rights of women
prisoners. However, abortion remains illegal in the country with penalties of 1-3 years imprisonment
(Wikipedia 2022).
• As a signatory of CEDAW and of the SDGs, Brazil is obliged to report on progress in achieving the goals
and targets/commitments set out in these international protocols. In the latest SDG Voluntary Review of
2020 Brazil committed to increase by 20% the number of women in the legislative branch, to ensure that
30% of political election candidates are women and to raise by 20% the number of women in the Chamber
of Deputies and the Federal Senate. In the SDG report Brazil boasted of high performance in access to
education, and in reducing the gap between males and females. Critics, however, point out that these
reported achievements are racially skewed against Afro-descendants and indigenous women, and they
urge Brazil not just to count numbers of women but to be racially inclusive. Issues of safe transport and
public infrastructure in and around the major cities is reported to affect women disproportionately –
exemplified by the high numbers of female murders. Among indigenous children, the percentages of
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 34

=== PAGE 154 ===
150
malnutrition and other preventable diseases are also reported to be high. This is in spite of Brazil having
one of the world’s largest and outreaching health systems. The inequalities afflicting the most vulnerable
overshadow any successes.
National overview
The status of gender discourse in Brazil is complex and concurrently affected by a variety of other forms of
discrimination, for example structural racism/discrimination against indigenous and black communities as well
as discrimination against sexual orientation. The current government has diluted efforts made by the previous
governments in terms of human rights and denial of environmental issues including climate change (Nilo A
and Fernandes C 2021). In the face of this broad picture, a few concerning indicators stand out as:-
• Brazil’s high numbers of child marriages, sexual abuse cases against children and adolescents, such that
in 2019, the country had the fourth highest incidences, globally.
• An increasing number of cases of violence against women and LGBTI+.
• A 75% budget reduction for combating VAW in the past five years.
• An increase in HIV infections in the North and Northeast regions, the poorest regions of the country (Nilo
A and Fernandes C 2021).
In 2015 Brazil was 5th highest in the number of murders of women (4.8 killings for every 100,000 women)
among 83 countries (Open Government Partnership 2018). While murder rates are falling, femicide increased
and in 2019, at least 4 women were killed each day in Brazil reaching an all-time high (Global Citizen 2019).
The WEF’s GGI’s 2021 for Brazil was 0.693 (0 indicating the worst equality status and 1 showing no gaps at
all among men and women). This indicates that 30.7 percent of women have less opportunities as compared
to males. The index placed Brazil at 93 out of 156 countries. The 2021 reports states that Brazil has not
improved its GGI, and that instead, the country had declined in its progress over the past year (World Economic
Forum 2021).
Within the Latin American and Caribbean region, Brazil’s GGI ranked 25 out of 26 countries, a poor
performance for such a populous and relatively well developed country. The gender gap with regards Political
Empowerment is huge and the country still has to close a gap of 86.2% to achieve gender parity in this
component. The 13.8% is a 4-rank drop since 2020. Brazil has had one woman as head-of-state for only five
years of the last 50 (only a 12% gap closed so far) (World Economic Forum 2021).
Gender gaps also persist in terms of Economic Participation and Opportunity, where only 66.5%
of the gap has been closed. These gaps manifest primarily in terms of wage and income. While Brazil has a
long way to go to bridge gender gaps in politics and the economy, it has already closed gaps on the Health
and Survival and Educational Attainment subindexes. In terms of health, 98% of the gap has been closed, and
parity has been achieved at all levels of education. However, only 10.7% of Brazilian women in university are
enrolled in STEM programmes versus 28.6% of men (World Economic Forum 2021).
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 35

=== PAGE 155 ===
151
The country’s Gender Inequality Index was reported as 0.408, ranking the country 95th out of 162 countries
in 2019. The GII was calculated from the following indicators:
• 15.0% of parliamentary seats are held by women
• 61.6% of adult women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 58.3% of their
male counterparts
• For every 100,000 live births, 60.0 women died from pregnancy related causes; and the adolescent birth
rate is 59.1 births per 1,000 women of ages 15-19.
• 54.2% Female participation in the labour market is compared to 74.1 for men (UNDP 2020).
In the case of Brazil, the WBL Index data refers to São Paulo, the main business centre, where Brazil’s score
is 85 out of a 100; a higher score than the regional average of 80.4. However, this masks the inequalities in
the rest of the country as Sao Paulo is not fully representative of the country.
Laws and regulations affecting freedom of movement, workplace conditions, marriage and gender differences
in property inheritance indicators had a perfect score of 100. However, on 4 of the 8 WBL indicators
improvements are needed. These are laws with regards to pay Parenthood, Entrepreneurship and Pensions
(the indicator that scored the least of all).
Despite closing the gender gap in education, Brazil needs to put in place policies that can incentivize women’s
enrolment in technical studies which can contribute to opening new and better economic opportunities for
them. Brazil should be compelled to collect not only sex disaggregated information but ethnic sex
disaggregated data in order to track progress in addressing inequality gaps between the white community and
the black and indigenous communities.
2.2.7 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Key national gender policies, institutions and commitments that mainstream gender considerations
or will influence projects’ enabling environment
• The Gender and Child Affairs Department fall under the Office of the Prime Minister of Trinidad and
Tobago, and its mission is to mainstream the equitable advancement of women and men and girls and
boys in all areas of national development, and ensure the protection, development, and participation of all
children in preparation for meaningful adult life. Above this, the Office of the Prime Minister (Gender and
Child Affairs) is responsible for coordinating the implementation and monitoring of the National Policy on
Gender and Development, 2018.
• Trinidad and Tobago has signed and ratified various international instruments, treaties and conventions
including CEDAW, the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the International Conference on
Population Development Plan of Action (ICPD PoA), the Beijing Platform for Action (BPfA), and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Trinidad and Tobago signed the Convention in 1985 and ratified
it in 1990. Every 4 years Trinidad and Tobago reports to the CEDAW committee.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 36

=== PAGE 156 ===
152
• The key instrument for mainstreaming gender in the country is the aforementioned National Policy on
Gender and Development 2018. This policy forms the framework which encourages the consideration of
the different needs, constraints, opportunities, and priorities of men and women thereby allowing them to
participate fully in the development process of the nation. The policy is consistent with the Government’s
commitments and obligations under (CEDAW), and other conventions cited above.
• To operationalize the policy the Government of Trinidad and Tobago developed and a National Action
Plan (NAP) ‘the National Development Strategy 2016-2030- Vision 2030’. The plan outlines more
specifically the goals and targets to achieve gender equality by 2030.
• In addition, Trinidad and Tobago has a number of legislature that criminalizes violence against women i.e.
the Sexual Offences Act, 1986 which criminalizes rape within marriage in its 2000 amendment, and the
Domestic Violence Act, 1999.
National overview
Trinidad and Tobago stood at 37th position among 156 countries in the world in the 2021 GGI ranking, and 6th
out of 26 countries among Latin America and Caribbean countries, with a score of 0.749 (best score 1 and
least is 0) reflecting a gender gap of 25.1 percent between men and women (World Economic Forum 2021).
More specifically, Trinidad and Tobago ranked 39th for Political Empowerment and 1 alongside other 37
countries for Health and Survival (World Economic Forum 2021).
Trinidad and Tobago’s GII value of 0.323 ranks it as 73 out of 162 countries in the 2019 index. This is computed
based on the following statistics:
• 32.9 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women;
• 74.5 percent of adult women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 71.2
percent of their male counterparts;
• 67.0 women in every 100,000 live births, die from pregnancy related causes; and the adolescent birth rate
is 30.1 births per 1,000 women of ages 15-19;
• Female participation in the labour market is 50.1 percent compared to 70.2 for men (UNDP 2020).
The World Bank’s WBL 2022 Index gives Trinidad and Tobago a score of 75 (out of a possible 100 which is
lower than the regional average of 80.4. Trinidad and Tobago obtained a perfect score of 100 in
Entrepreneurship, Assets and Pensions. Its lowest score was of 20 in Parenthood category. Trinidad may
need to review laws a on administration of maternity leave and benefits, time available for parental leave for
both parents as well as prohibiting dismissal of pregnant women (World Bank 2022).
2.3 FINDINGS FROM COUNTRY AND SECTOR ASSESSMENTS
Error! Reference source not found. (below) was developed through an analysis of the above sector and
country assessments; it provides a framework that the GGC will use to identify potential gender-responsive
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 37

=== PAGE 157 ===
153
interventions that should be considered as part of the project design process to maximise the gender benefits
of a specific project. The methodology applied in developing this framework is described at the end of this
subsection.
It serves as a high-level summary of some of the most pressing gender challenges in each country relevant to
climate change projects, and the sector-specific interventions which are most likely to address each challenge.
Therefore, during the project design process, the project owner and the GGC can identify the gender issues
that the project is most able to target upfront, based on the project’s sector focus and the most significant
challenges in the specific country. Subsequently, the sector-specific interventions which are most likely to
address these issues can be included in the project design, provided they are relevant to the country-specific
circumstances. The expected impacts of each intervention can then be incorporated into the monitoring and
evaluation process (i.e. the Gender Action Plan, Annex 8.2) to assess whether the desired benefits are in fact
being realised.
However, the framework does not provide an exhaustive list of challenges and possible interventions, and as
previously noted, the unique country-specific context will need to be considered in a detailed gender analysis
at each project’s pre-/feasibility stage, to thoroughly assess whether the designed intervention will indeed have
the expected effect, and to identify other potential gender issues.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 38

=== PAGE 158 ===
154
Table 6. Potential sector-specific interventions to address identified challenges
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 39

=== PAGE 159 ===
155
It should be noted that each intervention will likely also have knock-on indirect impacts on other areas of gender
inequality. For example, advancing women’s economic empowerment and improving their representation in
political decision making is likely to lead to reductions in the rate of child marriage and improvements in
women’s legal position respectively. These linkages between the project’s potential direct and indirect gender
related benefits will also be explored in more depth by the project owner and the GGC during the feasibility
stage as well as subsequent implementation and M&E stages.
Utility of the framework for Monitoring and Evaluation purposes
The categories of “challenges facing women” in Error! Reference source not found. also serve as a basis
for determining quantitative and qualitative indicators that can be tracked in the GGC’s Gender Action Plan
(accompanying Annex 8.2). For the purpose of the GAP indicators, the challenges have been further grouped
together as follows:
• The indicator “Improved livelihoods and enhanced resilience of women and girls resulting from
adaptation and mitigation measures” will track progress against the challenge “high vulnerability to
disasters”.
• The indicator “More equitable decision-making between men and women” will track progress against
the challenge “under-representation in political decision-making” (noting that the indicator will look to
track progress in broader decision-making spheres than those purely relating to political levels of
governance).
• The indicator “Reductions in gender based violence” will track progress against the challenge “violence
against women”.
• The indicator “Empowerment of women and girls through increased access to and control over
economic, health, infrastructural and educational resources, services and opportunities” will track
progress against the challenges “under representation in labour force”, “income gap”, “unequal access
to education”, “poor access to healthcare”, and “unequal access to other resources and public
services”. (noting “empowerment” will be considered through various lenses, including time-savings,
economic empowerment, health improvements, improvements in educational outcomes, etc.).
Methodology for developing the framework
Table 6 was developed through a multi-stage process:
• Analysis of the country assessments: The key gender challenges were identified for each
individual country, and these challenges were considered in aggregate to select those which were
present across the majority of countries. From this list, the challenges most likely to be directly
addressed by climate-related investments were selected.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 40

--- Table 1 on Page 159 ---
 | Table 6 was developed through a multi-stage process: | 
 | • Analysis of the country assessments: The key gender challenges were identified for each | 
 | individual country, and these challenges were considered in aggregate to select those which were | 
 | present across the majority of countries. From this list, the challenges most likely to be directly | 
 | addressed by climate-related investments were selected. | 

=== PAGE 160 ===
156
• Selection of indicators: A review of relevant literature was conducted and an appropriate
indicator for measuring the level of challenge was selected, accounting for the relevance of the
indicator and the availability of data.
• Data collection: The data was collected for each indicator for each country and was recorded in
a spreadsheet.
• Data analysis: The datapoints for each indicator were analysed in aggregate to ascertain the
spread of scores across the 8 select countries.
• Threshold selection: Two thresholds were assigned to each indicator to establish the point at
which the challenge is categorised as ‘significant’ or ‘highly significant’, based on the previous
data analysis and a consideration of international benchmarks.
• Category assignment: Each datapoint for each country and indicator was compared to the
corresponding thresholds to determine whether or not it fell into either the ‘significant’ or ‘highly
significant’ buckets.
o For example, the threshold for a ‘highly significant’ rate of gender violence is 30% and the
threshold for a ‘significant’ rate of gender violence is 10%. Therefore, countries where
30% or more of women experience gender violence in their lifetime are classified as
facing a ‘highly significant’ challenge of gender violence. Countries where 10-30% of
women experience gender violence in their lifetime are classified as facing a ‘significant’
challenge of gender violence.
• Intervention analysis: The interventions (“capacities for change”) previously identified in the
sector assessments were listed. The potential for each intervention to address each challenge
was determined based on the sector assessments, which outlined the potential impacts of each
intervention.
• Result: where there are significant gender issues of a high challenge, the project owner
will be required to include a more robust country specific interventions and indicators as
well as provide a gender assessment that addresses the possible eventualities.
The indicators and thresholds used are displayed in Error! Not a valid result for table.Error! Not a
valid result for table. below.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 41

--- Table 1 on Page 160 ---
 | • Selection of indicators: A review of relevant literature was conducted and an appropriate | 
 | indicator for measuring the level of challenge was selected, accounting for the relevance of the | 
 | indicator and the availability of data. | 
 | • Data collection: The data was collected for each indicator for each country and was recorded in | 
 | a spreadsheet. | 
 | • Data analysis: The datapoints for each indicator were analysed in aggregate to ascertain the | 
 | spread of scores across the 8 select countries. | 
 | • Threshold selection: Two thresholds were assigned to each indicator to establish the point at | 
 | which the challenge is categorised as ‘significant’ or ‘highly significant’, based on the previous | 
 | data analysis and a consideration of international benchmarks. | 
 | • Category assignment: Each datapoint for each country and indicator was compared to the | 
 | corresponding thresholds to determine whether or not it fell into either the ‘significant’ or ‘highly | 
 | significant’ buckets. | 
 | o For example, the threshold for a ‘highly significant’ rate of gender violence is 30% and the | 
 | threshold for a ‘significant’ rate of gender violence is 10%. Therefore, countries where | 
 | 30% or more of women experience gender violence in their lifetime are classified as | 
 | facing a ‘highly significant’ challenge of gender violence. Countries where 10-30% of | 
 | women experience gender violence in their lifetime are classified as facing a ‘significant’ | 
 | challenge of gender violence. | 
 | • Intervention analysis: The interventions (“capacities for change”) previously identified in the | 
 | sector assessments were listed. The potential for each intervention to address each challenge | 
 | was determined based on the sector assessments, which outlined the potential impacts of each | 
 | intervention. | 
 | • Result: where there are significant gender issues of a high challenge, the project owner | 
 | will be required to include a more robust country specific interventions and indicators as | 
 | well as provide a gender assessment that addresses the possible eventualities. | 
 | The indicators and thresholds used are displayed in Error! Not a valid result for table.Error! Not a | 
 | valid result for table. below. | 

=== PAGE 161 ===
157
Table 7. Indicators used to assess level of challenge in each country
Thresholds Explanation
Challenge Indicator Source Notes
Highly
Significant Highly significant Significant
significant
Where the delta between the male Where the delta between the male
Delta between male and Global and female participation in the and female participation in the
Underrepresentation in
female participation in Gender Gap >=20% >=10% labour force is greater than or equal labour force is greater than or equal
labour force
labour force Index (WEF) to 20%, the challenge is classified to 10%, but less than 20%, the
as highly significant. challenge is classified as significant.
Where female income is less than
Where female income is less than
Global or equal to 80% of male income, but
Income gap
Female income as a % of
Gender Gap <=60% <=80%
or equal to 60% of male income, the
greater than 60% of male income,
male income challenge is classified as highly
Index (WEF) the challenge is classified as
significant.
significant.
Where the educational attainment Where the educational attainment
Global Comprised of literacy rate, enrolment in primary education,
Unequal access to GGI educational attainment score is less than or equal to 0.9, score is less than or equal to 0.95,
Gender Gap <=0.9 <=0.95 enrolment in secondary education, and enrolment in tertiary
education score (1 = best, 0 = worst) the challenge is classified as highly but greater than 0.9, the challenge
Index (WEF) education
significant. is classified as significant.
Where the number of deaths per Where the number of deaths per
Global
Poor access to health Maternal mortality, deaths 100,000 births is greater than or 100,000 births is greater than or
Gender Gap >=150 >=100
care per 100,000 births equal to 150, the challenge is equal to 100, but less than 150, the
Index (WEF)
classified as highly significant. challenge is classified as significant.
Sum of GGI scores for Where the score for access to land
Where the score for access to land
access to land and non-land Global and non-land assets is greater than
Unequal access to and non-land assets is greater than
assets use, control and Gender Gap >=1.25 >=0.75 or equal to 0.75, but less than 1.25,
resources or equal to 1.25, the challenge is
ownership (0 = best, 2 = Index (WEF) the challenge is classified as
classified as highly significant.
worst) significant.
Where the % of women who have Where the % of women who have
% of women who have Global experienced gender violence in experienced gender violence in their
Violence against women experienced gender Gender Gap >=30% >=10% their lifetimes is greater than or lifetimes is greater than or equal to
violence in lifetime Index (WEF) equal to 30%, the challenge is 10%, but less than 30%, the
classified as highly significant. challenge is classified as significant.
Comprised of exposure, sensitive and adaptive capacity.
Where the vulnerability to disasters Where the vulnerability to disasters
Vulnerability to disasters Vulnerability to disasters at a country level has been used as
Higher vulnerability to ND-GAIN score is greater than or equal to score is greater than or equal to 0.4,
score from ND-GAIN index >=0.5 >=0.4 an indicator as significant literature exists highlighting the
disasters Index 0.5, the challenge is classified as but less than 0.5, the challenge is
(0 = best, 1 = worst) disproportionate impact of disasters on women (Centre for
highly significant. classified as significant.
Gender and Disaster 2021)
Where the political empowerment Where the political empowerment
Underrepresentation in Global Comprised of the % of parliamentary seats held by women,
GGI political empowerment score is less than or equal to 0.2, score is less than or equal to 0.4,
political decision Gender Gap <=0.2 <=0.4 the % of ministerial positions held by women, and the % of the
score (1 = best, 0 = worst) the challenge is classified as highly but greater than 0.2, the challenge
making Index (WEF) last 50 years during which a woman has been head of state
significant. is classified as significant.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 42

--- Table 1 on Page 161 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Challenge | Indicator |  |  | Source |  | Thresholds |  |  |  |  | Explanation |  |  |  |  | Notes |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Highly |  | Significant |  | Highly significant |  |  | Significant |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | significant |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Underrepresentation in
labour force | Delta between male and
female participation in
labour force |  |  | Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF) | >=20% |  |  | >=10% |  |  | Where the delta between the male |  |  | Where the delta between the male |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and female participation in the |  |  | and female participation in the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | labour force is greater than or equal |  |  | labour force is greater than or equal |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | to 20%, the challenge is classified |  |  | to 10%, but less than 20%, the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | as highly significant. |  |  | challenge is classified as significant. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Income gap | Female income as a % of
male income |  |  | Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF) | <=60% |  |  | <=80% |  | Where female income is less than
or equal to 60% of male income, the
challenge is classified as highly
significant. |  |  |  | Where female income is less than |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | or equal to 80% of male income, but |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | greater than 60% of male income, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the challenge is classified as |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | significant. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Unequal access to
education | GGI educational attainment
score (1 = best, 0 = worst) |  |  | Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF) | <=0.9 |  |  | <=0.95 |  |  | Where the educational attainment |  |  | Where the educational attainment |  | Comprised of literacy rate, enrolment in primary education,
enrolment in secondary education, and enrolment in tertiary
education |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | score is less than or equal to 0.9, |  |  | score is less than or equal to 0.95, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the challenge is classified as highly |  |  | but greater than 0.9, the challenge |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | significant. |  |  | is classified as significant. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Poor access to health
care | Maternal mortality, deaths
per 100,000 births |  |  | Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF) | >=150 |  |  | >=100 |  |  | Where the number of deaths per |  |  | Where the number of deaths per |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 100,000 births is greater than or |  |  | 100,000 births is greater than or |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | equal to 150, the challenge is |  |  | equal to 100, but less than 150, the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | classified as highly significant. |  |  | challenge is classified as significant. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Unequal access to
resources |  | Sum of GGI scores for |  | Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF) | >=1.25 |  |  | >=0.75 |  | Where the score for access to land
and non-land assets is greater than
or equal to 1.25, the challenge is
classified as highly significant. |  |  |  | Where the score for access to land |  |  |  | 
 |  | access to land and non-land |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and non-land assets is greater than |  |  |  | 
 |  | assets use, control and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | or equal to 0.75, but less than 1.25, |  |  |  | 
 |  | ownership (0 = best, 2 = |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the challenge is classified as |  |  |  | 
 |  | worst) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | significant. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Violence against women | % of women who have
experienced gender
violence in lifetime |  |  | Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF) | >=30% |  |  | >=10% |  |  | Where the % of women who have |  |  | Where the % of women who have |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | experienced gender violence in |  |  | experienced gender violence in their |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | their lifetimes is greater than or |  |  | lifetimes is greater than or equal to |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | equal to 30%, the challenge is |  |  | 10%, but less than 30%, the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | classified as highly significant. |  |  | challenge is classified as significant. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Higher vulnerability to
disasters | Vulnerability to disasters
score from ND-GAIN index
(0 = best, 1 = worst) |  |  | ND-GAIN
Index | >=0.5 |  |  | >=0.4 |  | Where the vulnerability to disasters
score is greater than or equal to
0.5, the challenge is classified as
highly significant. |  |  | Where the vulnerability to disasters
score is greater than or equal to 0.4,
but less than 0.5, the challenge is
classified as significant. |  |  |  | Comprised of exposure, sensitive and adaptive capacity. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Vulnerability to disasters at a country level has been used as | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | an indicator as significant literature exists highlighting the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | disproportionate impact of disasters on women (Centre for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Gender and Disaster 2021) | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Underrepresentation in
political decision
making | GGI political empowerment
score (1 = best, 0 = worst) |  |  | Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF) | <=0.2 |  |  | <=0.4 |  |  | Where the political empowerment |  |  | Where the political empowerment |  | Comprised of the % of parliamentary seats held by women,
the % of ministerial positions held by women, and the % of the
last 50 years during which a woman has been head of state |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | score is less than or equal to 0.2, |  |  | score is less than or equal to 0.4, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the challenge is classified as highly |  |  | but greater than 0.2, the challenge |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | significant. |  |  | is classified as significant. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 161 ---
Delta between male and
female participation in
labour force

--- Table 3 on Page 161 ---
Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF)

--- Table 4 on Page 161 ---
Underrepresentation in
labour force

--- Table 5 on Page 161 ---
Where female income is less than
or equal to 60% of male income, the
challenge is classified as highly
significant.

--- Table 6 on Page 161 ---
Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF)

--- Table 7 on Page 161 ---
Female income as a % of
male income

--- Table 8 on Page 161 ---
Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF)

--- Table 9 on Page 161 ---
Comprised of literacy rate, enrolment in primary education,
enrolment in secondary education, and enrolment in tertiary
education

--- Table 10 on Page 161 ---
Unequal access to
education

--- Table 11 on Page 161 ---
GGI educational attainment
score (1 = best, 0 = worst)

--- Table 12 on Page 161 ---
Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF)

--- Table 13 on Page 161 ---
Poor access to health
care

--- Table 14 on Page 161 ---
Maternal mortality, deaths
per 100,000 births

--- Table 15 on Page 161 ---
Where the score for access to land
and non-land assets is greater than
or equal to 1.25, the challenge is
classified as highly significant.

--- Table 16 on Page 161 ---
Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF)

--- Table 17 on Page 161 ---
Unequal access to
resources

--- Table 18 on Page 161 ---
% of women who have
experienced gender
violence in lifetime

--- Table 19 on Page 161 ---
Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF)

--- Table 20 on Page 161 ---
Where the vulnerability to disasters
score is greater than or equal to
0.5, the challenge is classified as
highly significant.

--- Table 21 on Page 161 ---
Where the vulnerability to disasters
score is greater than or equal to 0.4,
but less than 0.5, the challenge is
classified as significant.

--- Table 22 on Page 161 ---
Vulnerability to disasters
score from ND-GAIN index
(0 = best, 1 = worst)

--- Table 23 on Page 161 ---
Higher vulnerability to
disasters

--- Table 24 on Page 161 ---
ND-GAIN
Index

--- Table 25 on Page 161 ---
Underrepresentation in
political decision
making

--- Table 26 on Page 161 ---
Global
Gender Gap
Index (WEF)

--- Table 27 on Page 161 ---
Comprised of the % of parliamentary seats held by women,
the % of ministerial positions held by women, and the % of the
last 50 years during which a woman has been head of state

--- Table 28 on Page 161 ---
GGI political empowerment
score (1 = best, 0 = worst)

=== PAGE 162 ===
158
2.4 CONCLUDING REMARKS
As can be seen from Table 6, as well as the sector and country -specific assessments that underpin it, the
types of vulnerabilities, challenges, baseline conditions, national targets and ambitions, and capacities /
opportunities for change are diverse at both a country level, and for each of the five sectors. The GGC
recognises this and appreciates the importance of ensuring that the projects that it supports have suitably
tailored approaches to i) address context specific gender issues and ii) advance gender equality. While the
project owner will be primarily responsible for adopting these approaches (underpinned by project-specific
gender assessments and action plans), the GGC will uphold a responsibility of ensuring that these gender
approaches, assessments and action plans are developed and implemented to the expected degree of detail
and rigour (in line with the GCF’s requirements on Gender Mainstreaming). The GGC’s approach for ensuring
this is described in Chapter 3, with clear commitments contained in the accompanying Gender Action Plan
(Annex 8.2) on how it, as an organisation, will ensure that the necessary resources (human and financial) are
in place to adequately provide technical input into gender-related processes, review, oversee, and monitor
progress made as a result of the project.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 43

=== PAGE 163 ===
159
3 Programme Application
The final section of this Annex provides more detail on the GGC’s approach to practically ensuring projects
are in alignment with the GCF’s approach to project-level gender mainstreaming. Where projects do not
have a core gender focus, the portfolio manager will try to elicit interest for additional subprojects with green
interventions with an indirect or direct gender focus especially for adaptation projects.
3.1 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILTIES (AE AND EE)
The Accredited Entity is responsible for overseeing and monitoring that the GGC is in compliance with the
GCF’s fiduciary principles and standards, environmental and social safeguards standards and Gender Policy,
and other relevant GCF policies and requirements, in accordance with the relevant legal agreements
(accreditation master agreements and funded activity agreements).
The AE will aid in reviewing and submitting the quarterly and annual Climate Impact reports as well as the
aggregated/consolidated Monitoring and Evaluation plan to the GCF. As GGC becomes operational, the AE
will also assist in confirming that GGC has the applicable institutional systems, policies and procedures to
adequately undertake the programme. In addition, the AE will monitor that GGC has the ability to monitor,
report and verify data received from project owners as well as that the relevant GCF standards, safeguards
and policies are being upheld. In terms of Annex 11, a budget has been allocated to monitoring, evaluation
and reporting function of gender related indicators and impact whereby the AE will have oversight of both the
budget as well as the implementation of the funds towards achieving the selected activities.
To date, the AE has also conducted a robust due diligence and risk assessment on the GGC to ensure
that funds received will be administered to the fulfilment of the programme.
Indeed, the AE as well as the appointment of a third party assessor astute in Climate, Gender and E&S
thematic areas, will assess whether GGC has the ability to implement and maintain GCFs Gender Policy and
protocols. The AE will remain nimble and agile to the evolving GCF policy environment and ensure that the
GGC is kept abreast of any developments or changes that may arise during the implementation of the
programme.
GGC as the Executing Entity (EE) will be supervised by the AE. GGC is thus responsible for executing or
carrying out the GCF-funded programme and will review and provide input into the gender action plans,
assessment and Climate Impact reports as and when they are submitted by the borrowers. The EE also has
institutional knowledge and experience to implement monitoring evaluation and reporting requirements as they
pertain to gender-specific indicators based on their previous experience in issuing green bonds of this kind.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 44

--- Table 1 on Page 163 ---
 | The final section of this Annex provides more detail on the GGC’s approach to practically ensuring projects | 
 | are in alignment with the GCF’s approach to project-level gender mainstreaming. Where projects do not | 
 | have a core gender focus, the portfolio manager will try to elicit interest for additional subprojects with green | 
 | interventions with an indirect or direct gender focus especially for adaptation projects. | 

=== PAGE 164 ===
160
3.2 OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES
3.2.1 GGC TRANSACTION SELECTION PROCESS (TSP)
In pursuit of achieving its mission GGC will consider the wider positive and negative impacts of the transactions
to which it seeks to provide a credit guarantee. Specific consideration will be given to understanding,
measuring and managing a transaction’s impact based on the following four core elements:
Purpose People Planet Profit
The positive impact a
The positive and
borrower has on
The positive and negative impact a
climate change The positive and
negative impact a borrower has on the
impact beyond the negative impact a
borrower has on its local, national and
transaction: being borrower has on its
most important international
replicable, natural environment.
stakeholders. These economy. This
establishing This includes usage
include employees, includes creating
precedents or of natural resources,
families, customers, employment,
addressing toxic materials and
suppliers, generating
information so on, but also the
communities, and innovation, paying
asymmetry and active removal of
any other person taxes, wealth
thereby building a waste, reforestation
influencing or being creation and any
pathway for greater and restoration of
affected by the other economic
climate financing natural harm done.
borrower. impact a borrower
from global capital
has.
markets.
Figure 1 Four core elements of TSP
In the context of the above, GGC recognizes the importance of ensuring sound gender practices to avoid
and/or minimize and manage potential financial and reputational liabilities. Consequently, the consideration of
E&S and gender factors and safeguards forms an integral part of GGC’s Transaction Scorecard (Supporting
Annex A) which is used to select transactions that ensure key gender risks and impacts have been identified
and are effectively managed throughout the transaction lifecycle.
The development of a bankable project is typically a lengthy process, particularly if the infrastructure asset or
intervention is sizable. As a guarantor, it is envisaged that GGC will be introduced to a transaction at a later
stage of a project’s development, often to assist the project achieve financial close by provide a credit
guarantee to senior debt capital providers. The graphic below illustrates this, by showing the ‘Guarantor’
intervening at the ‘Implementation’ and ‘Operation’ phases of the project development cycle.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 45

=== PAGE 165 ===
Figure 2 Process Flow Diagram
Therefore, GGC will likely not have the opportunity to influence the gender assessment of a climate project
at an early stage in the project development cycle. Instead, GGC relies on having a robust Transaction
Selection Process (TSP), which will review and carry out strategic due diligence on the borrower’s existing
gender and E&S documentation, processes and systems to determine if they are compliant with the
requirements of GGC’s E&S, Gender, Climate Management Framework (Annex 6). It is against this
backdrop that GGC’s robust TSP has been developed, and includes seven (7) strategic steps that GGC will
follow in determining whether a project meets the requisite gender standards. Furthermore, the TSP is a
unique process that seeks to inform the selection of impactful climate projects in the absence of GGC being
the project developer or sponsor. A simple illustration of the TSP is provided below, and each of the steps are
described thereafter.
Figure 3 TSP Process
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 46
•••• ENPC
P la n n in g
xistin g C o n d itio n s A sse
e e d s Id e n tificatio n
lan n in g Stu d ie s
o n ce p t D e ve lo p m e n t
ssm e n t •
P r e p a r a t io n
Fe asib ility Stu d ie s
- Te ch n ical
- E co n o m ic
- E n viro n m e n tal
- So cial/G e n d e r
E
P
••
q u
r o c u r e
Se le ct P ro
E n gage Le
it y In v
m e n t
cu re m e n t Strate
ad Fin an cie rs
e s t o r s
gy
Im
••
p
CC
D
le m e n t
ap ital R aisin
o n stru ctio n
e b t In v
a t io n
g/Syn d icatio
e s t o r s
G u
n
a r a n
••
t o
O p e r a
O p e ratio n
M ain te n an
r
t io
ce
n
161

=== PAGE 166 ===
162
3.2.1.1 STEP 1: TRANSACTION ORIGINATION (1-2 WEEKS)
Transactions will be originated by GGC’s Origination Partners (e.g. MUFG, Deutsche Bank, etc.) who will have
had training from GGC on its E&S, Gender, Climate Management Framework and what an acceptable project
transaction from a gender perspective would look like.
At Transaction Origination, GGC’s Origination Partners liaise with the project transaction’s borrowers to garner
the latest information and documents for the project transaction. Seeing as GGC is likely to be interacting near
the end of the project development cycle, it is expected that, at a minimum, the following documents will be
made available for further review by GGC’s requisite specialists and committees, inter alia:
i. Climate Impact Analyses (mitigation) and/or Climate Impact Assessment (adaptation);
ii. Gender Assessment & Action Plan;
iii. Environmental & Social Impact Assessment (ESIA); and
iv. Climate Bond and/or Loan Certification.
The gender assessment and action plan must comply with the GCF’s policy on mainstreaming gender into
projects. The gender assessment will identify context-specific key issues and factors (baseline information)
that contributes to gender inequalities. It may consist of primary or secondary research, or a combination of
both. It is impossible to integrate gender equality into projects or activities without clearly understanding gender
issues within the targeted population. A gender analysis enables project developers to understand the
implications of gender on climate change mitigation, adaptation and disaster risk reduction interventions (and
vice-versa), and design appropriate interventions that can benefit all members of a community. It also allows
the project developers to develop indicators to better assess how initiatives have engaged with or impacted
different groups. Key baseline information will thus be weaved into the assessments that considers:
• What are the gender-based inequalities, discriminations and rights denials in each context? How do
these issues intersect with other discrimination factors such as age, ethnicity, disability, class, etc.?
• How will gender relations influence the effectiveness and sustainability of the project activity or result?
How will project processes and activities be designed to reduce inequalities and increase equality?
• How will the proposed results affect the relative status of women and men? Will they exacerbate or
reduce inequalities?
Figure 4 What’s is a gender analysis?
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 47

=== PAGE 167 ===
163
3.2.1.2 STEP 2: INITIAL SCREENING AND CATEGORISATION (1-3 WEEKS)
Once an Origination Partner has introduced a transaction it will undergo an initial screening using a Red,
Amber, Green (“RAG”) Checklist. The RAG Checklist forms part of a unique, multifaceted Transaction
Scorecard, which is GGC’s proprietary project selection asset.
RAG CHECKLIST Red Amber Green
The board and/or senior management of the borrower have
strong oversight and a clear governance process to support
gender diversity and inclusion.
There are specific policies and programmes to support
inclusiveness of both men and women at work.
There are initiatives in place to promote, retain and attract
women decision making positions.
Building on recent and/or existing data, there are minimal
differences between the roles/responsibilities/functions/
levels/grades undertaken by men and women in the
workforce, including permanent, contracted, seasonal staff as
well as contractor construction and maintenance staff.
The borrower has the appropriate systems and processes to
collect and monitor gender-disaggregated staff data (e.g.
average salary, turnover, absenteeism, retention, and
promotion) and this data is used for decision-making on
gender-related efforts.
The borrower has active inclusive sourcing or procurement
initiatives in place to source from women-owned businesses.
The borrower collects and monitors gender-disaggregated
data on demand, service usage and/or customer
segmentation (e.g. related to access, availability, affordability,
feasibility, and satisfaction) and uses this data for decision-
making related to planning, design, marketing, sales, pricing,
service(s) and distribution.
Appropriate grievance mechanisms have been put in place by
the project to respond to issues and concerns raised by
women and girls throughout the project's life cycle.
Appropriate measures have been put in place to ensure
adequate representation and participation of women in all
consultations and capacity building efforts.
The borrower has the necessary systems and resources to
report in annual and periodic reporting cycles on progress
against gender indicators.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 48

--- Table 1 on Page 167 ---
RAG CHECKLIST |  | Red |  |  | Amber |  |  | Green | 
The board and/or senior management of the borrower have
strong oversight and a clear governance process to support
gender diversity and inclusion. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
There are specific policies and programmes to support
inclusiveness of both men and women at work. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
There are initiatives in place to promote, retain and attract
women decision making positions. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Building on recent and/or existing data, there are minimal
differences between the roles/responsibilities/functions/
levels/grades undertaken by men and women in the
workforce, including permanent, contracted, seasonal staff as
well as contractor construction and maintenance staff. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The borrower has the appropriate systems and processes to
collect and monitor gender-disaggregated staff data (e.g.
average salary, turnover, absenteeism, retention, and
promotion) and this data is used for decision-making on
gender-related efforts. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The borrower has active inclusive sourcing or procurement
initiatives in place to source from women-owned businesses. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The borrower collects and monitors gender-disaggregated
data on demand, service usage and/or customer
segmentation (e.g. related to access, availability, affordability,
feasibility, and satisfaction) and uses this data for decision-
making related to planning, design, marketing, sales, pricing,
service(s) and distribution. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Appropriate grievance mechanisms have been put in place by
the project to respond to issues and concerns raised by
women and girls throughout the project's life cycle. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Appropriate measures have been put in place to ensure
adequate representation and participation of women in all
consultations and capacity building efforts. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The borrower has the necessary systems and resources to
report in annual and periodic reporting cycles on progress
against gender indicators. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 168 ===
164
The borrower has committed to assessing the policy,
regulatory or legal landscape as it relates to possible gender
impediments.
The borrower has committed a budget for the implementation
of Gender assessment and Action Plans, and the mobilization
of external gender expertise, as and when required.
The borrower has the necessary resources and capacity to
implement the Gender Action Plan
The borrower has made the necessary commitments to take
corrective action is taken where progress against gender
indicators falls short of targets.
If the answer to any of the above questions is RED, then the transaction will be rejected and no longer pursued
by GGC. For the avoidance of doubt, any GCF Category A project is not within GGC’s mandate to pursue
and will not be taken forward.
Where there is insufficient information to draw a clear conclusion and/or there are mitigating factors (e.g. the
borrower is making credible efforts to move into compliance from RED), the transaction is classed as AMBER
and is referred to GGC’s Executive Committee. The committee determines whether further due diligence
resources should be invested to assist the borrower to move to GREEN.
If a transaction scores GREEN responses to all of the questions in the RAG Checklist, then the transaction
will be progressed to the next step of the transaction selection process, from a gender perspective.
3.2.1.3 STEP 3: REVIEW AND CHALLENGE (1-3 WEEKS)
Following a professional review of the available gender information and documentation, in conjunction with
discussions with the borrower’s senior management team, the gender components of the Transaction
Scorecard will be completed by GGC’s investment team under the guidance of GGC’s internal gender
specialist. A screening note is used to outline the analysis and assumptions underpinning their inputs into the
Transaction Scorecard.
The draft Transaction Scorecard is then presented for review to the GGC’s Impact Committee, which
comprises specialists such as an independent gender specialist. These specialists challenge the analysis and
assumptions made by the GGC investment team to ensure there has been sufficient rigour in the various
assessments’ methods, calculations and findings. Once satisfied the GGC’s Impact Committee approve the
transaction to move through the formal due diligence and remediation strategy phases.
3.2.1.4 STEP 4: DUE DILIGENCE (2-5 WEEKS)
As part of GGC’s criteria in assessing the eligibility of a project for a guarantee, GGC will carry out a high-level
due diligence of the project concept to determine if there are any major gender-related risks that could result
in clear gender negative outcomes. The vulnerabilities and country analyses provided in Section 2 of this
Annex serves as a basis for this review. That is, the gender framework (Table 6 in section Error! Reference
source not found.) will be used to ensure that the project’s gender assessment has identified pressing gender
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 49

--- Table 1 on Page 168 ---
The borrower has committed to assessing the policy,
regulatory or legal landscape as it relates to possible gender
impediments. |  |  | 
The borrower has committed a budget for the implementation
of Gender assessment and Action Plans, and the mobilization
of external gender expertise, as and when required. |  |  | 
The borrower has the necessary resources and capacity to
implement the Gender Action Plan |  |  | 
The borrower has made the necessary commitments to take
corrective action is taken where progress against gender
indicators falls short of targets. |  |  | 

=== PAGE 169 ===
165
challenges of significance to the target country, and proposed appropriate interventions (“capacities for
change”) to address these.
The due diligence step begins with GGC’s internal E&S/gender specialist engaging an independent in-country
E&S/gender consultant to undertake a site visit with GGC’s investment team and the borrower. In parallel with
a physical site visit, they collectively conduct interviews with stakeholders to determine whether the submitted
gender information provided is accurate and commensurate with aspirations and claims made in the
documents (that is, the project’s gender analysis, assessment and action plan) This assessment will also be
used to determine whether the project’s level of ambition with respect to gender-related targets and impacts
is adequate.
During this process, the team will also determine whether the project owner has adequately captured the
following in the assessment:
▪ The needs and rights of women and key populations are represented in the assessment
▪ Comprehensive representation of participants, including government, civil society and marginalised
members of the community
▪ An investment case for integrating gender-responsive programming into the project/programme
▪ An adequate budget to ensure implementation of prioritized responses intended to address the gender
dimensions (including a budget for resources that address needs and vulnerabilities and technical
assistance expertise to assist with possible gaps)
A gender-sensitive approach in policies and plans including linkages between gender based violence and the
interventions presented in the project Should it be determined that the project’s gender assessment and / or
action plan falls short of the GGC’s and GCF’s requirements, the internal gender specialist will determine if
and how these could be bolstered through the provision of gender-focussed capacity development support to
the project owner (as per Action 2, Output 4 of the Gender Action Plan (Annex 8.1)). This ensures that project
owners are supported in improving their project development processes, by optimising the projects benefits
accrued to women and other vulnerable groups (as opposed to having proposals rejected on this basis).
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 50

=== PAGE 170 ===
166
Figure 5 What is a gender assessment by an expert?
GGC acknowledges that the selection of, and relationship building with, the in-country E&S/gender specialist
consultant is a critical element of GGC’s internal assurance process. The in-country E&S/gender specialist
consultant will also assist GGC in conducting ad hoc monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of a selected transaction
project, post financial-close, as well as working with a borrower to improve their competencies.
The outcome of the due diligence step will be an updated Transaction Scorecard and a detailed transaction
DD report from the investment team, supplemented by the in-country E&S/gender specialist consultant. The
report provides evidence to validate the various transaction assessments, analyses and their underlying
assumptions. In addition, the team will assess whether the project owner has the requisite material, financial
and human budgetary resources for implementation of project gender action plans and assessment. The
implementation budget will need to be realistic and accurate in relation to the project needs. Critically, it also
highlights any gaps and/or meaningful deviations that have been uncovered during due diligence, which will
need to be addressed by the borrower.
3.2.1.5 STEP 5: REMEDIATION AND DISCLOSURE (2-5 WEEKS)
The remediation and disclosure step dovetails with the due diligence step, drawing directly from the detailed
transaction DD report. Where gaps and/or deviations exist the GGC investment team, under the guidance of
GGC’s internal E&S/gender specialist, will work with the in-country E&S/gender specialist consultant to assist
the borrower to develop a remediation strategy to address the gaps/deviations.
Once the remediation strategy and action plan (includes an implementation budget) has been
developed, the borrower is required to commit to delivering on the strategy, within a pre-agreed timeframe.
GGC will require the project owner to develop a project-level Gender Action Plan, using the template
provided by the GGC (aligned with the GCF’s guidance on the structure of this GAP) and guided by
the Gender Responsive Results Framework checklist questions below (Figure 6). The GGC will also seek
a commitment from the project owner to report on the targets and indicators set out in the GAP, at agreed
milestones. Where a borrower does not commit or expresses a clear reluctance to developing and/or
delivering a remediation strategy or action, the transaction will be rejected by the GGC investment team.
To progress, a remediation strategy and action must be delivered to the satisfaction of the GGC internal
E&S/gender specialist, alongside a firm commitment by the borrower to undertake the strategy. This will then
be tabled with an updated Transaction Scorecard, the detailed transaction DD report, and an M&E strategy
(see Step 6), for the GGC Impact Committee’s consideration.
3.2.1.6 STEP 6: MONITORING & EVALUATION STRATEGY (2-5 WEEKS)
The M&E Strategy step is carried out in parallel with the remediation step. The M&E Strategy is developed by
the GGC investment team in collaboration with the GGC’s in-country specialist consultants and the borrower.
The M&E Strategy links directly with GGC’s Theory of Change, as approved by the GCF. Each of the activities,
outputs, outcomes and ultimate goal, are expounded upon in the M&E Strategy with clear actions as to how,
and by whom, data and information is collected, assessed and reported, in respect of the transaction’s element.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 51

=== PAGE 171 ===
167
The M&E Strategy must receive a clear commitment by the borrower, before it is tabled alongside the
Transaction Scorecard, the detailed transaction DD report, and the remediation strategy, for the GGC Impact
Committee’s consideration. As with the remediation strategy, where a borrower does not commit, or expresses
a clear reluctance to developing and/or delivering the M&E Strategy, the transaction will be rejected by the
GGC investment team before it is tabled with GGC’s Impact Committee for consideration.
Figure 6 What is a gender responsive results framework
3.2.1.7 STEP 7: APPROVAL (1-2 WEEKS)
GGC’s Impact Committee, which comprises independent specialists, will review the updated Transaction
Scorecard, detailed transaction DD report, remediation strategy and gender action (an implementation budget)
and M&E Strategy provided by the GGC investment team. Once satisfied that the transaction is compliant with
GGC’s Framework the Impact Committee will be asked to provide its approval for the transaction to progress
to the determination of a guarantee issuance.
However, if the GGC’s Impact Committee has residual concerns regarding the E&S or gender elements of
the transaction, then the GGC investment team will be required to go back to Step 5 (Remediation &
Disclosure) and work closely with the borrower to address the concerns of GGC’s Impact Committee.
Once GGC’s Impact Committee has approved the transaction it will progress to GGC’s Investment Committee
that will opine on the material, financial and commercial aspects of the transaction. Importantly, the Investment
Committee will only approve transactions that have first been approved by the Impact Committee. This ensures
that all potential transactions have a clear climate purpose, and prioritise people and the planet, before profit
is a consideration. The approval a transaction ‘purpose, people and planet’ elements are therefore a
prerequisite for profit.
If GGC’s Investment Committee is comfortable with the financial and commercial aspects of the transaction, it
will issue a formal approval to provide a guarantee on behalf of the borrower.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 52

=== PAGE 172 ===
168
3.2.1.8 MULTIDISCIPLINARY LINES OF DEFENCE
Therefore, GGC makes use of multidisciplinary ‘lines of defence’ in the above TSP to reduce the risk of being
exposed to gender risks on the transactions that it chooses to guarantee. These lines of defence are
professional specialists in the fields of climate, gender, environmental and social sciences, and climate bond
certifications. Importantly, the GGC will liaise with the GCF on the appointment of these specialists. In terms
of the Gender/E&S Management elements, these lines of defence are as follows:
Figure 7 Specialists
The internal E&S specialist is expected to be a mid-senior to
Internal Gender/E&S Specialist senior level hire with at least 10 years of experience of working
in the E&S field with a focus on emerging markets.
The Impact Committee E&S specialist is expected to be a senior
Impact Committee Gender/E&S
level hire with at least 15 years of experience of working in the
Specialist
E&S field with a focus on emerging markets.
The in-country E&S consultant is expected to be a reputable
local or regional E&S consultancy firm which has a credible track
In-Country Gender/E&S Consultant
record of at least 5 years working with and applying the IFC
Performance Standards.
Importantly, the internal E&S Specialist and Impact Committee Specialist will both possess a “portfolio” level
view of the projects being supported through the provision of guarantees. This allows for cross-fertilization of
best practice / innovative gender-focused interventions that could prove effective in different sectors and
contexts, and which could be introduced to other projects as they enter the GGC’s pipeline. In-country
consultants complement this, by providing bottom-up on-the-ground expertise that is critical to ensuring all
solutions are appropriate and fit for purpose.
In addition to the above, all GGC investment team members will be given E&S/Gender Management training
on a regular basis to ensure that there is a solid understanding of the requirements of GGC’s E&S/Gender
Management Team members will also be taught skills on how to determine the key competencies of a
borrower to be able to deliver on these multidisciplinary prerequisites.
3.2.1.9 PROJECTED TSP TIMEFRAMES
It is anticipated, from the team’s experience gained from similar global guarantor initiatives and organisations
(e.g. GuarantCo), the Transaction Selection Process should take between 12 - 24 weeks (or 3 – 6 months).
The timeframe illustration below shows that an ‘efficient timeframe’ could take 12 weeks, whereas a ‘protracted
timeframe’ could take up to (and potentially longer than) 24 weeks.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 53

--- Table 1 on Page 172 ---
Internal Gender/E&S Specialist | The internal E&S specialist is expected to be a mid-senior to
senior level hire with at least 10 years of experience of working
in the E&S field with a focus on emerging markets.
Impact Committee Gender/E&S
Specialist | The Impact Committee E&S specialist is expected to be a senior
level hire with at least 15 years of experience of working in the
E&S field with a focus on emerging markets.
In-Country Gender/E&S Consultant | The in-country E&S consultant is expected to be a reputable
local or regional E&S consultancy firm which has a credible track
record of at least 5 years working with and applying the IFC
Performance Standards.

=== PAGE 173 ===
169
Figure 8 TSP flow diagram
3.3 MONITORING AND EVALUATION (IMPLEMENTATION)
GGC is ultimately responsible for overseeing and reporting to the investors (for example to GCF) on the
progress made in the monitoring and evaluation plan. This task will be supported by the AE who will submit
the aggregated report to the relevant stakeholders. GGC is also responsible for managing the system design,
execution and monitoring of the reporting platform while the project owner or borrower will be responsible for
contributing to the expected results and submitting the achieved results to GGC for their review. To ensure
that any social, economic climate agenda indicators or targets are reported adequately and fairly, a Climate
Advisory Team will be appointed to assist with ensuring that the estimated and analysed outcomes are as
realistic and translatable before investors such as the Green Climate Fund receive the data.
The Climate Advisory Team will also assist with collecting baseline data at a country level to ensure that
recipient countries are designing projects which are country relevant. The team will rely on established
partnership and networks but also on official documentation and research. An additional third party reviewer
will also be appointed to verify the aggregated outcomes in the report submitted to the investors. Borrowers
will be expected during any reporting period to account for expected results targets as indicated per in their
logframe/M&E plan. It is intended that in time, all applications will be submitted online through a digital platform
created by GGC which will assist with collecting the relevant data aggregating it and thus allowing for a more
streamlined approach to reporting to the various investors.
Borrowers will be tasked to devise a full data collection protocol for their projects at the time of approval. This
will ensure that they are adequately collecting data sources, incorporating timelines and have the systems in
place to ensure that the data is readily available during the quarterly and annual reporting cycles. Borrowers
will also be encouraged to consider the data they need to adequately and robustly complete reports. Wherever
possible, all indicators will be disaggregated by sex, and subpopulation by subcategory. In addition, data on
progress to meet the various indicators will be collected at the field level during workshops hosted in various
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 54

=== PAGE 174 ===
170
countries every quarter whereby Participants are encouraged to share their lessons learned challenges and
experiences with implementing projects to determine the impact of the programme.
GGC’s monitoring and evaluation framework is thus designed to include gender-responsive targets and
indicators (for example that address the sustainability of gender related investments) to monitor gender
equality results against the established baseline. Tracking and reporting on gender-related project results (i.e.
gender-specific impacts per project, as well as those that speak to the related co-benefits of incorporating a
gender lens into the project design) will be used to influence and inform the design of future interventions, as
well as attract interest from new prospective green interventions with a focus on gender related targets.
M&E occurs at every stage of the project, from initial feasibility, project design, preliminary design review,
implementation and ongoing performance review.
3.4 GENDER RESPONSIVE PROJECT DESIGN
Including gender considerations in the design of green bonds significantly scales up the financing available for
advancing gender equality: in 2020 USD 1 trillion were invested in green bonds and other green-finance
debt investments; in comparison by the end of 2020 there were approximately USD 18 billion in assets
managed by gender lens investment vehicles (GenderSmart 2021). While investment in gender issues
specifically is growing, capitalising on the existing investment in climate initiatives through incorporating a
gender lens to green bonds provides the opportunity to significantly scale the funding dedicated to gender
equality, particularly given the intersection of gender and climate challenges. When a gender lens is
incorporated into the design of guaranteed green bonds, the potential benefits fall into two categories:
1. Benefits from including women in the project planning and implementation processes
When women are accorded positions of responsibility in projects, they gain experience of involvement in
political and public life. This can provide a platform for broader political empowerment of women by
facilitating their attainment of similar opportunities outside of the project context, and by bringing women into
the sector in the long term. Secondly, women’s involvement is positively correlated with the gender benefits
of the project (GenderSmart 2021).
2. Benefits from the project itself
Including gender considerations in the project itself aims to ensure that the project advances gender equality
and benefits women at least equally, as women have differing preferences to men, shaped by their
particular economic and social status, roles and needs. The specific project benefits will vary depending on
the project sector, albeit there are some advantages which apply across sectors. These include ensuring
women have at least equal access to the employment, training opportunities, financing and/or productive
assets provided by the project (GenderSmart 2021).
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 55

=== PAGE 175 ===
171
Despite the benefits, a number of challenges exist which present barriers to incorporating gender benefits in
green bonds:
• Lack of data – availability of sex-disaggregated baseline data is low, particularly longitudinal data,
making it difficult to conduct pre-project gender analyses and to measure project impacts
(GenderSmart 2021).
• Lack of predictive modelling capabilities – the lack of historical data makes it difficult to predict the
gendered impacts of gender-responsive interventions and therefore to design effective projects
(GenderSmart 2021).
• Establishing benchmarks – there is no established methodology for ascertaining whether a project
meets gender performance expectations (e.g. does a project need to perform well across all criteria
or just one?) (IISD 2021).
• Measuring impacts – improvements to gender equality can be hard to measure and may only be
realised after a project has completed (GenderSmart 2021).
• Higher costs – transaction costs are elevated due to the need to prepare gender action plans, collect
sex-disaggregated data, and report on gendered project impacts (IISD 2021).
• Perceived lack of urgency – some investors may be reluctant to incorporate gender-specific
initiatives as they view tackling climate change as a higher priority and/or do not fully appreciate the
gender-environment nexus (UNDP 2019).
• Barriers to women’s participation – women may not benefit from projects equally due to pre-existing
inequalities. For example, lower education levels and higher care burdens may limit their ability to
secure high-skilled employment generated by the project (GenderSmart 2021).
Based on the above assessment, GGC will do its best effort to ensure that the following gender responsive
requirements a reintegrated into the project design for prospective projects (at a minimum):
• Sex-disaggregated data and using gender indicators to inform gender responsive monitoring,
evaluation, reporting and learning are included.
• Gender analyses must consider issues of intersectionality, to understand how vulnerabilities within
marginalised groups compound based on a range of factors (such as disability, age, indigenous
persons status etc.). Where possible, data on these sub-groups should be collected and used to
develop targeted project responses that address the varying needs of marginalised beneficiary
members.
• Gender assessments are conducted that inform the project design, budgeting, staffing,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation.
• Risks are analysed that the project may experience or pose, putting measures in place to ensure
activities do not exacerbate existing gender-related inequalities, including SEAH, gender-based
violence, and seize opportunities to address gender gaps and support empowerment of women.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 56

=== PAGE 176 ===
172
• Sufficient resources are allocated for specific activities, technical support and/or other actions to
improve gender equality considerations, including the meaningful engagement of diverse stakeholders
and beneficiaries.
• The action plan should also define the target population, whether that is direct (e.g. the employees of
the companies financed) or indirect (e.g. women in the broader population impacted by the project).
Where an action plan is not in place, funding for gender-responsive activities should be ring-fenced
and/or explicit targets should be set (AMMC 2021).
• The gender performance indicators identified in the gender action plan should, again, be sensitive to
the project sector and location.
• Gender considerations should also inform the selection of financial instruments for the temporary
investment of the funds raised from green bonds. For example, the gender performance ranking of a
company (for investment in corporate services) or a country’s gender equality score (for investment in
government securities) could be factored into decision making (International Institute for Sustainable
Development, 2021). However, a softer approach may be necessary for the integration of gender
considerations in the management of proceeds than in the use of proceeds, given the need to select
financial instruments that enable the funds to be accessed quickly. Where options are significantly
constrained, a commitment to prioritising investment opportunities with above-average gender
performance where possible may be sufficient (International Institute for Sustainable Development,
2021).
• Issuers should report on both the gender criteria used to select projects and the actual gender impacts.
Reporting should be conducted at least annually and should be verifiable by third parties (AMMC
2021). Regular reporting should allow the implementation of mitigation measures if the targets outlined
in the gender action plan are not being met (International Institute for Sustainable Development 2021).
3.5 GRIEVANCE MECHANISM AND STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
3.5.1 STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
Stakeholder engagement is an essential part of the Framework to facilitate the integration of gender
considerations into GGC’s financing lifecycle and decision making. In this context, stakeholder engagement
denotes proactive ongoing dialogue, information sharing and interactions between GGC and its stakeholders
such as women led organisations. As such, GGC commits to developing and implementing effective
stakeholder engagement mechanisms (internally and externally and as noted in Annex 7) to support a culture
of transparency and accountability and learning and continual improvement. For example, implementing
regular cross-team interactions, function meetings and presentations on gender and E&S topics, direct internal
communication via e-mails, newsletters, etc.
3.5.2 GRIEVANCE MECHANISM
Concerning external communication mechanisms, an important mechanism that will be implemented and
maintained is a grievance mechanism. This will support the process to effectively identify, receive, register,
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 57

=== PAGE 177 ===
173
screen and evaluate, track and formally address complaints or feedback from stakeholders regarding the
subproject activities. The mechanism will facilitate the resolution of grievances promptly through an accessible,
fair, transparent and constructive process. It will also be culturally appropriate and readily accessible, at no
cost to the affected communities, and without retribution to the individuals, groups, or communities that raised
issues or concerns. The grievance mechanism will include but not be limited to the following elements:
• Borrowers will require an established and operational, accessible and inclusive survivor
centred, SEAH relevant and gender responsive grievance redress mechanism that:
o Includes treating survivors with dignity and respect, taking time to listen to what they have to
say rather than rushing to take action
o treat all survivors equally and nonjudgmentally, making sure their experience is not unfairly
dismissed, for example, because they are young, old, disabled, a sexual or gender minority,
or work in prostitution.
o Includes stakeholder guidance to identify existing and potential local SEAH to enable effective
redress of the matter
o Trains the relevant personnel on the relevant SEAH requirements for recording and actioning
complaints
o Enables consultations with women leaders and those working with adolescent girls and boys
and other at-risk groups should be prioritized to enable understanding of SEA/SH risks and
trends in the community.
o Provides for a detailed code of conduct to guide engagement.
o Monitors SEAH and GBV indicators to track possible risks or challenges
o Offers various methods to lodge complaints include online, email, letters or in-person
o Provides confidentiality/anonymity to a complainant or a representative if requested by the
complainant
o Addresses concerns promptly and effectively at no cost and without retribution
o Handles grievances in a culturally appropriate, discreet, objective, transparent, sensitive and
responsive manner
• Different ways in which vulnerable people can submit their grievances, and taking into account
language barriers/limitations and the need for anonymity if a complainant fears retaliation or
submission by an authorized representative or civil society organization;
• Provision to keep complainants’ identities confidential, especially in instances where the complainants
fear retaliation;
• Provision for interpretation/translation to overcome language barriers/limitations;
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 58

=== PAGE 178 ===
174
• A log where grievances are registered in writing and maintained as a publicly available database. The
database should include information about the complaint and the resolution of the complaint, including
the remedy provided, taking into consideration that complainants’ identities can be kept anonymous if
requested. This database should also be shared with the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism;
• Publicly advertised procedures, identifying the means for submitting grievances, setting out the length
of time users can expect to wait for acknowledgement, response, and resolution of their grievances,
descriptions of the transparency of the procedures, and the governing and decision-making structures;
• An appeals process to which unsatisfied grievances may be referred when the resolution of grievance
has not been achieved;
• Information about other available grievance mechanisms, including the GCF independent Redress
Mechanism and the accredited and implementing entities' grievance mechanisms; and
• Measures in place to protect complainants from retaliation.
Figure 9. Example of a Grievance Mechanism
The responsibility for establishing and maintaining the grievance mechanism will be with the project owner or
sponsor. The project owner will be responsible for meeting with local/stakeholders affected by the project to
explain and discuss the different reporting mechanisms and process that the stakeholders agree on the
selected methods that are the most appropriate. The details of the discussion will be recorded and included
in the stakeholder meeting summary. A central telephonic and email address will be provided that will facilitate
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 59

=== PAGE 179 ===
175
complaints and ensure that they are shared by the appropriate persons overseeing the matter. The emails and
phone calls received will be treated as confidential. The project owner will be required to maintain a log that
contains:
1. Date of the complaint
2. Name of aggrieved party and any affiliation/organization
3. Contact details of the aggrieved party
4. Category of the complaint (environmental, social, government, other)
5. If the complaint is an appeal to a previous result of handling the complaint
6. Recommended investigation of the issue
7. Closing date and information provided to the aggrieved party
8. Record the result of the investigation in the Excel file, including a summary of the action taken or
justification for not taking action and the date of response to the party aggrieved
The project owner will acknowledge the complaint in writing in a timely manner and report back to the AE on
next steps. Complaint investigations may vary depending on the nature of the complaint, but every effort should
be made to ensure that complaints are dealt with promptly. Most investigations should not last longer than 90
days. The content of the complaint register and the management of these must respect the confidentiality of
the aggrieved party to the extent possible, and there should be no retaliation against aggrieved parties or
complainants. In some cases, it may be appropriate for the project owner to continue to involve the aggrieved
party during the investigation of the complaint. This could take place by inviting the aggrieved party to a
meeting, a conference call, or committing more in writing. Any ongoing engagement with the aggrieved party
must be noted in the register of complaints
3.5.3 SPECIAL CONDITIONS
Project owners will be required to screen their projects for SEAH risk assessment and should consider the
following questions before designing the GRM:
• Are country-level rates of gender-based violence (GBV) higher than regional averages?
• Are there prevailing socio-cultural norms that marginalise women or restrict their participation in the
public and private spheres?
• Will the project take place in a fragile or conflict-affected environment?
A risk assessment of possible SEAH consequences during the due diligence process is imperative. The AE
must also ensure that projects have the require expertise and capacity to manage this risk.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 60

=== PAGE 180 ===
176
3.6 RECOMMENDED RESOURCES FOR PROJECT OWNERS
To help guide the project owners in their Gender Analysis and development of Gender Indicators they can
consider the following resources:
• Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects (2017) Green Climate Fund and UN Women
• UN-REDD Methodological Brief on Gender (2017) Technical Resource Series
• The World Bank’s PPP website with collated resources across the following sectors: Agriculture,
Education, Energy, Health, Information and Communications Technology (ICT), Transport, Water and
Sanitation. See:http://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/ppp-sector/genderimpacts-
ppps/sector-specific-materials/sector-specific-materials
• Asian Development Bank (2013) Tool Kit on Gender Equality Results and Indicators
https://www.adb.org/documents/tool-kit-gender-equality-resultsand-indicators
• The Gender Data Portal for the latest sex-disaggregated data and gender statistics covering
demography, education, health, economic opportunities, public life and decision-making, and agency,
see http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/
• GACC tool see http://cleancookstoves.org/resources/490.html
• ACDI/VOCA- Gender Analysis, Assessment, and Audit Manual & Toolkit
• Harvard- Gender Roles Framework or Gender Analysis Framework
• FAO- Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis Field Handbook
• Gender Analysis in Natural Resource Management | Land Portal Gender Analysis for Sustainable
Livelihoods and Participatory Governance in Rwanda
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 61

=== PAGE 181 ===
177
4 References
Abdullar et al. 2020. “Civil Society Alternative Report on CEDAW Pakistan.” https://www.af.org.pk/Reports/Civil
Society Alternative Report on CEDAW Pakistan 2020.pdf, Pakistan.
Afrobarometer. 2018. “Gender equality in Tanzania: Uproar and perceived progress.”
AMMC. 2021. Gender Bond Guidelines.
https://www.ammc.ma/sites/default/files/AMMC%20Gender%20Bonds%20Guidelines.pdf.
Bayudan-Dacuycuy, Connie. 2019. Examining the women's low labor market participation rate in the
Phlippines: Is housework the missing link? Quezon City: Philippine Institute for Development Studies
.
Cagatay. 1998. “Gender and Poverty. UNDP Working Paper. Social Development and Poverty Elimination
Division.”
Cascais, Antonio. 2019. “Rwanda - real equality or gender-washing?” DW. Accessed March 10, 2022.
https://www.dw.com/en/rwanda-real-equality-or-gender-washing/a-47804771.
Centre for Gender and Disaster. 2021. Gender and Disaster: Bibliography & Reference Guide - Volume 1 -
2nd Edition.
https://www.gdnonline.org/_files/ugd/3a710f_156b01617a1d4d9798c6e6c939f39361.pdf.
Chan et al. 2016. “The status of women and gender equality in Tanzania: the broad policy context.”
Chiwona-Karltun et al. 2017. “What is the evidence that gender affects access to and use of forest asses for
food security? A systematic map protocol.”
CIF. 2017. “Gender and Sustainable Forest Management: Entry Points for Design and Implementation.”
CJ Pierce Colfer et al. 2016. “Gender and Forests: climate change, tenure, value chains and emerging issues.”
David, Clarissa C, Jose Ramon Albert, and Jana Flor Vizmanos. 2018. Sustainable Development Goal 5: How
does the Philippines fare on gender equality? Quezon City: Philippine Institute for Development
Studies.
Deloitte. 2015. Women, energy and economic empowerment. Applying a gender lens to amplify the impact of
energy access. Accessed January 2022.
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/insights/us/articles/women-empowerment-energy-
access/DUP_950-Women-Energy-and-Economic-Empowerment_MASTER1.pdf.
FAO. 2016. “Gender in Forestry Module.”
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 62

=== PAGE 182 ===
178
—. 2018. Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox increases gender considerations in its modules. Accessed
January 2022. https://www.fao.org/sustainable-forest-management/toolbox/sfm-home/detail-
events/en/c/1145493/.
FAO. n.d. “Women in Forestry: challneges and opportunities.”
FAO, IFAD & World Bank. 2015. “Gender in Climate Smart Agriculture .”
GCF & UNWOMEN. 2017. “Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects .”
GCF. 2013. Gender Assessment: Improving the resilience of vulnerable coastal communities to climate
change related impacts in Vietnam. GCF.
Gender CC. n.d. Transport, gender and climate change. Accessed January 2022.
https://www.gendercc.net/gender-climate/transport.html.
Gender Montioring Office. 2019. The stste of Gender Equality in Rwanda. GMO.
http://gmo.gov.rw/fileadmin/user_upload/Researches%20and%20Assessments/State%20of%20Gen
der%20Equality%20in%20Rwanda.pdf.
Genderlinks. 2021. “Gender Barometer: Climate Justice.”
GenderSmart. 2021. Gender & Climate Investment: A strategy for unlocking a sustainable future.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/6089294d7cb43b4cffb93591/t/60ec750cdcef4a49b3a96120/1
626109200947/GenderSmart+Climate+Report.pdf.
Ghafar, Adel Abdel. 2021. “Causes and Consequences of Inequality in Egypt.” Special Issue: The Political
Economy of the Contemporary Middle East 111 (1): 5-26. doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/muwo.12370.
Global Citizen. 2019. 4 Women Are Killed Every Day in Brazil as Femicide Persists. Accessed MArch 2022.
https://www.globalcitizen.org/en/content/femicide-brazil-2019/.
Government of the Lao People's Democratic Republic. 2018. “Voluntary National Review.”
H Jabeen. 2014. “Adapting the built environment: the role of gender in shaping vulnerability and resilience to
climate extremes in Dhaka.”
Hassan et al. 2013. “Determinants of Growth for Women Owned and Operated Micro Enterprises: The Case
of Garissa, Kenya. International Journal of Business and Commerce Vol. 2, No.7.”
Idris. 2018. “Barriers to women’s economic inclusion in Tanzania.”
IEA. 2020. SDG7: Data and Projections - Access to electricity. Accessed January 2022.
https://www.iea.org/reports/sdg7-data-and-projections/access-to-electricity.
IEAb. 2020. SDG7 : Data projections - Access to clean cooking. Accessed February 2022.
https://www.iea.org/reports/sdg7-data-and-projections/access-to-clean-cooking#abstract.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 63

=== PAGE 183 ===
179
IFAD. 2020. Building women’s resilience and livelihoods. Accessed February 2022.
https://www.ifad.org/en/web/latest/-/story/building-women-s-resilience-and-livelihoods.
IFC. n.d. “Bridging the Gender Gap in Access to Finance. .”
IIED. 2021. What women want – part two: to map vulnerability to climate change. Accessed January 2022.
https://www.iied.org/what-women-want-part-two-map-vulnerability-climate-change.
IISD. 2021. Gender Lens Sustainable Investing. 31 January. https://www.iisd.org/articles/gender-lens-
sustainable-investing.
ILO. 2013. “Women in the Transport Sector.”
International Institute for Sustainable Development. 2021. Integrating Gender Considerations into Green
Bonds. https://www.iisd.org/system/files/2021-10/gender-considerations-green-bonds.pdf.
International Transport Forum. 2019. “Submission by the International Transport Forum (ITF) at the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development: Gender and Climate Change.”
Isbell, thomas, David Jacobs, and Christina Scheller. 2019. For Senegalese women, advancement is real but
uneven. Afrobarometer. https://afrobarometer.org/publications/ad305-senegalese-women-
advancement-real-uneven.
Islamic Development Bank. 2019. Country Gender Profile: Uganda. Islamic Development Bank.
https://www.isdb.org/sites/default/files/media/documents/2020-09/Uganda%20Gender.pdf.
IUCN & WEDO. 2011. “Forests and Gender.”
IUCN. 2020. Gender-based violence and the environment. Accessed February 2022.
https://www.iucn.org/resources/issues-briefs/gender-based-violence-and-
environment#:~:text=Resource%20scarcity%2C%20conflicts%20and%20displacement,Climate%20
change%20worsens%20these%20effects.
IUCN. 2013. “The Environment and Gender Index.”
Jennings, G. 2020. “GAINING OR LOSING GROUND: ENSURING THAT POST-COVID-19
TRANSPORTATION SERVES THE NEEDS OF WOMEN IN LOW-INCOME SUB-SAHARAN
AFRICAN CITIES.”
JICA. 2013. “Country Gender Profile: Cote d' Ivoire.”
JICA. 2016. “Country Gender Profile: Tanzania Final Report.”
Kachana Ginige et al. 2009. “Gender Mainstreaming in Disaster Reduction: Why and How? Disaster
Prevention and Management.”
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 64

=== PAGE 184 ===
180
Kachana Ginige et al. 2014. “Tackling Women's Vulnerabilities through Integrating a Gender Perspective into
Disaster Risk Reduction in the Built Environment.”
Kingdom of Cambodia. 2019. Cambodia's Voluntary National Review 2019. UN.
Lao Women's Union. 2019. “Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women and Adoption
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform (BPfA+25).”
Linh, Nguyen Sy. 2021. State of Gender Equality and Climate Change in Vietnam. UNEP, UN Women and
SIDA.
Moglia, Magnus, Kim S Alexander, Silva Larson, Anne (Giger)-Dray, Garry Greenhalgh, Phommath
Thammavong, Manithaythip Thephavanh, and Peter Case. 2020. “Gendered roles in Agrarian
Transition: A study of lowland rice farming in Lao PDR.” Sustainability 12 (13): 5403.
MWCA. 2018. “Ministry of Women and Children Affairs - Chapter 7.”
https://mof.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/mof.portal.gov.bd/page/5e31763f_f5b2_4ecb_bf9a_e
dc8609d2f3f/G-1_06_30_Women_English.pdf.
Nesbitt-Ahmed et al. 2015. “Making Care Visible: Influencing Story on Policy Change on Unpaid Care Work',
Stories of Influence, Gender, Power and Sexuality Programme.”
Nguyen, Huong Thu. 2019. “Gendered vulnerabilities in times of Natural Disasters: Male-to-Female violence
in the Philippines in the aftermath of Super Typhoon Haiyan.” Violence Against Women 25 (4): 421-
440.
Nilo A and Fernandes C. 2021. “The risk of losing the 2030 Agenda in Brazil.”
https://sdg.iisd.org/commentary/guest-articles/the-risk-of-losing-the-2030-agenda-in-brazil/.
https://sdg.iisd.org/commentary/guest-articles/the-risk-of-losing-the-2030-agenda-in-brazil/.
OECD. 2014. “Social Institutions & Gender Index: Synthesis Report.” https://www.oecd.org/dev/development-
gender/BrochureSIGI2015-web.pdf.
OHCHR. 2022. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women reviews the situation of women
in Côte d’Ivoire. Accessed March 2022.
https://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=24805&LangID=E.
Open Government Partnership. 2018. Open Data about femicide in Brazil.
https://www.opengovpartnership.org/stories/open-data-about-femicide-in-brazil/.
Orleck-Jetter, Evann. 2018. “Helping marginalized women in Cambodia.” 12 October. Accessed March 8,
2022. https://borgenproject.org/tag/gender-equality-in-cambodia/.
P. Kristjanson et al . 2019. “Taking Action on Gender Gaps in Forest Landscapes .”
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 65

=== PAGE 185 ===
181
Phongluxa, Khampheng, Ghislaine Langeslag, Tej Ram Jat, Sengchanh Kounnavong, Mariam A Khan, and
Dirk R Essink. 2020. “Factors influencing sexual and reproductive health among adolescents in Lao
PDR.” Global Health Action 13.
Rainforest Alliance. 2020. Women Are the Key to Environmental Resilience. Accessed February 2022.
https://www.rainforest-alliance.org/insights/women-are-the-key-to-environmental-resilience/.
Republic of Indonesia. 2021. Indonesia's Volunatry National review (VNR) 2021. Republic of Indonesia.
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/280892021_VNR_Report_Indonesia.pdf.
Republic of Uganda. 2020. Voluntary National Review Report on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Kampala: Republic of Uganda.
Reyes, Celia M, Jose Ramon Albert, Aubrey D Tabuga, Arkin A Arboneda, Jana Flor Vizmanos, and Carlos C
Cabaero. 2019. The Philippines'Voluntary National Review on the Sustainable Development Goals.
Quezon City: Philippine Institute for Development Studies.
S. Huyer et al. 2021. “Expanding Opportunities: A framework for gender and socially inclusive climate resilient
agriculture.”
S. Kottegoda. 2011. “Mainstreaming Gender in Disaster Management Policy: Key issues and Challenges in
the Asia-Pacific Region.”
Samir, Nehal. 2018. “Gender inequality: A continuing crisis.” Daily News Egypt.
https://dailynewsegypt.com/2018/05/31/gender-inequality-a-continuing-crisis/.
Saunders, K. 2019. “The mobility sector is on the verge of an awakening.”
Sothorn, Kem, Ros Bandeth, Florent P.B Zwiers, and Kem Keothyda. 2019. The Empowerment of Women in
Cambodia. Phnom Penh: Parliamentary Institute of Cambodia.
Statista. 2021. Gender gap index in Tanzania from 2016 to 2021. Accessed March 2022.
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1220574/gender-gap-index-in-
tanzania/#:~:text=The%20gender%20gap%20index%20score,countries%20in%20Sub%2DSaharan
%20Africa.
Tacoli. 2012. “Urbanization And Emerging Population Issues Working Paper 7. Urbanization, gender and
urban poverty: paid work and unpaid carework in the city.”
The United Republic of Tanzania. 2005. “National Strategy for Gender.”
UGBS. 2019. Gender Issues in Uganda: An analysis of gender based violence, asset ownership and
employment. UGBS. https://www.ubos.org/wp-
content/uploads/publications/03_2019UBOS_Gender_Issues_Report_2019.pdf.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 66

=== PAGE 186 ===
182
UN. 2019. ‘Women-led Climate Resilient Farming’ Model (WCRF). Accessed February 2022.
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/partnership/?p=31017.
UN. 2019. “2019 Rwanda Volunatry National Review Report.”
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/23432Rwanda_2019_VNR_Final_Draft__
_17_06_2019.pdf.
UN Women. 2022. “Country Fact Sheet: Philippines.” Accessed March 09, 2022.
https://data.unwomen.org/country/philippines.
UN Women. n.d. Senegal. https://africa.unwomen.org/en/where-we-are/west-and-central-africa/senegal.
UNDP. 2018. Gender Equality Strategy: UNDP Rwanda (2019 - 2022). Kigali: UNDP.
UNDP. 2019. Gender Responsive Indicators: Gender and NDC Planning and Implementation.
https://www.ndcs.undp.org/content/ndc-support-programme/en/home/impact-and-
learning/library/gender-responsive-indicators-gender-and-ndc-planning-for-implementation.html.
UNDP. 2020. “Human Development Report - Tanzania.”
UNDP. 2020. “Human Development Report - Vietnam.”
UNDP. 2020. Human Development Report 2020. UNDP. https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/UGA.pdf.
UNDP. 2020. Human Development Report 2020. UNDP. https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/SEN.pdf.
UNDP. 2020. “Human Development Report 2020: Brazil.” https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/BRA.pdf.
UNDP. 2020. Human Development Report 2020: Cambodia. https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/KHM.pdf, UNDP.
UNDP. 2020. Human Development Report 2020: Cote d'Ivoire. https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/CIV.pdf, UNDP.
UNDP. 2020. Human Development Report 2020: Kenya. https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/KEN.pdf, Kenya: UNDP.
UNDP. 2020. Human Development Report 2020: Lao People's Democratic Republic. UNDP.
UNDP. 2020. Human Development Report 2020: South Africa. https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/ZAF.pdf, South Africa: UNDP.
UNDP. 2020. “Human Development Report 2020: Trinidad and Tobago.”
https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-Profiles/TTO.pdf.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 67

=== PAGE 187 ===
183
UNDP. 2020. “Human Development Report: Bangladesh.” https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/BGD.pdf.
UNDP. 2020. “Morocco Human Development Report.”
UNEP. 2020. Safe transport modes for women can only mean better connectivity. February. Accessed January
2022. https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/story/safe-transport-modes-women-can-only-mean-
better-connectivity.
UNESCO. 2022. “Cambodia - Gender Indicator - Perception of gender equality.” Accessed March 8, 2022.
https://en.unesco.org/creativity/cambodia-gender-indicator-perception-gender-equality.
UNFPA. 2021. “Gender and Inclusion Assessment of Covid-19 Pandemic on vulnerable women and girls in
the Philippines.” 21 March . Accessed March 09, 2022.
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/gender_report_v09.pdf.
—. 2022. “Human rights & gender equality: Cambodia.” Accessed March 8, 2022.
https://cambodia.unfpa.org/en/node/15236.
United Nations. 2020. “Convention on the Elimination.”
https://www.ecoi.net/en/file/local/2026585/N2006212.pdf, Pakistan.
United Republic of Tazania . 2019. “2019 Voluntary National Review .”
UNWOMEN. 2021. “Empowering women through climate resilient agriculture in west and central Africa.”
USAID. 2020. “Gender Analysis and Assessment USAID/Egypt Final Report.”
https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X46M.pdf.
USAID. 2018. “USAID/Morocco Gender Analysis.”
Vietnam. 2018. “2018 Voluntary National Review.” Ha Noi.
Vongxay, Viengnakhone, Kongmany Chaleunvong, Dirk R Essink, Jo Durham, and Vanphanom Sychareun.
2020. “Knowledge of and attitudes towards abortion among adolescents in Lao PDR.” Global Health
Action 13 (2).
Wikipedia. 2022. Abortion in Brazil. Accessed March 2022. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abortion_in_Brazil.
World Bank. 2021. Filling in knowledge gaps on gender equality in transportation. Accessed January 2022.
https://blogs.worldbank.org/transport/filling-knowledge-gaps-gender-equality-transportation.
—. 2022. Women, Business and the Law: Cambodia. Accessed March 2022.
https://wbl.worldbank.org/content/dam/documents/wbl/2022/snapshots/Cambodia.pdf.
—. 2022. Women, Business and the Law: Cote d'Ivoire. Accessed March 2022.
https://wbl.worldbank.org/content/dam/documents/wbl/2022/snapshots/Cote-divoire.pdf.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 68

=== PAGE 188 ===
184
—. 2022. Women, Business and the Law: Egypt. Accessed March 2022.
https://wbl.worldbank.org/en/data/exploreeconomies/egypt-arab-rep/2022.
—. 2022. Women, Business and the Law: Lao PDR. Accessed March 2022.
https://wbl.worldbank.org/content/dam/documents/wbl/2022/snapshots/Lao-pdr.pdf.
—. 2022. Women, Business and the Law: Philippines. Accessed March 2022.
https://wbl.worldbank.org/content/dam/documents/wbl/2022/snapshots/Philippines.pdf.
—. 2022. Women, Business and the Law: Rwanda. Accessed March 2022.
https://wbl.worldbank.org/en/data/exploreeconomies/rwanda/2022.
—. 2022. Women, Business and the Law: Senegal. Accessed March 2022.
https://wbl.worldbank.org/en/data/exploreeconomies/senegal/2022.
—. 2022. Women, Business and the Law: South Africa. Accessed March 2022.
https://wbl.worldbank.org/en/data/exploreeconomies/south-africa/2022.
—. 2022. Women, Business and the Law: Tanzania. Accessed March 2022.
https://wbl.worldbank.org/en/data/exploreeconomies/tanzania/2022.
—. 2022. Women, Business and the Law: Vietnam. Accessed March 2022.
https://wbl.worldbank.org/en/data/exploreeconomies/vietnam/2022.
World Economic Forum. 2021. Global Gender Gap Report.
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf, Cologny/Geneva: WEF.
World Economic Forum. 2021. Global Gender Report 2021.
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf, Geneva: WEF.
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf.
World Economic Forum. 2021. “World Economic Forum Global Gender Gap Report - South Africa.”
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/wef_gggr_2021.pdf, South Africa.
Ylipaa, Josephine, Sara Gabrielsson, and Anne Jerneck. 2019. “Climate Change Adaptation and Gender
Inequality: Insights from Rural Vietnam.” Sustainability 11 (10): 2805.
GCF_GGC_Gender Assessment_Annex 8_14.10.2022_clean _Final.docx Draft 69

=== PAGE 189 ===
185
Annex 8.2 | Gender Action Plan
11 May 2022

=== PAGE 190 ===
186
Acknowledgement
The following document is submitted in accordance with the submission of the Full Funding Proposal by the
Green Guarantee Company to the Green Climate Fund in line with their submission of the Project Preparation
Facility (PPF) Application dated 13 October 2021. The team responsible for the compilation of the document
are as follows:
 Development Guarantee Company
 Green Guarantee Company
 Pegasys Limited
 IBIS Consulting
 SR Consulting
The contributions by each of the organisations as well as the independent consultants was pivotal. Although
we cannot specially recognize the individuals named below for their expertise, dedication, energy, and
generosity, their role in the compilation of the annex is well noted. The impact of this Annex will be the product
of their collective contributions.
2

=== PAGE 191 ===
187
Gender Action Plan
GGC is committed to ensuring that its internal capacities and external (institutional- and project- specific) approaches to enhancing gender equality are
aligned with the GCF’s requirements.
This is reflected in the below Gender Action Plan.
Table 1 Gender Action Plan
Activities Indicators and Targets Timeline Responsibilities and Costs
Impact Statement: In mobilizing significant private debt capital towards climate change mitigation and adaptation projects across, the GGC will, to the best of its
ability, support greater gender equality and women’s empowerment within the target countries and sectors, through:
 Improved access to clean energy and empowerment of local communities, including women, girls, and vulnerable populations, through renewable energy,
energy services, enhanced energy efficiency and new technologies;
o This includes a focus on supporting women and girls living in cities and working in industries to make positive, healthier behavioural shifts through
the provision of better technologies and energy efficient designs to help reduce energy use in urban contexts.
 Improved access to safe, reliable and affordable low-emission transport systems for local communities, with special attention paid to the needs of those in
vulnerable situations, including women and girls, through the provision of low- and zero-emission public and private transport solutions.
 Improved livelihoods and enhance the resilience of vulnerable communities, including women and girls, to the negative climate impacts currently affecting
critical agricultural and food systems.
 Improved health outcomes and increase in time-savings, recreation, and economic activities for women and girls through enhancements to the built and
natural environments that they rely on (ranging from improvements in WASH and energy infrastructure, through to improvements in land-use and
conservation of forests and ecosystems).
Outcome Statement: By demonstrating how the provision of green guarantees can support widescale roll-out of inclusive climate change mitigation and adaptation
projects, the GGC will achieve the following gender-responsive outcomes (with sex disaggregated fund level impacts at, or near, gender parity):
 Enhanced resilience and improved health for communities, including women and children, through GHG emissions reductions and adaptation measures,
relating to both built and natural environments.
 More equitable decision-making between men and women, reductions in gender based violence, increased access to and control over resources, and
economic empowerment of women and girls through the GGC’s Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), mandatory project safeguards,
3

--- Table 1 on Page 191 ---
 | Activities |  |  | Indicators and Targets |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities and Costs | 
 | Impact Statement: In mobilizing significant private debt capital towards climate change mitigation and adaptation projects across, the GGC will, to the best of its |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ability, support greater gender equality and women’s empowerment within the target countries and sectors, through: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  Improved access to clean energy and empowerment of local communities, including women, girls, and vulnerable populations, through renewable energy, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | energy services, enhanced energy efficiency and new technologies; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | o This includes a focus on supporting women and girls living in cities and working in industries to make positive, healthier behavioural shifts through |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the provision of better technologies and energy efficient designs to help reduce energy use in urban contexts. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  Improved access to safe, reliable and affordable low-emission transport systems for local communities, with special attention paid to the needs of those in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | vulnerable situations, including women and girls, through the provision of low- and zero-emission public and private transport solutions. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  Improved livelihoods and enhance the resilience of vulnerable communities, including women and girls, to the negative climate impacts currently affecting |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | critical agricultural and food systems. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  Improved health outcomes and increase in time-savings, recreation, and economic activities for women and girls through enhancements to the built and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | natural environments that they rely on (ranging from improvements in WASH and energy infrastructure, through to improvements in land-use and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | conservation of forests and ecosystems). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Outcome Statement: By demonstrating how the provision of green guarantees can support widescale roll-out of inclusive climate change mitigation and adaptation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | projects, the GGC will achieve the following gender-responsive outcomes (with sex disaggregated fund level impacts at, or near, gender parity): |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  Enhanced resilience and improved health for communities, including women and children, through GHG emissions reductions and adaptation measures, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | relating to both built and natural environments. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  More equitable decision-making between men and women, reductions in gender based violence, increased access to and control over resources, and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | economic empowerment of women and girls through the GGC’s Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), mandatory project safeguards, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 192 ===
188
stakeholder consultation framework (including expert consultation on pressing gender issues, determined on a country-by-country basis), and gender-
responsive project design approaches.
 Strengthened institutional capacity of project owners in the design and delivery of gender-responsive projects, aligned with GCF requirements.
Budget: GGC will adequately budget for a dedicated gender resource to oversee all of GGC’s gender-related activities, as well as the ad hoc appointment
of gender specialists with in-country and sector -specific expertise, on a project-by-project basis and has allocated approximately USD 5 000 000 towards
M&E and reporting impact.
Output 1: Establish organisational processes and systems to enhance gender equality outcomes
Dedicate necessary finances and human resources to implement this 100% annual compliance with Established in Year 1 Consulting team appointed by
Gender Action Plan, with indicator data disaggregated by sex to gender reporting at an GGC to head ESG and Gender.
ensure reportable progress. organisational level Implemented in
Dedicate necessary human and financial resources to build, Line items in GGC’s annual perpetuity (duration of Costs included in the GGC’s
strengthen and sustain GGC’s capacity related to gender equality budgets to cover processes GGC’s years in annual budgets, as follows (see
knowledge management, learning, and implementation through: and activities to adequately operation) also Annex 4 and 11):
 the appointment of a dedicated gender resource to oversee all of cover costs of the on-going  Dedicated gender
GGC’s gender-related activities; and engagement of the GGC’s expertise within the GGC’s
 the ad hoc appointment of gender specialists with in-country and gender, E&S resource, as well Impact Team (comprising
sector -specific expertise, as needed on a project-by-project as project-specific gender gender, climate and E&S
basis. expertise, as required. resources). In T1, the team
will consist of one (1)
GGC’s Environmental and Social Management System, Policy and ESM System, Policy and
resource(supported by
Framework in place. Framework operationalised in
external consultants) and
Year 1.
grow year-on-year to
ultimately comprise seven
(7) resources (split equally
between gender, climate
and E&S).
 Project-level consultancy
services, which includes
the cost of in-country
experts to be mobilised on
4

--- Table 1 on Page 192 ---
 | stakeholder consultation framework (including expert consultation on pressing gender issues, determined on a country-by-country basis), and gender- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | responsive project design approaches. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  Strengthened institutional capacity of project owners in the design and delivery of gender-responsive projects, aligned with GCF requirements. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Budget: GGC will adequately budget for a dedicated gender resource to oversee all of GGC’s gender-related activities, as well as the ad hoc appointment |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of gender specialists with in-country and sector -specific expertise, on a project-by-project basis and has allocated approximately USD 5 000 000 towards |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | M&E and reporting impact. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 1: Establish organisational processes and systems to enhance gender equality outcomes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Dedicate necessary finances and human resources to implement this |  |  | 100% annual compliance with |  | Established in Year 1
Implemented in
perpetuity (duration of
GGC’s years in
operation) |  |  |  |  | Consulting team appointed by | 
 | Gender Action Plan, with indicator data disaggregated by sex to |  |  | gender reporting at an |  |  |  |  |  |  | GGC to head ESG and Gender. | 
 | ensure reportable progress. |  |  | organisational level |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Dedicate necessary human and financial resources to build, |  |  | Line items in GGC’s annual |  |  |  |  |  |  | Costs included in the GGC’s | 
 | strengthen and sustain GGC’s capacity related to gender equality |  |  | budgets to cover processes |  |  |  |  |  |  | annual budgets, as follows (see | 
 | knowledge management, learning, and implementation through: |  |  | and activities to adequately |  |  |  |  |  |  | also Annex 4 and 11): | 
 |  the appointment of a dedicated gender resource to oversee all of |  |  | cover costs of the on-going |  |  |  |  |  |  |  Dedicated gender | 
 | GGC’s gender-related activities; and |  |  | engagement of the GGC’s |  |  |  |  |  |  | expertise within the GGC’s | 
 |  the ad hoc appointment of gender specialists with in-country and |  |  | gender, E&S resource, as well |  |  |  |  |  |  | Impact Team (comprising | 
 | sector -specific expertise, as needed on a project-by-project |  |  | as project-specific gender |  |  |  |  |  |  | gender, climate and E&S | 
 | basis. |  |  | expertise, as required. |  |  |  |  |  |  | resources). In T1, the team | 
GGC’s Environmental and Social Management System, Policy and
Framework in place. | GGC’s Environmental and Social Management System, Policy and |  | ESM System, Policy and
Framework operationalised in
Year 1. | ESM System, Policy and |  |  |  |  |  |  | will consist of one (1) | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | resource(supported by | 
 | Framework in place. |  |  | Framework operationalised in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | external consultants) and | 
 |  |  |  | Year 1. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | grow year-on-year to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ultimately comprise seven | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (7) resources (split equally | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | between gender, climate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and E&S). | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  Project-level consultancy | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | services, which includes | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the cost of in-country | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | experts to be mobilised on | 

--- Table 2 on Page 192 ---
Established in Year 1

Implemented in
perpetuity (duration of
GGC’s years in
operation)

=== PAGE 193 ===
189
a project-by-project basis.
In Year 1, this budget is
earmarked as
USD$1,560,000.00 and
will grow to
USD$ 3,120,00.00 by Year
10.
AE to monitor and report on
progress.
Output 2: Ensure project-level gender assessments and action plans (GAPs) are developed (NOTE: project-level assessments, and hence specific gender
indicators and targets can only be established as and when specific projects that the GGC will support are identified. Thus, indicators and targets are identified where
known, and if not, are exemplars).
As part of each project’s gender assessment, ensure: 100% of projects that receive In perpetuity (duration Project Owner, with review,
 Relevant sex-disaggregated data at a country level is collected guarantees. of GGC’s years in oversight and input (as
and analysed operation) necessary) from GGC’s
 Women’s organisations working on gender issues are identified Gender Resource and
and engaged additional expert input from
 Gender-related baseline data specific to the sector and country is gender specialist with country
established and sector specific expertise
 The project is aligned with / in support of the country’s SDG, NDC (to be determined on a project
and policy gender-related commitments by project basis).
 Country and sector specific gender vulnerability(ies) are identified
AE to monitor and report on
(using the Sector and Country Assessments in Annex 8.1 as a
basis for further research and engagement) progress.
 Opportunities / solutions for the project to address these
Costs included in the GGC’s
vulnerabilities are well defined and adequately integrated into the
annual budgets, as follows (see
project design and delivery processes (using Table 6, Annex 8.1,
also Annex 4 and 11):
as a basis for further research and engagement)
5

--- Table 1 on Page 193 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | a project-by-project basis. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | In Year 1, this budget is | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | earmarked as | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | USD$1,560,000.00 and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | will grow to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | USD$ 3,120,00.00 by Year | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 10. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | AE to monitor and report on | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | progress. | 
 | Output 2: Ensure project-level gender assessments and action plans (GAPs) are developed (NOTE: project-level assessments, and hence specific gender |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | indicators and targets can only be established as and when specific projects that the GGC will support are identified. Thus, indicators and targets are identified where |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | known, and if not, are exemplars). |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | As part of each project’s gender assessment, ensure: |  | 100% of projects that receive
guarantees. | In perpetuity (duration
of GGC’s years in
operation) | Project Owner, with review,
oversight and input (as
necessary) from GGC’s
Gender Resource and
additional expert input from
gender specialist with country
and sector specific expertise
(to be determined on a project
by project basis).
AE to monitor and report on
progress.
Costs included in the GGC’s
annual budgets, as follows (see
also Annex 4 and 11): | Project Owner, with review, | 
 |  Relevant sex-disaggregated data at a country level is collected |  |  |  |  | oversight and input (as | 
 | and analysed |  |  |  |  | necessary) from GGC’s | 
 |  Women’s organisations working on gender issues are identified |  |  |  |  | Gender Resource and | 
 | and engaged |  |  |  |  | additional expert input from | 
 |  Gender-related baseline data specific to the sector and country is |  |  |  |  | gender specialist with country | 
 | established |  |  |  |  | and sector specific expertise | 
 |  The project is aligned with / in support of the country’s SDG, NDC |  |  |  |  | (to be determined on a project | 
 | and policy gender-related commitments |  |  |  |  | by project basis). | 
 |  Country and sector specific gender vulnerability(ies) are identified |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | AE to monitor and report on | 
 | (using the Sector and Country Assessments in Annex 8.1 as a |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | basis for further research and engagement) |  |  |  |  | progress. | 
 |  Opportunities / solutions for the project to address these |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Costs included in the GGC’s | 
 | vulnerabilities are well defined and adequately integrated into the |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | annual budgets, as follows (see | 
 | project design and delivery processes (using Table 6, Annex 8.1, |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | also Annex 4 and 11): | 
 | as a basis for further research and engagement) |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 193 ---
100% of projects that receive
guarantees.

--- Table 3 on Page 193 ---
In perpetuity (duration
of GGC’s years in
operation)

=== PAGE 194 ===
190
Review and input into each project’s Gender Action Plan, ensuring the 100% of projects that receive  Dedicated gender
outcomes (actions) of the project’s gender assessment are adequately guarantees. expertise within the GGC’s
captured, resourced and assigned responsibilities and timelines for all Impact Team (comprising
subsequent project phases. gender, climate and E&S
Ensure sufficient budget is allocated to implement and monitor each 100% of projects that receive resources). In T1, the team
project’s GAP. guarantees will consist of one (1)
resource(supported by
external consultants) and
grow year-on-year to
ultimately comprise seven
(7) resources (split equally
between gender, climate
and E&S).
 Project-level consultancy
services, which includes the
cost of in-country experts to
be mobilised on a project-by-
project basis. In Year 1, this
budget is as
USD$ 1,560,000.00 USD and
will grow to USD$ 3,120,00.00
by Year 10.
Output 3: Gender sensitive safeguarding and stakeholder consultation is implemented to enable gender inclusive processes, leading to gender-
responsive project designs.
Stakeholder consultations and project safeguarding will include the 100% of projects under In perpetuity (duration Oversight from consulting
following categories, only when and as appropriate: consideration for a guarantee of GGC’s years in team appointed by GGC to
 Gender Equality and Women’s Rights operation) head ESG and Gender.
 Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions % of women, indigenous
 Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement peoples and vulnerable
6

--- Table 1 on Page 194 ---
 | Review and input into each project’s Gender Action Plan, ensuring the |  | 100% of projects that receive
guarantees. |  |  |  Dedicated gender | 
 | outcomes (actions) of the project’s gender assessment are adequately |  |  |  |  | expertise within the GGC’s | 
 | captured, resourced and assigned responsibilities and timelines for all |  |  |  |  | Impact Team (comprising | 
 | subsequent project phases. |  |  |  |  | gender, climate and E&S | 
Ensure sufficient budget is allocated to implement and monitor each
project’s GAP. | Ensure sufficient budget is allocated to implement and monitor each |  | 100% of projects that receive
guarantees |  |  | resources). In T1, the team | 
 | project’s GAP. |  |  |  |  | will consist of one (1) | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | resource(supported by | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | external consultants) and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | grow year-on-year to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | ultimately comprise seven | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | (7) resources (split equally | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | between gender, climate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | and E&S). | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  Project-level consultancy | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | services, which includes the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | cost of in-country experts to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | be mobilised on a project-by- | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | project basis. In Year 1, this | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | budget is as | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | USD$ 1,560,000.00 USD and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | will grow to USD$ 3,120,00.00 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | by Year 10. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 3: Gender sensitive safeguarding and stakeholder consultation is implemented to enable gender inclusive processes, leading to gender- |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | responsive project designs. |  |  |  |  |  | 
Stakeholder consultations and project safeguarding will include the
following categories, only when and as appropriate:
 Gender Equality and Women’s Rights
 Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions
 Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement |  |  | 100% of projects under
consideration for a guarantee
% of women, indigenous
peoples and vulnerable | In perpetuity (duration
of GGC’s years in
operation) | Oversight from consulting
team appointed by GGC to
head ESG and Gender. |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 194 ---
100% of projects that receive
guarantees.

--- Table 3 on Page 194 ---
100% of projects that receive
guarantees

=== PAGE 195 ===
191
• Sites of Cultural and Historical Heritage populations included in project Delivery through Project
• Forced Eviction and Displacement design consultation (target: Owners
• Land Tenure and Other Rights 40% of all consulted).
• Indigenous Peoples GGC to provide Technical
 Corruption Assistance support, where
 Economic Impacts Project Owners lack capacity
• Labour Rights to deliver gender sensitive
• Negative Economic Consequences safeguarding and stakeholder
 Climate and Energy consultation
• Emissions
• Energy Supply Costs included as per project
 Water budgets (to be reviewed and
• Impact on Natural Water Patterns/Flows approved by the GGC to
• Erosion and/or Water Body Instability ensure they are adequate).
 Environment, ecology and land use
• Landscape Modification and Soil AE to monitor and report on
progress.
• Vulnerability to Natural Disaster
• Genetic Resources
• Release of pollutants
• Hazardous and Non-hazardous Waste
• Pesticides & Fertilisers
• Harvesting of Forests
• Food
• Animal husbandry
• High Conservation Value Areas and Critical
Habitats
• Endangered Species
Output 4: M&E analysis confirms gender-responsive project designs support lead to greater equality outcomes (NOTE: project-level assessments, and
hence specific gender indicators and targets can only be established as and when specific projects that the GGC will support are identified. Thus, indicators and
targets are identified where known, and if not, are exemplars).
7

--- Table 1 on Page 195 ---
• Sites of Cultural and Historical Heritage
• Forced Eviction and Displacement
• Land Tenure and Other Rights
• Indigenous Peoples
 Corruption
 Economic Impacts
• Labour Rights
• Negative Economic Consequences
 Climate and Energy
• Emissions
• Energy Supply
 Water
• Impact on Natural Water Patterns/Flows
• Erosion and/or Water Body Instability
 Environment, ecology and land use
• Landscape Modification and Soil
• Vulnerability to Natural Disaster
• Genetic Resources
• Release of pollutants
• Hazardous and Non-hazardous Waste
• Pesticides & Fertilisers
• Harvesting of Forests
• Food
• Animal husbandry
• High Conservation Value Areas and Critical
Habitats
• Endangered Species |  | populations included in project
design consultation (target:
40% of all consulted). |  | Delivery through Project
Owners
GGC to provide Technical
Assistance support, where
Project Owners lack capacity
to deliver gender sensitive
safeguarding and stakeholder
consultation
Costs included as per project
budgets (to be reviewed and
approved by the GGC to
ensure they are adequate).
AE to monitor and report on
progress. | 
 | Output 4: M&E analysis confirms gender-responsive project designs support lead to greater equality outcomes (NOTE: project-level assessments, and |  |  |  | 
 | hence specific gender indicators and targets can only be established as and when specific projects that the GGC will support are identified. Thus, indicators and |  |  |  | 
 | targets are identified where known, and if not, are exemplars). |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 196 ===
192
Develop appropriate organisational-level digital M&E platform that Digital platform established Year 1 Oversight from consulting
aggregates progress and data from project-level GAPs to inform team appointed by GGC to
GGC’s Annual Reporting process 100% of project’s GAPs In perpetuity (duration head ESG and Gender.
loaded on digital M&E platform of GGC’s years in
operation) Costs: M&E budget forms part
of the GGC’s overarching
MERL budget for 2022-32
(USD$ 5,603,907.00 total)
(See Annex 11).
AE to monitor and report on
progress.
Demonstrate that gender-responsive project designs result in:  At least 50% of all In perpetuity (duration Project Owners with data
 Improved livelihoods and enhanced resilience of women and beneficiaries are female of GGC’s years in verified by GGC’s Gender
girls resulting from adaptation and mitigation measures; across GGC’s investment operation) Resource
 More equitable decision-making between men and women; portfolio. AE to monitor and report on
 Reductions in gender based violence; Exemplar indicators include: progress.
 Empowerment1 of women and girls through increased  Quantitative indicators to
access to and control over economic, health, infrastructural measure targets and Costs: M&E budget forms part
and educational resources, services and opportunities. quotas for women’s of the GGC’s overarching
participation and MERL budget for 2022-32
using aggregated quantifiable and qualitative data. leadership at project level (USD$5,603,907.00 total) (See
are tracked and reported Annex 11).
on.
It should be noted that, where a target has not been set for a specific  Measurable reduction in
indicator, the intention of the indicator is to demonstrate that – when a gender-based violence
project does contribute to such an indicator – it will be reported on by tracked and reported on.
1 Empowerment will be considered through various lenses, based on the project, to include – for example – time‐savings, economic empowerment, health improvements, improvements in educational
outcomes, etc.
8

--- Table 1 on Page 196 ---
Develop appropriate organisational-level digital M&E platform that
aggregates progress and data from project-level GAPs to inform
GGC’s Annual Reporting process |  |  | Digital platform established
100% of project’s GAPs
loaded on digital M&E platform |  |  | Year 1
In perpetuity (duration
of GGC’s years in
operation) |  | Oversight from consulting | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | team appointed by GGC to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | head ESG and Gender. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Costs: M&E budget forms part | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | of the GGC’s overarching | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | MERL budget for 2022-32 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (USD$ 5,603,907.00 total) | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (See Annex 11). | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | AE to monitor and report on | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | progress. | 
 | Demonstrate that gender-responsive project designs result in: |  |  |  At least 50% of all |  | In perpetuity (duration
of GGC’s years in
operation) | Project Owners with data
verified by GGC’s Gender
Resource
AE to monitor and report on
progress.
Costs: M&E budget forms part
of the GGC’s overarching
MERL budget for 2022-32
(USD$5,603,907.00 total) (See
Annex 11). | Project Owners with data | 
 |  Improved livelihoods and enhanced resilience of women and |  |  | beneficiaries are female |  |  |  | verified by GGC’s Gender | 
 | girls resulting from adaptation and mitigation measures; |  |  | across GGC’s investment |  |  |  | Resource | 
 |  More equitable decision-making between men and women; |  |  | portfolio. |  |  |  | AE to monitor and report on | 
 |  Reductions in gender based violence; |  |  | Exemplar indicators include: |  |  |  | progress. | 
 |  Empowerment1 of women and girls through increased |  |  |  Quantitative indicators to |  |  |  |  | 
 | access to and control over economic, health, infrastructural |  |  | measure targets and |  |  |  | Costs: M&E budget forms part | 
 | and educational resources, services and opportunities. |  |  | quotas for women’s |  |  |  | of the GGC’s overarching | 
 |  |  |  | participation and |  |  |  | MERL budget for 2022-32 | 
 | using aggregated quantifiable and qualitative data. |  |  | leadership at project level |  |  |  | (USD$5,603,907.00 total) (See | 
 |  |  |  | are tracked and reported |  |  |  | Annex 11). | 
 |  |  |  | on. |  |  |  |  | 
 | It should be noted that, where a target has not been set for a specific |  |  |  Measurable reduction in |  |  |  |  | 
 | indicator, the intention of the indicator is to demonstrate that – when a |  |  | gender-based violence |  |  |  |  | 
 | project does contribute to such an indicator – it will be reported on by |  |  | tracked and reported on. |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 196 ---
Develop appropriate organisational-level digital M&E platform that
aggregates progress and data from project-level GAPs to inform
GGC’s Annual Reporting process

--- Table 3 on Page 196 ---
Digital platform established

100% of project’s GAPs
loaded on digital M&E platform

--- Table 4 on Page 196 ---
Year 1

In perpetuity (duration
of GGC’s years in
operation)

--- Table 5 on Page 196 ---
In perpetuity (duration
of GGC’s years in
operation)

=== PAGE 197 ===
193
the Borrower to the GGC (as opposed to the GGC expecting all  Number/proportion of
projects to report on all indicators). women with improved
access to financial
mechanisms (equity
investment, affordable
loans, insurance etc.) for
low-carbon/climate-
resilient products and
services.
 Quantifiable increases in
targeted and diversified
employment opportunities
for women and men.
 Increase in earning and
income generation
opportunities for both
women and men
expressed as income ratio
of men to women.
 Quantitative indicators
that measure women’s
and men’s shift in time
spent / time-savings and
economic opportunities
resulting from a project’s
adaptation or mitigation
measures (such as those
resulting from increased
access to healthcare,
education, infrastructure
9

--- Table 1 on Page 197 ---
the Borrower to the GGC (as opposed to the GGC expecting all
projects to report on all indicators). |  |  Number/proportion of |  |  | 
 |  | women with improved |  |  | 
 |  | access to financial |  |  | 
 |  | mechanisms (equity |  |  | 
 |  | investment, affordable |  |  | 
 |  | loans, insurance etc.) for |  |  | 
 |  | low-carbon/climate- |  |  | 
 |  | resilient products and |  |  | 
 |  | services. |  |  | 
 |  |  Quantifiable increases in |  |  | 
 |  | targeted and diversified |  |  | 
 |  | employment opportunities |  |  | 
 |  | for women and men. |  |  | 
 |  |  Increase in earning and |  |  | 
 |  | income generation |  |  | 
 |  | opportunities for both |  |  | 
 |  | women and men |  |  | 
 |  | expressed as income ratio |  |  | 
 |  | of men to women. |  |  | 
 |  |  Quantitative indicators |  |  | 
 |  | that measure women’s |  |  | 
 |  | and men’s shift in time |  |  | 
 |  | spent / time-savings and |  |  | 
 |  | economic opportunities |  |  | 
 |  | resulting from a project’s |  |  | 
 |  | adaptation or mitigation |  |  | 
 |  | measures (such as those |  |  | 
 |  | resulting from increased |  |  | 
 |  | access to healthcare, |  |  | 
 |  | education, infrastructure |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 197 ---
the Borrower to the GGC (as opposed to the GGC expecting all
projects to report on all indicators).

=== PAGE 198 ===
194
services, sustainable land-
use activities etc.).
Output 4: Enhanced institutional capacity of project owners to develop and implement projects that lead to greater equality outcomes
Guarantees provided to women led businesses and / or targeted At least 25% of all projects In perpetuity (duration Project Owners with data
allocation of guarantees to project’s that explicitly look to address gaps comply with one or more of the of GGC’s years in verified by GGC’s consulting
in financing for women. 2XChallenge: Financing for operation) team
Women criteria.
AE to monitor and report on
Women led or owned women Progress indicator, progress.
businesses that receive tracked in perpetuity.
support / gain access to Costs: M&E budget forms part
guarantees from the GGC. of the GGC’s overarching
MERL budget for 2022-32
(USD$5,603,907.00 total) (See
Annex 11).
Project Owners capacitated to develop and deliver gender-responsive Number of Project Owners In perpetuity (duration GGC’s Gender Resource to
support through technical assistance (TA) from the GGC who receive technical of GGC’s years in manage and track TA support
assistance from the GGC to operation) to Project Owners
enhance / improve the gender-
responsiveness of their project AE to monitor and report on
design progress.
Costs: M&E budget forms part
of the GGC’s overarching
MERL budget for 2022-32
(USD$5,603,907.00 total) (See
Annex 11).
10

--- Table 1 on Page 198 ---
 |  |  | services, sustainable land- |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | use activities etc.). |  |  |  | 
 | Output 4: Enhanced institutional capacity of project owners to develop and implement projects that lead to greater equality outcomes |  |  |  |  |  | 
Guarantees provided to women led businesses and / or targeted
allocation of guarantees to project’s that explicitly look to address gaps
in financing for women. |  | At least 25% of all projects
comply with one or more of the
2XChallenge: Financing for
Women criteria.
Women led or owned women
businesses that receive
support / gain access to
guarantees from the GGC. |  |  | In perpetuity (duration
of GGC’s years in
operation)
Progress indicator,
tracked in perpetuity. | Project Owners with data
verified by GGC’s consulting
team
AE to monitor and report on
progress.
Costs: M&E budget forms part
of the GGC’s overarching
MERL budget for 2022-32
(USD$5,603,907.00 total) (See
Annex 11). | 
Project Owners capacitated to develop and deliver gender-responsive
support through technical assistance (TA) from the GGC |  | Number of Project Owners
who receive technical
assistance from the GGC to
enhance / improve the gender-
responsiveness of their project
design |  |  | In perpetuity (duration
of GGC’s years in
operation) | GGC’s Gender Resource to
manage and track TA support
to Project Owners
AE to monitor and report on
progress.
Costs: M&E budget forms part
of the GGC’s overarching
MERL budget for 2022-32
(USD$5,603,907.00 total) (See
Annex 11). | 

=== PAGE 199 ===
195
The following table showcases the timeline for implementation of the gender action plan:
Table 2 Timeline
GAP Milestones Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Year 7 Year 8 Year 9 Year 10
Gender-responsive budgets, systems and processes X
in place
Gender resource appointed X
Database of country-specific gender specialists X X X X
identified
Project-level gender sensitive and gender-responsive X
methodologies in place to guide gender assessments
and action plans
Project-level gender sensitive and gender-responsive X
methodologies refined based on application learnings
Organisational-wide implementation of gender X
safeguarding and stakeholder consultation
methodologies
Gender safeguarding and stakeholder consultation X
methodologies refined based on application learnings
Monitoring, Verification and Reporting (MRV) platform X
in place
Monitoring, Verification and Reporting (MRV) platform X
refined based on application learnings
Technical Assistance: gender-related training and X X X X X X X X
capacity development for project owners
Sex-disaggregated project data, reporting and fund- X2 X X X X X X X
level reporting
2 Assuming at least one project is implemented in Year 3
11

--- Table 1 on Page 199 ---
 | GAP Milestones |  |  | Year 1 |  |  | Year 2 |  |  | Year 3 |  |  | Year 4 |  |  | Year 5 |  |  | Year 6 |  |  | Year 7 |  |  | Year 8 |  |  | Year 9 |  |  | Year 10 | 
 | Gender-responsive budgets, systems and processes |  | X | X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | in place |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Gender resource appointed |  |  | X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Database of country-specific gender specialists |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | identified |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project-level gender sensitive and gender-responsive
methodologies in place to guide gender assessments
and action plans |  |  | X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Project-level gender sensitive and gender-responsive |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | methodologies refined based on application learnings |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Organisational-wide implementation of gender
safeguarding and stakeholder consultation
methodologies |  |  | X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Gender safeguarding and stakeholder consultation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | methodologies refined based on application learnings |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Monitoring, Verification and Reporting (MRV) platform
in place |  |  | X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Monitoring, Verification and Reporting (MRV) platform |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | X |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | refined based on application learnings |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Technical Assistance: gender-related training and
capacity development for project owners |  |  |  |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  |  |  | 
 | Sex-disaggregated project data, reporting and fund- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | X2 |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  |  | X |  | 
 | level reporting |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
