=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sanghyun Kim
CreationDate: D:20220928155423+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (64-bit) 22.2.20212
ModDate: D:20220929094351+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (64-bit) 22.2.20212
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
17 – 20 October 2022
Incheon, Republic of Korea
Provisional agenda item 13
29 September 2022
Consideration of funding proposals -
Addendum II
Funding proposal package for FP192
Summary
This addendum contains the following seven parts:
a) A funding proposal titled "The R's (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate
Resilience Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R-CReWS)”;
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
’
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
’
d) Secretariats assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panels assessment;
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 3
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 139
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 140
Secretariat’s assessment 144
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 163
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
176
assessment
Gender documentation 180

=== PAGE 3 ===
The R's (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience
Project/Programme title:
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R-CReWS)
Country(ies): Barbados
Accredited Entity: Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC)
Date of first submission: 2022/02/24
Date of current submission 2022/07/28
Version number V.005

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
 | Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template | 
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4. |  | 

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 0
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AE Accredited Entity
AMA Accreditation Master Agreement
AMCECC Adaptation Measures to Counteract the Effects of Climate Change project
BNEP Barbados National Energy Policy
BSTP Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant
BWA Barbados Water Authority
CARICOM Caribbean Community
CAS Conventional Activated Sludge
CCCCC Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre
CFATF Caribbean Financial Action Task Force
CMMS Computerized Real-time Management System
CReW Caribbean Regional Fund for Wastewater Management project
CSME Single Market and Economy
DEFM Dynamic Economic and Financial Model
EE Executing Entity
EFE Extended Facility Fund
ELPA Electric Light and Power Act
ESIA Environment and Social Impact Assessment
ESMF Environment and Social Management Framework
ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESMS Environmental and Social Management System
ESS Environmental Social Safeguard
FATF Financial Action Task Force
FP Funding Proposal
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEF Global Environment Facility
GHG Greenhouse Gas Emission
GOB Government of Barbados
IDB Inter-American Development Bank
IDP Information Disclosure Policy
IPR Indirect Potable Reuse
IRMF Integrated Results Management Framework
IWRM integrated management of water resources
IWWM Integrated Water and Wastewater Management
MENB Ministry of Environment and National Beautification
NDA National Designated Authority
NWRP National Water Reuse Policy
PDMU Programme Development and Management Unit
PDP Physical Development Plan
PEA Public Education and Awareness

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
 | LIST OF ACRONYMS |  | 
AE |  | Accredited Entity | 
AMA |  | Accreditation Master Agreement | 
AMCECC |  | Adaptation Measures to Counteract the Effects of Climate Change project | 
BNEP |  | Barbados National Energy Policy | 
BSTP |  | Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant | 
BWA |  | Barbados Water Authority | 
CARICOM |  | Caribbean Community | 
CAS |  | Conventional Activated Sludge | 
CCCCC |  | Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre | 
CFATF |  | Caribbean Financial Action Task Force | 
CMMS |  | Computerized Real-time Management System | 
CReW |  | Caribbean Regional Fund for Wastewater Management project | 
CSME |  | Single Market and Economy | 
DEFM |  | Dynamic Economic and Financial Model | 
EE |  | Executing Entity | 
EFE |  | Extended Facility Fund | 
ELPA |  | Electric Light and Power Act | 
ESIA |  | Environment and Social Impact Assessment | 
ESMF |  | Environment and Social Management Framework | 
ESMP |  | Environmental and Social Management Plan | 
ESMS |  | Environmental and Social Management System | 
ESS |  | Environmental Social Safeguard | 
FATF |  | Financial Action Task Force | 
FP |  | Funding Proposal | 
GDP |  | Gross Domestic Product | 
GEF |  | Global Environment Facility | 
GHG |  | Greenhouse Gas Emission | 
GOB |  | Government of Barbados | 
IDB |  | Inter-American Development Bank | 
IDP |  | Information Disclosure Policy | 
IPR |  | Indirect Potable Reuse | 
IRMF |  | Integrated Results Management Framework | 
IWRM |  | integrated management of water resources | 
IWWM |  | Integrated Water and Wastewater Management | 
MENB |  | Ministry of Environment and National Beautification | 
NDA |  | National Designated Authority | 
NWRP |  | National Water Reuse Policy | 
PDMU |  | Programme Development and Management Unit | 
PDP |  | Physical Development Plan | 
PEA |  | Public Education and Awareness | 

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 0
PM Preventative Maintenance
R2RP Roof-to-Reef Programme
RAFF Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility
RE Renewable Energy
RFP Request for Proposals
RO Reverse Osmosis
SCSTP South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant
SCWRP South Coast Water Reclamation Project
SIDS Small Island Developing States
SLR Sea Level Rise
SOPs Standard Operating Procedures
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNITAR United Nations Institute for Training and Research
VFD Variable Frequency Drives
WSRN S- Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados
Barbados
WWD Wastewater Department

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
PM | Preventative Maintenance
R2RP | Roof-to-Reef Programme
RAFF | Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility
RE | Renewable Energy
RFP | Request for Proposals
RO | Reverse Osmosis
SCSTP | South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant
SCWRP | South Coast Water Reclamation Project
SIDS | Small Island Developing States
SLR | Sea Level Rise
SOPs | Standard Operating Procedures
UNEP | United Nations Environment Programme
UNFCCC | United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNITAR | United Nations Institute for Training and Research
VFD | Variable Frequency Drives
WSRN S-
Barbados | Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados
WWD | Wastewater Department

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1
A
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.1. Project or A.2. Public or
Project Public
programme private sector
Not applicable
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)
GCF Co-financers’
contribution contribution1
Mitigation total 7.5 % ---- %
☒ Energy generation and access 5% ---- %
☐ Low-emission transport ---- % ---- %
A.4. Result area(s)
☒ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 2.5 % ---- %
☐ Forestry and land use ---- % ---- %
Adaptation total 92.5 % 100 %
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities 17.5% 25%
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security 37.5% 75%
☒ Infrastructure and built environment 37.5 % ---- %
☐ Ecosystems and ecosystem services ---- % ---- %
Population of Barbados or 277,821
persons (136,132males and
141,689 females) (excluding annual
tourist arrival of approximately
1,237,200 million visitors per year)
(World Bank WDI, 2021)
A.6. Expected
A.5. Expected mitigation 136,220 (66,748 141,601 (69,384
adaptation
outcome males and males and
outcome
69,472 females) 72,217 females)
(Core indicator 1: GHG
40,875 tCO2e over 25 years
direct indirect
emissions reduced, avoided or
(Core indicator 2:
beneficiaries beneficiaries
direct and indirect
removed / sequestered)
beneficiaries reached)
49% 51%
A.7. Total financing (GCF
50 Million USD
+ co-finance)
A.9. Project size Small (Upto USD 50 million)
A.8. Total GCF funding
39.4 Million USD
requested
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF contribution (i.e.
GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the funding proposal.

--- Table 1 on Page 7 ---
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or
programme | Project | A.2. Public or
private sector | Public | 
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP) | Not applicable |  |  | 
A.4. Result area(s) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | GCF
contribution | Co-financers’
contribution1
 | Mitigation total |  | 7.5 % | ---- %
 | ☒ Energy generation and access |  | 5% | ---- %
 | ☐ Low-emission transport |  | ---- % | ---- %
 | ☒ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances |  | 2.5 % | ---- %
 | ☐ Forestry and land use |  | ---- % | ---- %
 | Adaptation total |  | 92.5 % | 100 %
 | ☒ Most vulnerable people and communities |  | 17.5% | 25%
 | ☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security |  | 37.5% | 75%
 | ☒ Infrastructure and built environment |  | 37.5 % | ---- %
 | ☐ Ecosystems and ecosystem services |  | ---- % | ---- %
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome
(Core indicator 1: GHG
emissions reduced, avoided or
removed / sequestered) | 40,875 tCO2e over 25 years | A.6. Expected
adaptation
outcome
(Core indicator 2:
direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached) | Population of Barbados or 277,821
persons (136,132males and
141,689 females) (excluding annual
tourist arrival of approximately
1,237,200 million visitors per year)
(World Bank WDI, 2021) | 
 |  |  | 136,220 (66,748
males and
69,472 females)
direct
beneficiaries | 141,601 (69,384
males and
72,217 females)
indirect
beneficiaries
 |  |  | 49% | 51%
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance) | 50 Million USD | A.9. Project size |  | 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested | 39.4 Million USD |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 7 ---
A.1. Project or
programme

--- Table 3 on Page 7 ---
A.2. Public or
private sector

--- Table 4 on Page 7 ---
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)

--- Table 5 on Page 7 ---
A.6. Expected
adaptation
outcome

(Core indicator 2:
direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached)

--- Table 6 on Page 7 ---
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome

(Core indicator 1: GHG
emissions reduced, avoided or
removed / sequestered)

--- Table 7 on Page 7 ---
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance)

--- Table 8 on Page 7 ---
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2
A
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8.
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested ☒ Grant 39.4 Million USD
☐ Equity Enter number
for the GCF funding ☐ Loan Enter number
☐ Results-based payment Enter number
☐ Guarantee Enter number
A.11. Implementation
5 years A.12. Total lifespan 25 years
period
A.13. Expected date of 10/17/2022 A.14. ESS category B
AE internal approval
A.16. Has
A.15. Has this FP been Yes ☒ No ☐
Readiness or PPF
submitted as a CN Yes ☒ No ☐
support been used
before?
to prepare this FP? PPF022
A.18. Is this FP
A.17. Is this FP included
included in the
in the entity work Yes ☒ No ☐ Yes ☒ No ☐
country
programme?
programme?
A.19. Complementarity
Yes ☒ No ☐
and coherence
Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC), established by an
Intergovernmental Agreement entered into force on February 2, 2002, a non-profit
regional organization among Member States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
The CCCCC organized and existing under the laws of Belize pursuant to the ACT, Act
No. 6 of 2015, dated 29th July 2015 and legally registered as an International Inter-
Governmental Organisation under Article 102 of the United Nations Treaty and having
A.20. Executing Entity its registered office at 3rd Floor, David L. McKoy Business Centre, Bliss Parade, P.O.
information Box 563, Belmopan, Belize, Central America. The CCCCC is a regional accredited entity
(Direct Access Entity) to the GCF.
The Barbados Water Authority is a Statutory Body established by an act of Legislature
on October 8, 1980 to replace the Waterworks Department of Government. It
commenced operations on April 1, 1981. BWA full registered address is The Pine
Commercial Estate, The Pine St. Michael BB11000, Bridgetown, Barbados.
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)

--- Table 1 on Page 8 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding | Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8.
☒ Grant 39.4 Million USD
☐ Equity Enter number
☐ Loan Enter number
☐ Results-based payment Enter number
☐ Guarantee Enter number |  | 
A.11. Implementation
period | 5 years | A.12. Total lifespan | 25 years
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval | 10/17/2022 | A.14. ESS category | B
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before? | Yes ☒ No ☐ | A.16. Has
Readiness or PPF
support been used
to prepare this FP? | Yes ☒ No ☐
PPF022
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme? | Yes ☒ No ☐ | A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country
programme? | Yes ☒ No ☐
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence | Yes ☒ No ☐ |  | 
A.20. Executing Entity
information | Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC), established by an
Intergovernmental Agreement entered into force on February 2, 2002, a non-profit
regional organization among Member States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
The CCCCC organized and existing under the laws of Belize pursuant to the ACT, Act
No. 6 of 2015, dated 29th July 2015 and legally registered as an International Inter-
Governmental Organisation under Article 102 of the United Nations Treaty and having
its registered office at 3rd Floor, David L. McKoy Business Centre, Bliss Parade, P.O.
Box 563, Belmopan, Belize, Central America. The CCCCC is a regional accredited entity
(Direct Access Entity) to the GCF.
The Barbados Water Authority is a Statutory Body established by an act of Legislature
on October 8, 1980 to replace the Waterworks Department of Government. It
commenced operations on April 1, 1981. BWA full registered address is The Pine
Commercial Estate, The Pine St. Michael BB11000, Bridgetown, Barbados. |  | 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 8 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding

--- Table 3 on Page 8 ---
A.11. Implementation
period

--- Table 4 on Page 8 ---
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval

--- Table 5 on Page 8 ---
10/17/2022


--- Table 6 on Page 8 ---
A.16. Has
Readiness or PPF
support been used
to prepare this FP?

--- Table 7 on Page 8 ---
Yes ☒ No ☐

PPF022

--- Table 8 on Page 8 ---
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before?

--- Table 9 on Page 8 ---
A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country
programme?

--- Table 10 on Page 8 ---
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme?

--- Table 11 on Page 8 ---
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence

--- Table 12 on Page 8 ---
A.20. Executing Entity
information

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3
A
Climate Change Problem
Barbados is experiencing “absolute water scarcity” based on the Falkenmark water stress indicator since
approximately 305-310 m3 of water is available per person per year, placing Barbados amongst the most
water scarce countries in the world.
The issue of water scarcity becomes of greater concern in the face of climate change. The projections,
representative for Barbados, using a multi-model CMIP6 ensemble with the SSP2-4.5 scenario and for the
epoch 2041 – 2060, indicate that:
• The mean annual daily maximum temperature will increase by about 1.0°C. The mean annual daily
minimum temperature will increase by about 1.3°C. The daily maximum temperature increase is
largest during the wet season from September to November.
• The number of heatwaves (three consecutive days where the maximum temperature exceeds the
average daily maximum temperature at the 90% threshold) has increased over the period 1991 –
2020 and may be expected to increase further with increasing temperatures.
• Annual mean precipitation will decrease by about 9%. The decrease is particularly severe in the May
- July season, effectively extending the dry season by two months.
There is a cause-and-effect relationship with each of these scenarios. For instance, temperatures will affect
the seasonality of crops, increase evapotranspiration rates, induce heat stress on the population, including
tourists and livestock, increase cooling costs, induce changes in plant-wildlife-insect populations and
distribution range and increase infectious and vector-borne diseases. More intense rainfall, severe storm
conditions and SLR will promote flash flooding; saline intrusion into available ground water abstraction and
irrigation wells and salinization of agriculture lands; coastal erosion and damage to coastal infrastructures
and disruption to businesses.
The effects of climate change are already evident in Barbados as increased flash-flooding magnitude and
frequency has caused havoc in Barbados: on 29 November 2016 Barbados experienced over 170 mm of
rainfall in a few hours, which previously was only observed in 1995, and this contributed to the failing of the
sewerage system.
The decreasing amount and increasingly skewed pattern of precipitation and increasing evapotranspiration
due to higher temperatures will set the stage for increased drought which will further decrease underground
recharge rates and increase salinization of aquifers, which provide 95% of the island’s potable water supply.
The overall implication of the available body of work suggests that sustainable aquifer yields could decrease
by around 50% by 2050. This is troubling for Barbados as the level of groundwater abstraction is already
between 85-100% of the safe yield.
Project Summary and Climate Results
Wastewater management strategies using reclaimed water will be a critical component to help mitigate the
impacts of climate change on water scarcity. Reclaimed water is wastewater that has been treated to tertiary
levels so that it can be beneficially reused for non-potable sources, such as agriculture, landscaping, turf
maintenance, and recharging the aquifer.
The goal of 3R-CReWS is to facilitate the enhancement of the health, wellbeing, and productivity of
Barbadians through the use of carbon neutral and climate resilient water and energy management
technologies and strategies that ensures water is protected, managed, recycled, reused, and conserved.
This will be achieved through four outcome level results and ten output level results.
Outcomes 1 and 2 of this project are the largest, in terms of budget, as they are focused on infrastructure
works and transfer of technology. Specifically, Outcome 1 aims to achieve a climate resilient pathway
through the upgrade of the Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) to a tertiary treatment system and
the installation of wastewater treatment systems in two Zone A locations in Barbados to harness reclaimed
water, which will be utilized for aquifer recharge and agricultural irrigation. This will be achieved through the
installation of a 9km pipeline that will supply reclaimed water to support irrigation developments in the
Codrington-Neils-Lears-Salters-Constant-Valley, which will benefit 155 farmers on 235 Hectares and recharge

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4
A
wells (injections wells) for replenishing the aquifer. This water reclamation and reuse process will be
complemented with the installation of decision support tools and infrastructure that are critical for resilient
building.
Outcome 2, which spans the installation of renewable energy PV systems, automated controls such as
variable frequency drives (VFDs) and a sludge dewatering system, will contribute to the achievement of a
low-emission pathway.
Outcomes 3 and 4 are “soft” developmental results that primarily aim to create an enabling environment for
achieving a paradigm shift in the approaches to the management of water resources, specifically wastewater,
and thereby promoting water security in the face of a changing climate. Specifically, Outcome 3 is targeting
the enhancement of capacities and capabilities, primarily at the BWA, for managing, monitoring and
operating the upgraded BSTP through the development of customized trainings, updating the Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Operational Manual and implementing a risk management framework.
Outcome 4 further strengthens the enabling environment through a legislative review, strengthening buy-in,
ownership and leadership in the private sector for the adoption of wastewater technologies and reuse options
and having nation-wide public education and awareness on the nexus between climate change and water
availability, wastewater as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options and promoting transparency
and lessons emerging from this project.
Outcomes 1 and 4 are expected to yield co-benefits related to social, economic, adaptation, mitigation and
environmental sectors.

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5
B
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
National Context
Barbados has a population of approximately 287,000, with a density in the region of 660 persons per km2,
ranking the island within the top fifteen most densely populated countries in the world 2. Barbados is
experiencing “absolute water scarcity” based on the Falkenmark water stress indicator 3 since approximately
305-310 m3 per person per year of water is available, making Barbados amongst the most water scarce
countries in the world.4 Water availability in Barbados is acutely affected by the periods and intensities of the
wet and dry seasons and by extreme weather systems so much so that a dry spell of only 7-10 days has the
potential to reduce yields, thus influencing the livelihoods of farmers and wider population and increasing
their climate vulnerability.5
Climate change projections for Barbados and impacts
As is indicated the Feasibility Study, climate change projections using a multi-model CMIP6 ensemble with
the SSP2-4.5 scenario and for the epoch 2041–2060 indicate that the current issues and challenges faced
by Barbados will increase over the coming decades, relative to the current climatological normal, the period
1991–20206:
• The mean annual daily maximum temperature will increase by about 1.0°C. The mean annual daily
minimum temperature will increase by about 1.3°C. The daily maximum temperature increase is
largest during the wet season from September to November.
• The number of heatwaves (three consecutive days where the maximum temperature exceeds the
average daily maximum temperature at the 90% threshold) has increased over the period 1991–
2020 and may be expected to increase further with increasing temperatures.
• Annual mean precipitation will decrease by about 9%. The decrease is particularly severe in the May
- July season, effectively extending the dry season by two months.
The results of the analyses on the climate change projections on temperature are aligned with the findings
of Working Group I of the IPCC in their report for the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6). For precipitation and
droughts there is no agreement in the CMIP6 models for the Caribbean region (although the local
precipitation data for Barbados does show trends such as an increase in extremely heavy precipitation).
From Chapter 11, for the Caribbean region:
• Table 11.13: Significant increases in the intensity and frequency of hot extremes and significant
decreases in the intensity and frequency of cold extremes: CMIP6 models project a robust increase
in the intensity and frequency of TXx events and a robust decrease in the intensity and frequency of
TNn events
• Table 11.14: Insufficient data and a lack of agreement on the evidence of trends in heavy
precipitation: CMIP6 models, CMIP5 models, and RCMs project inconsistent changes in the region
• Table 11.15: Mixed trends between subregions, but some evidence of increases in drought duration.
For the Caribbean, and Barbados, the number of hot days is projected to increase substantially, in turn
increasing the frequency of hot days and nights that are considered “hot”, there will be more intense and
shorter duration rainfall events interspersed with long periods of dry weather and increased frequency and
2 World Population Review (Barbados 2020): http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/barbados-population/
3 This method defines water scarcity in terms of the total water resources that are available to the population of a region; measuring scarcity as the
amount of renewable freshwater that is available for each person each year. If the amount of renewable water in a country is below 1,700 m3 per person
per year, that country is said to be experiencing water stress; below 1,000 m3 it is said to be experiencing water scarcity; and below 500 m3, absolute
water scarcity (Falkenmark, M., J. Lundquist and C. Widstrand (1989), “Macro-scale Water Scarcity Requires Micro-scale Approaches: Aspects of
Vulnerability in Semi-arid Development”, Natural Resources Forum, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 258-267)
4 Barbados Second National Communication (2018).
5 Barbadian farmers, especially small farmers, are becoming increasingly vulnerable to drought as their livelihoods are threatened by low rainfall where
crops are rainfed and by low water levels and increased production costs due to increased irrigation. Their livestock grazing areas change in nutritional
value, as more low quality, drought tolerant species dominate during extensive droughts, causing the vulnerability of livestock to increase. The potential
for livestock diseases also increases. http://www.fao.org/americas/noticias/ver/en/c/419202/
6 See Feasibility Study for more details.

--- Table 1 on Page 11 ---
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
National Context
Barbados has a population of approximately 287,000, with a density in the region of 660 persons per km2,
ranking the island within the top fifteen most densely populated countries in the world 2. Barbados is
experiencing “absolute water scarcity” based on the Falkenmark water stress indicator 3 since approximately
305-310 m3 per person per year of water is available, making Barbados amongst the most water scarce
countries in the world.4 Water availability in Barbados is acutely affected by the periods and intensities of the
wet and dry seasons and by extreme weather systems so much so that a dry spell of only 7-10 days has the
potential to reduce yields, thus influencing the livelihoods of farmers and wider population and increasing
their climate vulnerability.5
Climate change projections for Barbados and impacts
As is indicated the Feasibility Study, climate change projections using a multi-model CMIP6 ensemble with
the SSP2-4.5 scenario and for the epoch 2041–2060 indicate that the current issues and challenges faced
by Barbados will increase over the coming decades, relative to the current climatological normal, the period
1991–20206:
• The mean annual daily maximum temperature will increase by about 1.0°C. The mean annual daily
minimum temperature will increase by about 1.3°C. The daily maximum temperature increase is
largest during the wet season from September to November.
• The number of heatwaves (three consecutive days where the maximum temperature exceeds the
average daily maximum temperature at the 90% threshold) has increased over the period 1991–
2020 and may be expected to increase further with increasing temperatures.
• Annual mean precipitation will decrease by about 9%. The decrease is particularly severe in the May
- July season, effectively extending the dry season by two months.
The results of the analyses on the climate change projections on temperature are aligned with the findings
of Working Group I of the IPCC in their report for the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6). For precipitation and
droughts there is no agreement in the CMIP6 models for the Caribbean region (although the local
precipitation data for Barbados does show trends such as an increase in extremely heavy precipitation).
From Chapter 11, for the Caribbean region:
• Table 11.13: Significant increases in the intensity and frequency of hot extremes and significant
decreases in the intensity and frequency of cold extremes: CMIP6 models project a robust increase
in the intensity and frequency of TXx events and a robust decrease in the intensity and frequency of
TNn events
• Table 11.14: Insufficient data and a lack of agreement on the evidence of trends in heavy
precipitation: CMIP6 models, CMIP5 models, and RCMs project inconsistent changes in the region
• Table 11.15: Mixed trends between subregions, but some evidence of increases in drought duration.
For the Caribbean, and Barbados, the number of hot days is projected to increase substantially, in turn
increasing the frequency of hot days and nights that are considered “hot”, there will be more intense and
shorter duration rainfall events interspersed with long periods of dry weather and increased frequency and

--- Table 2 on Page 11 ---
 | This method defines water scarcity in terms of the total water resources that are available to the population of a region; measuring scarcity as the
amount of renewable freshwater that is available for each person each year. If the amount of renewable water in a country is below 1,700 m3 per person | 
per year, that country is said to be experiencing water stress; below 1,000 m3 it is said to be experiencing water scarcity; and below 500 m3, absolute | 
water scarcity (Falkenmark, M., J. Lundquist and C. Widstrand (1989), “Macro-scale Water Scarcity Requires Micro-scale Approaches: Aspects of | 
Vulnerability in Semi-arid Development”, Natural Resources Forum, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 258-267) | 

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6
B
intensity of extreme storms and sea-level rise (SLR). Higher temperatures will affect the seasonality of crops,
increase evapotranspiration rates, induce heat stress on the population, including tourists and livestock,
increase cooling costs, induce changes in plant-wildlife-insect populations and distribution range and
increase infectious and vector-borne diseases7. Already, in recent years Barbados has experienced high
incidences of vector borne and waterborne diseases that were attributed to episodic changes in temperature
(+0.7°C - +4.0°C) and rainfall patterns and linked to events such as dry season droughts and wet season
flash flooding. It is projected there could be even more of an increase in water-borne diseases, due to limited
water availability and wastewater sanitation.8
More intense rainfall, severe storm conditions and SLR will promote flash flooding; saline intrusion into
available groundwater abstraction and irrigation wells and salinization of agriculture lands; coastal erosion
and damage to coastal infrastructures and disruption to businesses. Increased flash-flooding magnitude and
frequency has caused havoc in Barbados: on 29 November 2016 Barbados experienced over 170 mm of
rainfall in a few hours, which previously was only observed in 1995, and this contributed to the failing of the
sewerage system. Stormwater run-off from intense rainfall activity that contain debris, microorganisms and
chemicals also contribute to nutrient loading in near-shore environments which negatively impact coral reefs.
Barbados has over 50 hard coral species and 600 species of fish. Coral reefs, which serve as natural
breakwaters along the coasts, also support more than 25% of all marine species, making them the most
biologically diverse of marine ecosystems and an equivalent, in terms of biomass productivity, to rainforests
on land.9 Furthermore, the coral reefs generate significant revenues for local fishermen and the tourism
sector through snorkelling and scuba diving10. The tourism sector in Barbados employs about 26,000 persons
(9% of the total population) and indirectly contributes to about 40% of Barbados earnings11, making climate
change a great threat to the island’s main economic earner.
The decreasing amount and increasingly skewed pattern of precipitation and increasing evapotranspiration
due to higher temperatures will increase water shortages and competition over water between tourism and
other productive sectors, increase in wildfires and agriculture productivity12. These conditions also set the
stage for increase drought which will further decrease underground recharge rates and salinization of
aquifers, which provide 95% of the island’s potable water supply.13 At the onset of the 2020 wet season,
Barbados had completed a 24-month period with below normal rainfall that had a severe impact on aquifer
recharge and resulted in seawater intrusion into coastal aquifers and reduced yields (see Figure 1). The
future is even more worrying since hydrogeological modelling using MODFLOW 200014, indicated that by
2050 under an RCP 2.6 scenario, groundwater yields could be reduced to 26.9 Mm3/year, and 25.5 Mm3/year
under the RCP 8.5 scenario, as compared to a no climate change estimate of between 65.7 Mm3/year and
82.3 Mm3/year, depending on which estimate is used15. Studies which took a mass-balance approach to
changes in groundwater storage indicated that under all climate change scenarios aquifers would be
progressively depleted.16 The overall implication of the available body of work suggests that sustainable
aquifer yields could decrease by around 50% by 2050. This is troubling for Barbados as the level of
groundwater abstraction is already between 85-100% of the safe yield. The Barbados Water Authority (BWA)
7 Simpson et. Al (2011)
8 Water scarcity carries a range of health risks in Barbados. These are related to the following: (a) Reduced amounts of water available for basic hygiene
(e.g. water- washed diseases); (b) Chemical and microbial contamination as a result of increased drought; (c) Gastrointestinal diseases. In addition, water
scarcity may result in water-storage and vector-borne diseases. Barbados has the highest incidence of dengue in the world. Rainwater storage as a
response measure to lack of freshwater provides breeding sites for the disease vector of dengue, the Aedes aegypti mosquito.
http://www.who.int/globalchange/projects/adaptation/PHE-adaptation-final-Barbados.pdf
9 Barbados Second National Communication (2018).
10 Farrrell, D., Nurse, L., & Moseley, L. (2007). Managing water resources in the face of climate change: A Caribbean perspective. UWI.
11 http://www.cbc.bb/index.php/news/item/2059-poverty-on-the-rise-in-barbados
12 Simpson et al (2011)
13 The poor are vulnerable as food price increases are often associated with drought. Expensive, desalinated water resources are becoming more
important in the Caribbean, and this can impact the poor significantly. Rural communities are vulnerable since potable water networks are less dense and
therefore more heavily impacted during drought, while children are at highest risk from inadequate water supplies during drought.
http://www.fao.org/americas/noticias/ver/en/c/419202/
14 The modelling work did not take into account the potential impact of sea level rise or fluxes between the freshwater and seawater interface and
therefore should be treated with some caution (Cashman, 2021)
15 Cashman (2021)
16 Cashman, et al., 2012 in Cashman (2021)

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7
B
has estimated that their own abstraction is approximately 47 Mm3/year and that total abstraction could be as
much as 62.5 Mm3/year when other sources are included. Recall that a lower estimate of safe yield given
above is 65.7 Mm3/year. The BWA abstraction, includes real losses17, which have been reported as
approximately 20.0 Mm3/year or some 38% of production. Even removing all losses from the distribution
system, which is unrealistic, would not be sufficient to offset the projected impact of climate change on aquifer
yields again, even if the impact has been over-estimated18. The challenges in groundwater management
become very apparent in the increasing levels of salinity in groundwater (see Figure 1).
Figure 1: Chlorinity levels in BWA wells (top panel) and monthly Standardised Precipitation Index
values (12-month period) at the weather observation station at the Caribbean Institute for
Meteorology and Hydrology (bottom panel), for the period 2000 – 2020. Note how episodes with
negative SPI values correlate with increasing chlorinity in the wells.
Interventions to counter the impacts of climate change
As a result of the projected effects of climate change on water quality and availability in Barbados, coupled
with projected increases in the population19 and development growths that may attract more tourist arrivals,
it will be necessary for Barbados to not only develop current wastewater management practices but also
implement new technologies that are climate resilient and reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
identify new sources of water that can be used to recharge the underground aquifers to be later used as
potable water after proper treatment. In terms of water consumption, irrigation is second only to domestic
use. It is estimated that approximately 80-90% of the water used for domestic activity is discharged as
wastewater. This represents a sustainable source of wastewater that could be treated and used as reclaimed
water in other productive activities where potable water quality is not required.20 In October 2018, the
17 water lost to bursts and leakage from the water distribution system
18 Cashman (2021)
19 According to the World Bank (2021), the population of Barbados is projected to peak in 2031 after which it is projected to decline
20 EPD and BWA (2018)

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8
B
Government of Barbados (GOB) enacted a National Water Reuse Policy (NWRP), which states that “the
traditional interpretation of the term water must expand beyond conventional freshwater sources to
encompass treated wastewater (reclaimed water), storm water and other sources as part of the total water
resources” 21.
There are two municipal wastewater treatment facilities: the Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP)
and the South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant (SCSTP). The 30-year-old BSTP has approximately 1,500
connections and is a secondary treatment plant with a short ocean outfall. The SCSTP has advanced primary
treatment works with an ocean outfall and accommodates approximately 3,000 connections, of which there
are currently 2,000 active connections. The SCSTP had a UV disinfection system installed, but it never
operated properly and was abandoned many years ago.22
According to the 2010 population census, whilst virtually 100% of all households in Barbados are connected
to the water distribution system, only 10 to 15% are connected to one of these two centralised wastewater
systems that do not have the capacity to disinfect the treatment plant effluent prior to being discharged
through ocean outfalls23. The remaining households in Barbados use pit latrines, septic tanks and
soakaways. Private properties such as hotels and some businesses make use of package treatment plants
and in some instances the treated wastewater is reused for landscaping purposes - currently there are 68
package treatment plants in operation24. Apart from the latter scenario, there is little reuse of treated
wastewater in Barbados.
The infrastructure and facilities in place to manage water resources are also vulnerable to climate change.
For instance, majority of the BWA’s operations are dependent on energy from the grid. Whenever, a storm
or hurricane or other climatic or non-climatic factor disrupt power supply to pumping stations, water supply
to the population is disrupted. Based on calculations by the BWA, in face of extended island wide power
disruption, the BWA will have just under one day’s reservoir storage capacity. Recently, BWA began
implementing grid-tied photovoltaic systems to reduce its energy cost and minimize it carbon footprint;25
however, these efforts alone cannot mitigate the vulnerability of the water supply system to extreme storm
events. Examples of climate parameters that can affect wastewater infrastructure and assets include:
Precipitation
▪ Higher intensity, frequency and duration of precipitation events leading to infrastructure flooding and
overflow conditions;
▪ Increased inflow to sewers;
▪ Increased likelihood and frequency of sewer flooding, overflows, and spills;
▪ Increased surface erosion and introduction of sediment to sewers;
▪ Excessive loading to wastewater sewage treatment works; and
▪ Surface flooding, due to intense rainfall events, can lower the efficiency and efficacy of onsite
wastewater treatment systems, such as soak-away fields.
Wind
▪ Increased wind loading on infrastructure assets and buildings.
Temperature
▪ Heat waves leading to reduced water availability and higher sewage contaminant concentrations
(less dilution) increased sewer related odour generation and release;
▪ Increased hydrogen sulphide production (resulting in increased infrastructure damage due to
corrosion); and
▪ Increased environmental impacts of residual contaminants including nutrient impacts due to elevated
receiving water temperatures.
21 Barbados Environmental Protection Department and the Barbados Water Authority (2018). National Water Reuse Policy for Barbados. Pg. 4
22 GEF (2019) National Package for Barbados for the CReW+ Project
23 (Integrated Sustainability, 2021 – Baseline Report)
24 Cashman (2021) Baseline Study and Wastewater Demand Analysis
25 The FP060 project that builds resilience into the water supply system on Barbados includes the installation of a PV system to ensure uninterrupted
operation at the Bellle, Bowmanston and Hampton pumping facilities.

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9
B
Ocean and Geotechnical
▪ Increased incidents of storm surges affecting wastewater discharge and property flooding; and
▪ Increased soil saturation impacting geotechnical stability to support tanks and other infrastructure as
well as affecting the efficiency of onsite wastewater treatment systems, such as soak-away fields in
affected areas.
The impact of climate change on groundwater resources also extends to on-site wastewater disposal, for
such practices as septic fields. On-site ground disposal of wastewater relies on the soil being unsaturated
to effect natural biological, physical, and chemical treatment processes and protect groundwater quality.
Saturated soil conditions result in significantly lower treatment and enable pathogenic microorganisms to
travel long distances through the soil, as well as result in surface failure and break-out of wastewater on the
surface with potential health risks.
Through a concerted effort, this Three Rs (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R-CReWS) project proposes to not only support the adaptation of
Barbados to the water scarcity conditions that will be amplified by climate variability and change, but to also
reduce its carbon footprint and GHGs emissions and serve as a practical example for Caribbean for climate
resilient water and wastewater management systems, treated wastewater reuse and aquifer recharge
through the enhancement of the wastewater treatment process to the tertiary level.
The 3R-CReWS will benefit from the lessons of the following projects and the project management team,
which will work in close collaboration with the staff at BWA, will ensure these areas of complementarity are
leveraged:
• The GOB received a loan from the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) for the Water and
Sanitation Systems Upgrade of the BWA that ran from 2011 to 2016. The project supported the
modernization of the institutional setting of the water and sanitation sector and improve water
production infrastructure and the efficiency of the operations of the BWA. This project is benefiting
from the work done towards wastewater management such as the preparation of the wastewater
reuse master plan.
• The Global Environment Facility (GEF) funded Testing a Prototype Caribbean Regional Fund for
Wastewater Management (CReW) project, which began in 2011 and completed activities in 2017.
The project used an integrated and innovative approach to reduce the negative environmental and
human health impacts from untreated wastewater discharges. Barbados was not a beneficiary
country of this pilot project; however, the noted challenges and key lessons coming out of this pilot
project are highly applicable to results of this project to promote buy-in and sustainability26. However,
there is an ongoing follow-up project called the CReW+, and Barbados is a beneficiary country,27 set
to roll out activities related to (i) institutional, policy, legislative and regulatory reforms for Integrated
Water and Wastewater Management (IWWM), Sustainable and tailor-made financing options for
urban, peri-urban and rural IWWM; (ii) Provision of innovative small-scale, local, rural, peri-urban and
community-based solutions for IWWM; and (iii) Knowledge Management and Advocacy on the
importance of IWWM order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.28 All the components of
this project are complementary to the 3R-CReWS project since it strengthens the enabling
environment and awareness of wastewater as a resource at the community level and promotes
private sector buy-in. These are key areas that will promote the sustainability of the 3R-CReWS
project.
• The Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados (WSRN S-Barbados)
project, which is funded by the GCF (FP060), includes the following complementary results (i)
making Barbados society aware of the water cycle and climate change impacts threatening the
island’s drinking water supply, and (ii) establishing a revolving fund strictly for supporting climate
26 Notably, the lessons pertaining to ensuring that an enabling environment (policy, legislation and regulations and protocols) is in place, importance of
education/sensitization not only the public, but decision-makers of the benefits of wastewater reuse, training and capacity building in the enhanced
technologies for operators, identifying a national champion (high profile policy maker or agency) to promote the project and its endorsement etc.
27 Full project name is: An integrated approach to water and wastewater management using innovative solutions and promoting financing mechanisms
in the Wider Caribbean Region
28 Full project name is: An integrated approach to water and wastewater management using innovative solutions and promoting financing mechanisms
in the Wider Caribbean Region

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10
B
change adaptation ad mitigation actions in the water sector. These areas will provide awareness and
finances for enhancing climate resilience in the water sector, which are important for maintaining
sustainability of the 3R-CReWS project results. In fact, the 3R-CReWS will expand the RAFF charter
to promote the adoption of wastewater treatment systems and reuse options
• The USAID funded Adaptation Measures to Counteract the Effects of Climate Change
(AMCECC) project, executed under the Ministry of Environment and National Beautification (MENB)
sets out proposals for stormwater policy and plans, which, when implemented, will enhance the
functioning of the sanitary sewer systems, which are designed solely for the transport of sewage but
are currently frequently affected by the infiltration of stormwater.
• The Roof-to-Reef Programme (R2R) is the Government’s sustainable development model for the
next decade and represents the country programme for Barbados. The primary focus is on improving
the social and environmental circumstances of the people in Barbados. The R2RP will enhance the
country’s ability to recover from climatic events. The R2RP is hinged on six thematic areas: Shelter,
Water, Energy, Waste, Land use, and Ecosystems Management. The thematic areas under the
R2RP are aligned to Barbados’ NDC priority areas. Barbados intends to develop a pipeline of projects
under the R2RP that will improve the country’s resilience to climate change as well as increase its
push to become carbon neutral by 2030. Some of the named projects such as the WSRN and this
3R-CReWs will fall under the R2R umbrella.
• Barbados received a second readiness programme from the GCF to advance Outcome 2: Country
Programming Process and Outcome 4 Climate Finance strategies and project pipeline strengthened
of the R2R Programme. This preparatory support program will assist the National Designated
Authority (NDA) in building the capacity needed to handle large cross sectoral projects involving
multiple stakeholders, implementing entities and interest groups. The development of a Country
Programme will assist in aligning the national GCF approach with existing national
policies/programmes. The Country Programme will provide clear guidelines in project selection and
ensure that all projects are linked to the national green economy priorities and Barbados’ NDC and
will also assist in operationalizing the NDC and obtaining financing for national projects or
programmes. The readiness support will also assist in identifying and exploring synergies with
ongoing initiatives which can be scaled up.
• Also notable is the proposed South Coast Water Reclamation Project (SCWRP) valued at USD105
million and is aimed at transforming the existing South Coast Plant, into a futuristic Water Resource
Recovery Facility. The goals of the project include: (I) augmenting existing water supplies, (ii)
mitigating climate change effects, (iii) addressing seawater intrusion and sea level rise, (iv)
diversifying potable water sources, (v) enhancing water supply resiliency and (vi) reducing the impact
of treated effluent on marine life and the environment. At the time of this proposal writing this project
was in the inception phase but is expected to be in full implementation at the start of the 3R-CReWS.
There are significant synergies between these projects as both plants will be upgraded to produce
tertiary level reclaimed water quality that will be suitable for non-potable reuse purposes. The 3R-
CReWS project will benefit from the lessons emerging from the implementation of the SCWRP to
enhance efficiency and effectiveness as well as the momentum and stakeholder buy-in and
awareness as it relates to the use of reclaimed water that has been built by the SCWRP.
Risks and Barriers
Whilst some degree of work has been advanced for the water sector, including wastewater; this project is
directly responding to specific barriers that have hindered the government of Barbados to transform it is
wastewater sector. These include:
• Financial: Barbados has a high debt to GDP ratio - at the end of 2020 it was 144%. With the
prolonged effects of COVID-19 on the tourism sector and increased government spending on health
care in 2021, the debt to GDP ratio is expected to increase. Given the resources needed to service
the debt, response to the COVID-19 pandemic and advance development and climate change
priorities, there is limited fiscal space. To address water insecurity, which is a priority of the
Government of Barbados, the use of reclaimed water is becoming a critical resource. More
specifically, the transformation of the water and wastewater sector requires the utilization of

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11
B
reclaimed water for productive/economic purposes; however, the adoption of upgraded treatment
process and technologies is necessary. The 3R-CReWS project is a part of this paradigm shift. The
3R-CReWs has significant capital costs, most of which is covered by GCF funding, however, in the
overall planned investment for transforming the sector, the GCF investment is less than a fifth of the
planned investment. Further, the ownership and sustainability dimensions are critical and is the
assumed responsibility of the Government of Barbados; as such the Operations and Maintenance
costs for the wastewater treatment systems, which is, and will continue to be, a significant part of the
operating budget at the BWA.
• Social - the underlying paradigm shift of this project is a change in culture and attitude towards the
use of water at the household level; however, there is limited knowledge and awareness about
the usefulness of reclaimed water as a resource. Therefore, to deliver the paradigm shift
envisioned, 3R-CReWS will enhance the knowledge and awareness of the public, including visitors
(tourists) and the private sector to change current behaviour to better manage and conserve water
or accept proposed water reuse practices through a nation-wide public education and awareness
programme and a strategy targeting the engagement of the private sector.
• Institutional – there is lack of trained staff to meet the requirements of the upgrades planned
by for BSTP and limited technical expertise in the private sector to manage and maintain
wastewater systems implemented. The 3R CReWS was specially designed to promote a paradigm
shift in the adoption of wastewater treatment technologies through the provision of specialized
training to BWA and key stakeholders, including from the private sector.
• Technological: there is inadequate up-to-date technologies in place at the BSTP to treat waste
water at a tertiary level and to support the BWA’s operations in a manner that is effective,
efficient and that promotes adaptation to and mitigation of climate change; for instance, there
is only 1 flow meter that was recently installed in December 2021, and prior to this there was a large
gap in data on influent and effluent flows and there is limited automated controls related to energy
efficiency and preventative maintenance. The 3R-CReWS is ensuring that state-of-the art
technologies are being implemented that promote low carbon operations such as the installation of
solar power to meet the energy demands of the upgrades, whilst also withstanding at least category
3 hurricanes given the location of Barbados in the hurricane belt and climate projections of more
intense and frequent hurricane season for the Caribbean. Further, 3R-CReWS will be implementing
decision-support systems that increases energy efficiency, the longevity of equipment through better
maintenance and management, and better response to the changes in the hydraulic capacity during
storm surges and/or flooding that result in waters infiltrating the sanitary sewer system. Further,
there is limited wide-spread use of up-to-date wastewater treatment technologies in the
private sector due to the reason noted in institutional barriers/risks (limited capacities). To promote
the adoption of wastewater treatment and reuse technologies in the private sector, the project is
investing in the development of an incentive programme as well as making resources available
through a revolving fund (RAFF).
• Regulatory: whilst there is very recently updated legislation (last quarter of 2021) that speak to the
use of wastewater treatment systems and reclaimed water, some legislations have not gotten
approval from cabinet (still at the stage of a bill) and limited sensitization to support
mainstreaming. Further, the larger issue of enforcement is a serious risk since there is already
evidence of institutional challenges related to the enforcement of legislation and policies. Therefore,
this project will undertake a gap assessment to determine if any gaps exist across the emerging
policies and legislation to ensure that the paradigm shift regarding the use of wastewater
technologies and reclaimed water are supported, promoted and enforced. There will also be an
accompanying roadmap that articulates how these emerging policies and legislation should be
promoted and recommendations for enforcement.
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)

--- Table 1 on Page 17 ---
reclaimed water for productive/economic purposes; however, the adoption of upgraded treatment
process and technologies is necessary. The 3R-CReWS project is a part of this paradigm shift. The
3R-CReWs has significant capital costs, most of which is covered by GCF funding, however, in the
overall planned investment for transforming the sector, the GCF investment is less than a fifth of the
planned investment. Further, the ownership and sustainability dimensions are critical and is the
assumed responsibility of the Government of Barbados; as such the Operations and Maintenance
costs for the wastewater treatment systems, which is, and will continue to be, a significant part of the
operating budget at the BWA.
• Social - the underlying paradigm shift of this project is a change in culture and attitude towards the
use of water at the household level; however, there is limited knowledge and awareness about
the usefulness of reclaimed water as a resource. Therefore, to deliver the paradigm shift
envisioned, 3R-CReWS will enhance the knowledge and awareness of the public, including visitors
(tourists) and the private sector to change current behaviour to better manage and conserve water
or accept proposed water reuse practices through a nation-wide public education and awareness
programme and a strategy targeting the engagement of the private sector.
• Institutional – there is lack of trained staff to meet the requirements of the upgrades planned
by for BSTP and limited technical expertise in the private sector to manage and maintain
wastewater systems implemented. The 3R CReWS was specially designed to promote a paradigm
shift in the adoption of wastewater treatment technologies through the provision of specialized
training to BWA and key stakeholders, including from the private sector.
• Technological: there is inadequate up-to-date technologies in place at the BSTP to treat waste
water at a tertiary level and to support the BWA’s operations in a manner that is effective,
efficient and that promotes adaptation to and mitigation of climate change; for instance, there
is only 1 flow meter that was recently installed in December 2021, and prior to this there was a large
gap in data on influent and effluent flows and there is limited automated controls related to energy
efficiency and preventative maintenance. The 3R-CReWS is ensuring that state-of-the art
technologies are being implemented that promote low carbon operations such as the installation of
solar power to meet the energy demands of the upgrades, whilst also withstanding at least category
3 hurricanes given the location of Barbados in the hurricane belt and climate projections of more
intense and frequent hurricane season for the Caribbean. Further, 3R-CReWS will be implementing
decision-support systems that increases energy efficiency, the longevity of equipment through better
maintenance and management, and better response to the changes in the hydraulic capacity during
storm surges and/or flooding that result in waters infiltrating the sanitary sewer system. Further,
there is limited wide-spread use of up-to-date wastewater treatment technologies in the
private sector due to the reason noted in institutional barriers/risks (limited capacities). To promote
the adoption of wastewater treatment and reuse technologies in the private sector, the project is
investing in the development of an incentive programme as well as making resources available
through a revolving fund (RAFF).
• Regulatory: whilst there is very recently updated legislation (last quarter of 2021) that speak to the
use of wastewater treatment systems and reclaimed water, some legislations have not gotten
approval from cabinet (still at the stage of a bill) and limited sensitization to support
mainstreaming. Further, the larger issue of enforcement is a serious risk since there is already
evidence of institutional challenges related to the enforcement of legislation and policies. Therefore,
this project will undertake a gap assessment to determine if any gaps exist across the emerging
policies and legislation to ensure that the paradigm shift regarding the use of wastewater
technologies and reclaimed water are supported, promoted and enforced. There will also be an
accompanying roadmap that articulates how these emerging policies and legislation should be
promoted and recommendations for enforcement.
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12
B
Background and Context
Small Island Developing States (SIDS), such as Barbados, are directly exposed to the extreme impacts of
climate change. By their very nature, sea level rise (SLR) is having a significant impact on the coastal zones,
where communities and infrastructure tends to be concentrated. SLR needs to be considered in all aspects
of long-term national planning, and more so in planning for critical public infrastructure which tends to have
a design lifetime of several decades. SLR is reducing the solution space available to Barbados, with options
to protect assets or accommodate SLR diminishing, forcing solutions based on a retreat from the coastal
zone (see Figure 2, below). This proposal is premised primarily on an approach to stretch the protect and
accommodate solution space through augmenting the replenishment of the freshwater aquifer and thus
reduce salination, arguably the most pressing impact of climate change on Barbados currently as virtually
all freshwater used is extracted from groundwater. This will create more time for the Government to respond
to the inevitable impacts of SLR.29
Figure 2: Decreasing solution space for small islands as sea level rises. Source: Haasnoot et. al.
2021. “Pathways to coastal retreat”, Science, v.374(6548), pp.1287-1290.
Wastewater management strategies using reclaimed water will be a critical component to help mitigate
impacts on groundwater levels, tightly linked to overall island water resources. Tertiary treatment of
wastewater will allow for the reuse of water for non-potable sources, such as agriculture, landscaping, turf
maintenance, and recharging the aquifer. Secondary treated sludge can be used as fertilizer for the
agricultural community and activated sludge can be used in landscaping, turf maintenance of lawns,
reclamation, soil erosion, and dump covering (CCCCC, 2019).
The goal of 3R-CReWS project is to facilitate the enhancement of the health, wellbeing, and productivity of
Barbadians through the use of carbon neutral and climate resilient water and energy management
technologies and strategies that ensures water is protected, managed, recycled, reused, and conserved.
To this end, the main objectives of the 3R-CReWS project are to:
29 The IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (2019) predicts a global mean SLR of 0.43 - 0.55 - 0.86m by 2100 for RCP
2.6, 4.5 and 8.5 scenarios, respectively, relative to the period 1986-2005 (section 4.2.3.2, table 4.4), with” high confidence in continued thermal expansion
and the loss of ice from both the [Greenland] and [Antarctica ice] sheets beyond 2100” (section 4.2.3.5).

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13
B
1. increase knowledge of wastewater generation including sources of wastewater and the quantity and
quality impacts, as well optimize treatment and minimize energy consumption and associated GHG
emissions;
2. build resilience into Barbados' wastewater management systems, which results in increased water
availability, production, distribution, and access thereby improving the community’s resilience, health
and wellbeing, and water and food security;
3. produce a treated wastewater effluent quality so that it can be reused for agricultural purposes,
reducing stress on diminishing groundwater resources and potable water supplies as a result of
climate change;
4. enable the use of reclaimed water for aquifer recharge thereby reducing saline intrusion and
contamination of ground water resources while enhancing water security, particularly during period
of droughts for Barbados;
5. reduce GHG emissions, increase self-sufficiency, contribute to the electricity grid and to contribute
to the frequency stabilisation of the electricity grid and act as a power shortfall filler;
6. Increase supply of locally sourced renewable energy that allows for a long-term source of revenue
through a feed-in tariffs program;
7. provide a standard and formal guidance to regulate and promote the use of reclaimed water and
obtain greater by-in from stakeholders;
8. build capacity and re-train BWA staff, including the private sector, to conduct preventive maintenance
and adopt climate-risk related adaptation strategies to increase the wastewater collection and
treatment systems resiliency; and
9. promote and demonstrate actions that encourage all water users in Barbados, including tourists, to
conserve and efficiently use water resources.
10. strengthens the enabling environment and, strengthening buy-in, ownership and leadership in the
private sector for the adoption of wastewater technologies and reuse options and having nation-wide
public education and awareness on the nexus between climate change and water availability,
wastewater as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options and promoting transparency and
lessons emerging from this project
For achieving the goal and specific objectives, the 3R-CReWS is organised into four (4) key components as
summarized in Figure 3.

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14
B
Figure 3: Summary of the Components of 3R-CReWS
These 4 components are synonymous with the following 4 outcomes of the project:
1. Enhanced availability, management and use of tertiary level reclaimed water to improve the water
sector’s resilience to climate change
2. Climate resilient low carbon operations achieved at BSTP
3. Enhanced capacity and capability to support a preventative maintenance (PM) and climate resiliency
programme
4. An enabling environment is created for wastewater technologies and use of reclaimed water
Collectively, these four outcomes/components are designed in consideration of the barriers that exist in
achieving a paradigm shift in the adoption of wastewater treatment technologies and reuse options in
Barbados. These barriers include the limited fiscal space that exist in a highly indebted country, limited
technical capacities in the public and private sectors to fully maintain and advance the adoption of
wastewater technologies, limited knowledge and awareness about the usefulness of reclaimed water as a
resource, and the absence of comprehensively developed and mainstreamed policy and regulatory
frameworks that promote the adoption of wastewater treatment technologies and reuse options, particularly
at the household level.
Outcome 1 of this project is the largest, in terms of budget, since it is primarily focused on the upgrades to
the BSTP and transfer of technology. Specifically, Outcome 1 is made up of four (4) outputs. Output 1.1 aims
to achieve a climate resilient pathway for the water sector through the upgrade of the BSTP to a tertiary
treatment system by converting the current CAS to a CAS-4 stage Bardenpho system and the installation of
a RO membrane. This output supports the achievement of GCF’s ARA 2 and will resulting co-benefits, which
include improving the quality in the near shore and marine environments, increase water available for the

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15
B
agriculture sector and the participation of women in the production and use of reclaimed water. With higher
quality water becoming available, this outcome includes as an output (1.2), the installation of a 9km pipeline
that will facilitate the distribution of the reclaimed water for irrigation and aquifer recharge purposes. This
output supports the achievement of GCF’s ARA 1 and 2. Given the highly technical nature of the upgrades,
it is being assumed that expertise exists for the installation of the required upgrades and that there will be
favourable conditions for the construction works to be done in a timely and effective way. To complement
the operations of the upgraded BSTP, there is an output (1.3) focused on the installation of critical decision-
support systems to adapt to climate change, promote climate mitigation through energy efficiency and
provide the tools necessary to monitor wastewater flow and quality. For instance, a sewer monitoring
programme, an on-site laboratory and software and equipment to automate control of the upgraded system
will be implemented. This output is aligned to GCF’s ARA 3. A key assumption is that the staff at the BWA
will consistently/routinely utilize the training and systems that have been implemented to optimize the
operations of the BSTP. To further promote the paradigm shift in the use of reclaimed water, the final output
(1.4) supports the installation of decentralized wastewater treatment systems in two Zone A locations in
Barbados to harness reclaimed water, which will be utilized for aquifer recharge and agricultural irrigation
through the installation of a 9km pipeline. Hence, this outcome and its supporting outputs will enhance
resilience to climate change by promoting water security. This output is aligned to GCF’s ARA 1, 2 and 3.
Efforts will be made to ensure the inclusion of women, youth, LGBTQIA, and other vulnerable populations
in these processes for effective adaptation and use of the upgraded systems; support to ensure budget
allocations are gender-responsive and aligned with the specific needs of women and men in target Zones
Given that this final output is primarily funded by the GOB, it is assumed that they remain committed to the
upgrades and co-financing materialize.
Outcome 2 is made up of one (1) output that is primarily focused on the installation of renewable energy PV
systems, automated controls such as variable frequency drives (VFDs) and a sludge dewatering system.
Collectively, these systems will ensure that there is low-emission at the BSTP, which contributes to the
achievement of the country’s a low-emission development pathway. This output is aligned to GCF’s MRA 1,
MRA3 and ARA 3 and is contributing to improved air quality since the impact of power outage linked to
extreme climatic events will not impact the treatment processes at the plant. As above, a key assumption is
that the staff at the BWA will consistently/routinely utilize the training and systems that have been
implemented to optimize the operations of the BSTP.
Outcomes 3 and 4 collectively contribute to ARA1, ARA 2, ARA 3 and MRA1 and aim to create an enabling
environment for achieving a paradigm shift in the approaches to the management of water resources,
specifically wastewater, and thereby promoting water security in the face of a changing climate. Specifically,
Outcome 3, which comprise two (2) outputs, is first targeting the enhancement of capacities and capabilities,
primarily at the BWA, for managing, monitoring and operating the upgraded BSTP through the development
of customized trainings, updating the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Operational Manual and
implementing a risk management framework. 12 customised courses will be developed/adopted under this
project covering topics such as: SCADA system, UWI/BWA Gender Sensitivity Training program, climate
change nexus with biosecurity and wastewater, PV refresher training course offerings from CVQ & NVQ
(Caribbean and National Vocational Qualifications), industrial waste inspector, CCTV equipment Operator
training program based on upgraded systems, laboratory testing, analysis and management, management
of the decentralized wastewater treatment plants, maintenance of CAS and RO technologies, SOPs and
operational manual updated, the risk management framework developed to meet the needs of the upgraded
system, CMMS, sewer monitoring and instrumentation and general wastewater course. It is assumed that
there is willingness and the availability of BWA staff and other key stakeholders to participate in the training
opportunities and that a total of 400 persons will be trained. Notable is that this output is aiming to address
some of the known risks with the implementation of this project, primarily that of limited capacities to promote
the adoption of wastewater technologies and reuse options. The second and final output for this outcome is
to promote innovation for the wastewater sector through the development of a strategic plan to guide the

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16
B
replication of water treatment facilities along the west coast corridor of Barbados. Given the highly
specialized nature of this output, it is assumed that relevant technical expertise is available to develop the
strategic plan.
Outcome 4, which is made up of three (3) outputs, further strengthens the enabling environment through the
development of a water and sanitation masterplan and a legislative review (Output 4.1). Of importance to
note is that the legislative review will identify gaps and recommendations for addressing same, as it relates
to strengthening buy-in and the use of wastewater technologies and reuse options. The review process will
ensure that gender differentiated needs and impacts of proposed amendments are considered and do not
negatively impact the wellbeing of women and other vulnerable groups. There will also be a concerted effort
to promote ownership and leadership in the private sector for the adoption of wastewater technologies and
reuse options through a three-pronged approach that includes a targeted engagement strategy, an incentive
programme and access to the RAFF resources aligned with the priorities arising from Stakeholder
consultations and in consideration of the unique needs of women and men (Output 4.2). A key assumption
here is that there is initial interest from the private sector. The final output (4.3) is focused on nation-wide
public education and awareness on the nexus between climate change and water availability, wastewater
as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options and promoting transparency and lessons emerging
from this project. There will be targeted PEA activities including school programmes, community
consultations, workshops/sensitization sessions for key stakeholders such as farmers and private sector.
The PEA campaign will include products such as videos/documentary, press releases of outputs of town hall
meetings within communities, case studies, digital flyers, posters), 40 water Wednesdays (8 per year), 20
newsletters (4 per year) and over 5000 combined posts on social media accounts. This output and its
activities support the advancement of GCF’s outcome ARA 1 and enabling environment related to knowledge
generation and learning. It is assumed that the updates are timely, relevant and accessible to a wide cross
section of stakeholders - private sector, individuals, tourists, national agencies, civil society, therefore
enabling the desired paradigm shift in attitudes for the adoption of wastewater technologies and reuse
options.
The project will benefit a wider cross-section of stakeholders. The reclaim water could benefit 186 hectares,
155 farmers, including small scale and women farmers, and 465 wage labourers that work on the farms. The
reclaim water will be transfer from BSTP to Waterford (Botanical Gardens) then northwards to recharge point
at Trents (Greenwich) (find points or take-offs along the way). 6 injection wells will be included in this option,
while the BWA have an indication of where these could be implemented, a sub-activity to confirm the best
points for injection. Note, the replenishing of the aquifers will benefit the entire population of Barbados.
The 400 persons refer to the target for the following training is to have 50/50 distribution of males and
females, where possible:
- SCADA - 20 operators
- Gender Sensitivity - 300 staff members
- Climate change nexus with biosecurity and wastewater - 300 staff members
- PV training course - 25 members
- Industrial waste inspector - 3 operators
- CCTV equipment - 6 operators
- Operator training - 8 operators
- Lab technician training – 3 technicians
- Decentralized wastewater treatment facilities - 50 staff
- CAS and RO technologies - 50 staff
- SOPs, operational manual and risk management framework - 70 operators
- CMMS - 70 staff members
- Sewer monitoring and instrumentation - 25 wastewater operators
- General wastewater course (safety, no exam) - 45 persons

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17
B
The co-benefits identified are related to social, gender, economic, adaptation, mitigation and environment,
as follows:
1. More water available for the agriculture sector thereby increasing its productivity (economic, social,
adaptation)
2. Improved water quality in the marine environment from improved management of wastewater. This
will improve beaches and tourism in Barbados (environment, social, economic)
3. Improved air quality from reduced GHG emission that will improve the environment, people’s health
(social) and mitigation of climate change.
4. Increased participation of women in the production and use of reclaimed water
See summary details in section B.2(b) on co-benefits.
More details on the outcomes and activities are included in Section B.3. The Theory of Change Diagram is
at Figure 4, below.
Figure 4: TOC for the 3R CReWS
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
Outcome
MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
number
Low-emission Building, Forestry and Most Health, well- Ecosystems
transport cities, land use vulnerable being, food and

--- Table 1 on Page 23 ---
The co-benefits identified are related to social, gender, economic, adaptation, mitigation and environment,
as follows:
1. More water available for the agriculture sector thereby increasing its productivity (economic, social,
adaptation)
2. Improved water quality in the marine environment from improved management of wastewater. This
will improve beaches and tourism in Barbados (environment, social, economic)
3. Improved air quality from reduced GHG emission that will improve the environment, people’s health
(social) and mitigation of climate change.
4. Increased participation of women in the production and use of reclaimed water
See summary details in section B.2(b) on co-benefits.
More details on the outcomes and activities are included in Section B.3. The Theory of Change Diagram is
at Figure 4, below.
Figure 4: TOC for the 3R CReWS
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
Outcome
MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
number
Low-emission Building, Forestry and Most Health, well- Ecosystems
transport cities, land use vulnerable being, food and

--- Table 2 on Page 23 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) |  |  |  | GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) |  |  | 
Outcome |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | MRA 1 | MRA 2 | MRA 3 | MRA 4 | ARA 1 | ARA 2 | ARA 3 | ARA 4
number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Low-emission | Building, | Forestry and | Most | Health, well- |  | Ecosystems
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | transport | cities, | land use | vulnerable | being, food |  | and

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18
B
Energy industries, people and and water Infrastructure ecosystem
generation appliances communities security and built services
and access environment
Outcome 1 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐
Outcome 2 ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐
Outcome 3 ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐
Outcome 4 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐
Co-benefit
Co-benefit
number
Environmental Social Economic Gender Adaptation Mitigation
Increased
water
availability for
☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐
the
agriculture
sector
Improved
water quality
☒ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒
in the marine
environment
Improved air
☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒
quality
Increased
participation
of women in
the
☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐
production
and use of
reclaimed
water
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)
As set out in Section B.2, the 3R-CReWS project has four (4) components:
- Component 1 involves upgrading centralized and installing cluster wastewater collection and
treatment to achieve a tertiary water-quality. The outputs of this component are: (1) The Bridgetown
Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) upgraded to treat wastewater to a tertiary water-quality standard;
(2) Recycled wastewater being reused to supplement non-potable uses including irrigation and
aquifer recharge; (3) Decision making tools implemented to mitigate climate change risks to the
wastewater treatment and collection systems; (4) Onsite decentralized package treatment plants or
cluster treatment facilities installed (2).
- Component 2 intends to enhance the climate resilience and carbon-neutrality of the BSTP
wastewater treatment system through photovoltaic energy, energy conservation and efficiency
equipment. The main output of this component is improved emergency power and energy efficiency
and reduction in emission at the BSTP.
- Component 3 aims to enhance the enabling environment for wastewater management through the
development of standard operating procedures manual, flow and water quality monitoring, and
institutional human capacity development. This component will result in improved technical
capabilities of water technical personnel to operate, maintain and monitor and implement climate
change adaptation planning strategies for wastewater management.

--- Table 1 on Page 24 ---
Energy industries, people and and water Infrastructure ecosystem
generation appliances communities security and built services
and access environment
Outcome 1 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐
Outcome 2 ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐
Outcome 3 ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐
Outcome 4 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐
Co-benefit
Co-benefit
number
Environmental Social Economic Gender Adaptation Mitigation
Increased
water
availability for
☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐
the
agriculture
sector
Improved
water quality
☒ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒
in the marine
environment
Improved air
☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒
quality
Increased
participation
of women in
the
☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐
production
and use of
reclaimed
water
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)
As set out in Section B.2, the 3R-CReWS project has four (4) components:
- Component 1 involves upgrading centralized and installing cluster wastewater collection and
treatment to achieve a tertiary water-quality. The outputs of this component are: (1) The Bridgetown
Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) upgraded to treat wastewater to a tertiary water-quality standard;
(2) Recycled wastewater being reused to supplement non-potable uses including irrigation and
aquifer recharge; (3) Decision making tools implemented to mitigate climate change risks to the
wastewater treatment and collection systems; (4) Onsite decentralized package treatment plants or
cluster treatment facilities installed (2).
- Component 2 intends to enhance the climate resilience and carbon-neutrality of the BSTP
wastewater treatment system through photovoltaic energy, energy conservation and efficiency
equipment. The main output of this component is improved emergency power and energy efficiency
and reduction in emission at the BSTP.
- Component 3 aims to enhance the enabling environment for wastewater management through the
development of standard operating procedures manual, flow and water quality monitoring, and
institutional human capacity development. This component will result in improved technical
capabilities of water technical personnel to operate, maintain and monitor and implement climate
change adaptation planning strategies for wastewater management.

--- Table 2 on Page 24 ---
 | Energy |  | industries, |  | people and | and water | Infrastructure | ecosystem
 | generation |  | appliances |  | communities | security | and built | services
 | and access |  |  |  |  |  | environment | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Outcome 1 | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐
Outcome 2 | ☒ | ☐ | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☐
Outcome 3 | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐
Outcome 4 | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐

--- Table 3 on Page 24 ---
Co-benefit
number | Co-benefit |  |  |  |  | 
 | Environmental | Social | Economic | Gender | Adaptation | Mitigation
Increased
water
availability for
the
agriculture
sector | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐
Improved
water quality
in the marine
environment | ☒ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐ | ☒
Improved air
quality | ☐ | ☒ | ☐ | ☒ | ☐ | ☒
Increased
participation
of women in
the
production
and use of
reclaimed
water | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☐

--- Table 4 on Page 24 ---
Co-benefit
number

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19
B
- Component 4 focuses on educating the public and private sector on the importance of wastewater
reclamation and address climate change issues affecting the water sector and enabling policy and
legislation. The outputs of this component are: (1) Governance and planning frameworks
updated/developed to enable wastewater reuse; (2) Funding mechanism for the adoption of water
reuse applications/ systems developed; and, (3) Gender Sensitive Public Education and Awareness
Campaign Implemented.
Component 1: Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse
Barbados is almost entirely dependent on groundwater supplies (85% of potable water supply comes from
ground water), which is directly impacted by the weather and climate. The overall implication of the available
body of work suggests that sustainable aquifer yields could decrease by around 50% by 2050. This is
troubling as the indications are that the level of groundwater abstraction is already at between 85-100% of
the safe yield. Approximately 57 Mm3/yr is extracted from groundwater resources for domestic potable water
distribution and an estimated 11 Mm3/yr is extracted for agricultural irrigation30. The exact amount of water
extracted by agriculture is much higher as most points of extraction are un-metered private wells.
The outcome of this component is enhanced availability, management and use of tertiary level
reclaimed water to improve the water sector’s resilience to climate change. The BSTP will be upgraded
from a CAS to a CAS- 4Stage Bardenpho system and 2 onsite decentralized treatment plants (cluster) will
be installed in 2 communities in Zone A locations to produce a high-quality effluent that is biologically and
chemically safe. The effluent from the upgraded plants will be utilized for non-potable water applications
including irrigation and aquifer recharge. This is expected to reduce the extraction of groundwater leading to
reduced aquifer saltwater intrusion, and increased availability of groundwater during dry periods. This
increase in availability of water during dry periods, will have positive impacts on women who predominantly
undertake domestic and care roles. There will also be monitoring systems implemented to address data
gaps that exist and to facilitate enhanced management of the upgraded BSTP.
The total budget of this outcome is USD39 million, which is principally applied to the upgrades associated
with treatment plant (67%). The source of the funding is GCF in the amount of USD29.2 million (grant) and
BWA in the amount of USD9.3 million.
Output 1.1: The Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant is upgraded to treat wastewater to a tertiary
water-quality standard.
The BSTP is currently a secondary level treatment plant with water being released in the marine environment
through an outfall. The BSTP will be upgraded to treat wastewater to a tertiary reuse water-quality standard
using the existing infrastructure and wastewater treatment process (Conventional Activated Sludge). The
upgraded plant will result in tertiary treated wastewater that can be reclaimed and is suitable for non-potable
water applications including groundwater augmentation and irrigation. Figure 5 below depicts the existing
BSTP and Figure 6 is a schema of the existing and upgraded system that has been agreed to by the GOB
(See Feasibility Study for more details on options and assessment). The upgrades will enhance the water
security considering the projected climate change impacts on water resources for the island.
Activity 1.1.131: Design, procure and convert/upgrade the existing conventional activated sludge
(CAS) biological treatment process at the Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant to tertiary filtration
and disinfection for achieving national reclaimed water-quality standards.
30 Integrated Sustainability (2021). Feasibility Study See Section 1.1.2
31 See Section E.6 for the description on this activity and all other activities listed in this section.

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20
B
Figure 5: Bridgetown Wastewater Treatment Plant
Figure 6: Existing and (Proposed) Upgraded System for BSTP
The total budget of this output is USD25.7.1 million, which will be principally funded with GCF Funding.
Output 1.2: Tertiary treated reclaimed water is available to supplement non-potable use
Sea level rise and salt-water intrusion of potable water aquifers coupled with changing weather patterns
(intermittent and higher intensity rainfall) stresses Barbados water resources. In addition, agriculture
continues to compete with other sectors for scarce resources such as water, land, labour and capital, and
the GoB has increased its call for greater domestic food production through new and improved methods of
farming as a response to climate change. Greater water availability, using reclaimed water, for irrigation
purposes, should also lead to improved food security.
The supply of treated reclaimed wastewater to support irrigation developments in the Codrington-Neils-
Lears-Salters-Constant-Valley was deemed most suitable for this project (See Figure 7) and will provide

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21
B
benefits to 155 farmers (60% males and 40% males). In motivating and recommending this Option, the GOB
stressed that this should be seen as a first Phase of a larger enterprise to extend and expand the use of
treated reclaimed wastewater for irrigation purposes on lands along the west coast of Barbados and up to
the parish of St Lucy (See Feasibility Study Report). The use of reclaimed water for irrigation purpose
requires reverse osmosis membrane filtration to remove total dissolved solids to a concentration less than
450 mg/L required by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Safety for agricultural irrigation applications.
Activity 1.2.1: Install reverse osmosis (RO) membrane filtration systems to reduce the total dissolved
solids concentration of the reclaimed water produced at the BSTP
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline and 6 aquifer recharge wells (injection wells) going from the
BSTP for irrigation and aquifer recharge.
Figure 7: Map of 9km pipeline from BSTP to Waterford (Botanical Gardens) with take-off at Hothersal
roundabout to Friendship plantation the turn south along ABC H’way And Then Turn North Along
Belle Road up to Lears (Roberts Manufacturing) – irrigation can be done for lands on east and west
of that road. Also take in Neil’s Plantation, Salters, Constant and Valley Plantation.
The total budget of this output is USD8.6 million, with USD 2.5million to the finance the RO plant using GCF
funding and USD6.1 million in funding from the BWA/GOB to finance the installation of the 9Km pipeline.
Output 1.3: Decision-support tools and infrastructure implemented to mitigate potential climate
change risks to the wastewater collection and treatment systems
Decision-support tools (DSTs) and infrastructure upgrades are critical to enhance adaptive management to
climate change. Storm surges and rising sea levels can cause saltwater entry into the wastewater collection
system, which will impact the hydraulic and biological treatment capacities as well as reduce the quality of
reuse water, which warrants the need for a sewer monitoring programme. This will allow for greater
understanding of flows in the wet and dry season as well as the identification of points of stormwater

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22
B
infiltration into the collection system, considering the hydraulic capacity of the BSTP to inform remedial
actions.
Several decision-support tools and infrastructure are also needed to optimize the preventative maintenance
programme of the upgraded BSTP. Recognizing that valuable hard-copy data were destroyed by fire in the
past, an electronic Computerized Real-time Management System (CMMS) information system will enable
important information to be stored and readily accessed for analysis and will be less susceptible to potential
damage. The tools will optimize the electrical components to improve energy efficiency and reduce GHG
emissions associated with the operations of the plant
There is also need for periodic monitoring of the quality of the reclaimed water to manage associated
environmental and social risks32. Therefore, testing will be done on effluent water quality, through the
establishment of a laboratory, to optimize operations control strategies and reduce energy consumption and
GHG emissions as well as provide data as part of the public visibility programme to build their confidence
and trust in the quality of the treated wastewater. This is also critical element of ensuring that the TDS
concentration of reclaimed wastewater is less than 450 mg/L.
Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring programme that will include the installation of flow
measurement and rain-gauging equipment at the BSTP to identify and address sources of inflow and
infiltration to the sewer. Mechanisms that identify and reduce or mitigate vulnerabilities in the
wastewater collection systems will also be investigated.
Activity 1.3.2: Establish on-site laboratory facilities and personnel at the BSTP to generate influent
and effluent water quality data to inform operations control strategies that optimize operations and
reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions.
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Computerized Real-time Management System (CMMS) at the BSTP to
inform decision making and climate resilient building
The Figure 8 below summarizes how these three activities will inform climate change adaptation and
mitigation efforts.
32 As describe later in Section B.6, monitoring of water quality standard will be carried out firstly by BWA at the plant level (operational standards) and
the Ministry of Agriculture, in collaboration with Ministry of Health, through the Analytical Services Laboratory will conduct testing and analyses water
and wastewater samples. The Ministry of Environment through the Environment Protection Department, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, will monitor the water quality and enforce codes governing usage of this treated wastewater.

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23
B
Figure 8: Linkages between output 1.3 and climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts.
The total budget of this output is USD1.0 million, which is principally applied to the procurement of
Computerized Real-time Management System (CMMS) (52%). This output will be funded using GCF
proceeds.
Output 1.4: Decentralized treatment systems or cluster treatment systems installed
Under this output climate resilience, water security, safeguarding of groundwater quality and achieving a
paradigm shift in the use of reclaimed water will be promoted through the installation of decentralized
treatment systems in 2 communities in Zone A locations33. The decentralized package treatment systems
will provide enhanced collection and treatment systems that will produce reclaimed water suitable for
agricultural irrigation and that will reduce the health risks associated with intense rainfall (vis-a-vis the current
wastewater systems being used). This output will also expand the number of beneficiaries of this project in
a cost-effective manner since these communities are not serviced by either of the two STPs currently in
operation in Barbados and the cost of distributing reclaimed water from the BSTP into the community is high.
The implementation of the decentralized treatment systems will safeguard groundwater by eliminating the
potential risk from contamination associated with onsite wastewater disposal (pit latrines, septic tanks, and
soak-away fields). The risk of contamination is exacerbated by rainfall intensive conditions that saturate the
soil, reducing the ability of the bacteria in the soil to treat the wastewater, and potentially causing the
wastewater in the soak-away fields to reach ground water supplies or surface and come into contact with
the public. This output is part of the GOB’s larger programme to expand decentralized treatment systems
into other communities to promote the use of reclaimed water, reach households not connected to
centralized treatment plant, allow households to be connected to the network of reclaimed water pipeline
planned and address public health concerns.
Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater collection and treatment
demonstration systems in Zone A locations to produce reuse quality water for domestic/commercial
non-potable water applications.
Figure 9: Summary of the 2 Communities in Zone A benefiting from 3 CReWS
33 The GOB Groundwater Protection Zoning Policy established zones to guard against bacteriological contamination of the public water supply wells. The
most stringent regulations are enforced in the Zone A areas, which are located immediately around all existing and potential public water supply sites.

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24
B
See Annex 24 for details on the two communities selected for the installation of decentralized treatment
systems.
The total budget of this output is USD3.3 million and is totally finance by the BWA/GOB.
Component 2: Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency in Wastewater Treatment
Centralized wastewater management relies on expensive high-emission electricity supplied from
conventional power plants that use fossil resources, which not only increases operational costs but also
contributes to global warming. The Bridgetown STP currently uses 4,500 kWh of energy per day which
equates to energy costs of USD470,000 per year34 and the generation of approximately 17,200 CO e of
2
direct GHG emissions from the treatment process (at an average flow of 4,100 m3/day) to approximately
238,000 CO e (at an average flow of 56,700 m3/day)35.
2
The outcome of this component is that climate resilient low carbon operations achieved at BSTP. This
will be realized by: 1)installing grid-tied Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy Systems to offset increased
power consumption associated with the centralized treatment plant process upgrades using Category 3
hurricane resistant solar panels; 2) implementing automated controls and energy efficiency measured within
the upgraded centralized treatment processes to reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce GHG
emissions; and 3) installing sludge dewatering equipment to improve energy efficiency and reduce the
overall GHG and CO2 emissions associated with the biosolids.
The total budget of this outcome is USD 3.3 million, which is principally applied to the procurement and
installation of the 1 MW PV system and the watering technology (81%). The outcome will be funded by GCF.
Output 2.1: Energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies are implemented
Currently 0.18 MW of solar power is in place at the BSTP. An additional 1.8 MW of power is required to
accommodate the upgrades to the BSTP and operate the RO plant to achieve the water quality standard set
for agriculture reuse purposes. This output will deliver 1MW grid-tied PV system to offset the energy demand
of the upgraded BSTP36, which will yield 2063MWh of clean solar power per year leading to an estimated
GHG emission reduction of 1,411 tCO e per year (or 35,275 tCO e over 25 years). For more details, see
2 2
Feasibility Report). The grid-tied PV system will be equipped with remote management controls, which will
automate the supply from the grid to help manage intermittency and switching over between the grid and
solar PV system. It is currently envisioned that PV panels will be installed at the BSTP (See Feasibility Study
for proposed use of existing space at the BSTP); however, as a last measure the BWA has identified
alternative off-site for installation of the PV panel. One such is the Belle Pumping Station. If the latter is
pursued, then a net metering agreement will be entered into the Barbados Light and Power Limited. Aligned
with previous PV system installation by the BWA, high efficient and durable modules such as mono-
crystalline modules will be installed. There is an existing inverter room at BSTP but this will need to be
retrofitted with additional switch gears, electricity meters and monitoring equipment. AC power from the
inverter room will routed to the switch gear at the BSTP. This power will be coupled with the main bus bar
system and incorporates an automatic transfer switch (ATS), which will be coupled either with the GENSET
or with the Power Utility System. Approvals are required from the Government Electrical Engineering
Department (GEED), Barbados Light and Power (BL&P) and the Division of Energy.
Besides the installation of the gird-tied PV system, this output involves the implementation of energy efficient
technologies and sludge dewatering equipment. This will further reduce the overall energy footprint and
34 Integrated Sustainability (2021). Feasibility Report for the 3R’s for Climate Resilience Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R’s Crew Barbados) Preparation
Project. See Section 1.5.6
35 Integrated Sustainability (2021) Feasibility Study
36 The additional 0.8 MW of power will be financed by the GOB but is not counted as part of the co-financing for this project; albeit that government is
currently in advanced negotiations to secure financing for this additional 0.8MW.

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25
B
reduce GHG emissions associated with BSTP. This involves implementing automated controls and energy
efficiency equipment and measures, including variable frequency drives (VFDs), EE pumps, blowers, within
the upgraded centralized treatment processes. Currently, the dissolved oxygen in all bioreactors (contact
chambers, stabilization chambers, aerobic digesters) is controlled manually, which is not optimal. The
aeration is one of largest energy demanding component of the plant, typically consuming 40% or more of
the total energy demand; as such improvement in dissolved oxygen control will result in significant energy
efficiency improvements. To this end, automatic control, which depend on the DO senor readings in the
bioreactors, will be installed. Additionally, the current dewatering, biosolids handling and disposal practice
at BSTP is not optimal. By implementing dewatering technology, biosolids will be capture and removed from
the treatment process early, hence reducing the energy required to the effluent. Further, this enable the
BWA to reduce the water content of biosolids resulting in mitigation co-benefit of reduced GHG emissions
associated with the trucking and disposal of sludge on a dedicated sludge spray zone. According to the O&M
Manual [of the existing plant], (1982), the current sludge contains about 2% solids. If this sludge can be
dewatered by up20% solid, which is very typical with modern sludge dewatering technology, the volume of
the sludge needing to be trucked out and disposed of would be reduced by up to 10% of the current volume.
The installation of the dewatering technology would result in saving on energy cost and sludge transportation
and labour, and the environmental benefits including the reduction in GHG emissions and oil spills etc.
Activity 2.1.1: Install a grid-tied Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy Systems to offset increased
power consumption associated with the centralized treatment plant process upgrades using
Category 3 hurricane resistant solar panels
Figure 10: Possible locations at the BSTP for the installation of the 1MW of solar panels.
Activity 2.1.2: Implement automated controls and energy efficiency measures within the upgraded
centralized treatment processes to reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce GHG emissions.

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26
B
Activity 2.1.3: Install sludge dewatering equipment to improve energy efficiency and reduce the
overall GHG and CO emissions associated with the biosolids.
2
Since this component has one output, the total budget of this output is as presented at the outcome level.
Component 3: Capabilities to operate, maintain, expand and monitor wastewater and related
renewable energy technologies
This component responds to the need for greater understanding among BWA staff of the nexus between
climate change and water availability and the impacts of climate change on infrastructure and operational
measures to mitigate these impacts. Additionally, over the past few years the maintenance focus at BWA
has shifted from Preventative Maintenance (PM) towards emergency breakdown maintenance due, in part
to heavy rainfall events, and the lack of dedicated staff and financial resources for PM. Further, the west
coast of Barbados is not sewered and the impact of saltwater intrusion into freshwater resources and nutrient
loading into the nearshore marine environment are unknown and further investigation will support in bridging
this knowledge gap and chart a path for arresting those issues on the west coast.
The outcome of this component is to have enhanced capacity and capability to support the preventative
maintenance and climate resiliency programmes.
The total budget of this outcome is USD1.6 million, which is principally applied to training and capacity
building and knowledge transfer activities. The outcome will be financed using 100% GCF proceeds.
Output 3.1: Improved capabilities of wastewater technical personnel to operate, maintain and
monitor and implement climate change adaptation planning strategies for wastewater management
To complement the upgrades planned for the BSTP (Component 1 and 2), specialized training, enhanced
awareness of operational risks and management of same and updated protocols and procedures are needed
to be able to effectively manage, monitor and maintain the upgraded system. Not only are these areas
important for operational effectiveness, but it is an important element in building BWA’s capacity for
implementing the preventative maintenance programme and ensuring sustainability of its operations post
implementation of this project. See Figure 11 for the key areas that will be targeted for enhancing BWA’s
capabilities. Notable is that approximately 12 customized courses covering SCADA, gender and climate
change, PV systems, laboratory testing, analysis and management, CAS and RO technologies, sewer
monitoring and instrumentation and wastewater, to note a few, will be delivered during the project. It is
envisaged that approximately 400 individuals will be trained. Where possible, the Project will aim for parity
in the number of individuals trained, nevertheless, women will be strongly encouraged to participate in the
technical training programs thereby addressing the decision-making gap for women in technical thematic
areas.

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27
B
Figure 11: Key areas that will be targeted for enhancing BWA’s capabilities
The proposed centralized treatment and decentralized cluster treatment implementation strategy will
increase the need for both the number of skilled operators and the operator skill development related to
water reuse and renewable energy production. The project will ensure that recruitment processes are
gender responsive to address the underrepresentation of women as skilled operators. Similarly, the
implementation of the sewer monitoring programme, including the CMMS will require operator training in
planning for climate change impacts and the establishment of a robust operations information database,
which is readily accessed for analysis and will be less susceptible to potential damage from fires or storm
events potentially associated with climate change.
The proposed upgrades require a shift in maintenance focus from emergency breakdown maintenance to
preventative maintenance which is also of particular benefit to preparing for and adapting to climate change
impacts. A review of current operational and maintenance practices highlighted there is a lack of adequate
maintenance, with equipment generally only receiving attention resulting from breakdowns, as opposed to
preventative maintenance through a robust, documented, maintenance management system. It also
highlighted a lack of updated SOPs and manuals to guide operations. Improvements in documentation,
procedures, training, prevention of sexual and gender based violence (SGBV), as well as the health and
safety of field staff, will benefit both collection and treatment system performance. The upgrades of the
SOPs, manuals and operations need to incorporate gender considerationsas appropriate.
There is also a need to develop and mainstream risk management framework into BWA’s project
management and operations. This framework will encompass the full cycle of risk identification, assessment,
and mitigation of impacts, including protection from and prevention of sexual exploitation, abuse and sexual
harassment (internal and external. This risk management framework will be developed in consultation with
all departments to identify the risk register, existing controls and further actions needed and opportunities
for improvement, and train staff in its operation and further development. The latter will be implemented by
BWA during the course of the project and assessed at the end of the project as a gauge of the level of
sustainability built into the BWA’s operations.
Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide specialized and customized training to support the operations
and maintenance of wastewater collection and treatment facilities including photovoltaic equipment

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28
B
Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Operational Manual that addresses
the requirements of the upgrades, preventative maintenance, operator safety, and environmental
monitoring, including risks posed by climate change and gender and social inclusion
considerations.
Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement a risk management framework to support the sustainable
management of BWA’s operations.
The total budget of this output is USD1.1 million. This output will be funded using GCF proceeds.
Output 3.2: A strategic plan is developed to guide the replication of water treatment facilities along
the west coast
There is future potential for augmenting potable water supply by installing additional RO treatment facilities
along the west coast corridor which can intercept and collect brackish groundwater and treat it to potable
water standards to supplement drinking water resources. This would support the objectives of this project of
enhancing climate resiliency in the water sector. Strategic engagement with community groups, including
women’s groups and LGBTQIA groups to ensure that the plan considers the needs of women and vulnerable
groups a gender-responsive approach and that there is community-wide buy-in.
Activity 3.2.1: Investigate and develop a strategic plan for the installation of water treatment facilities
along the west coast corridor for augmenting water supply and protecting the west coast ecosystem.
The total budget of this output is USD0.5 million. This output will be funded using GCF proceeds.
Component 4: Capacities (regulatory, governance, awareness), buy-in and ownership within the
private and public sectors are improved for climate resilient development planning for the water
sector.
The upgrades to the equipment and training of technical staff to manage them is not enough for a lasting
and sustainable impact of this project. Stakeholders buy-in, adequate enforcement of legislative and
governance frameworks and expanding leadership and ownership to the private sector are also critical to
ensure that a sustainable market transformation occurs for the advancement of wastewater treatment and
use of reclaimed water in Barbados. For example, the legal regulatory framework in Barbados was very
recently updated to enhance the regulation and scaling-up of wastewater treatment and use of reclaimed
water. However, support is required to determine if any gaps, including gender and vulnerability gaps exist
among the recently articulated policies and regulations, and the identification of a roadmap for addressing
the gaps and enforcing the policies and regulations that are in place.
Further, to ensure the best development outcome of the project, the project and potential impacts should be
well communicated with the public and stakeholders, throughout the project cycle, especially those
disproportionately impacted by climate change such as youth and gender groups.
The key outcome is that an enabling environment is created for wastewater technologies and use of
reclaimed water. The enabling environment speaks to the legislation, organizational structures and
competency and strategies that need to be put in place. Achieving this outcome will significantly change the
culture of the water sector in Barbados, building a level of partnership and professionalism that is needed to
continually innovate and adapt to climate change, which in turn promotes sustainability for this project.

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29
B
The total budget of this outcome is USD1.6 million. The source of the funding is GCF in the amount of
USD1.3 million and BWA\GOB in the amount of USD0.3 million.
Output 4.1: Governance and planning roadmaps enhanced to enable use of reclaimed water in a
controlled and regulated manner.
Having adequate enforcement of legislation related to wastewater management, as well a long-term strategy
in place, are paramount for the sustainability of the impacts of this project.
Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative review to promote the Planning and Development Act,
Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related legislations for enhancing wastewater effluent quality,
treatment options and re-use requirements and applications (see list below). The review will also include
recommendations for strengthening - private sector engagement, public-private partnerships, building
codes, resiliency to climate change and equal opportunities and access to males and females.
The following policies/plans/legislation are either recently completed (2021) or in train, that are of relevance
to the 3R-CReWS project:
i. Tabling of the Planning and Development Regulations - General Development Order, Environmental
Impact Assessment Regulations and the General Regulations
ii. Final Revisions to the Physical Development Plan (in train)
iii. Water Order Bill (Water Zoning) - approved by Cabinet and being prepared for approval of Parliament
iv. Guidelines and Protocols for Potable Water Storage and Rainwater Harvesting
v. Updated Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan - approved by Cabinet
vi. Guidelines and Protocols for the Operation of Solid Waste Management Facilities - approved by
Cabinet
vii. The Integrated Blue Economy Policy Framework and Strategic Action Plan for Barbados - Approved
by Cabinet
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation master plan that includes an optimal combination of
decentralized, cluster and centralized water reclamation and reuse applications, with the centralized
reclaimed water being transmitted and used for agricultural irrigation and/or industrial use (such as lower
cost of reclaimed water transmission). This strategy will also take into consideration the social, gender-
related and climate risks in the design and prioritizing of water reuse strategies.
The total budget of this output is USD445,000, which is principally applied to the development of the water
and sanitation master plan (66%). The source of the funding is GCF in the amount of USD149,000 and BWA
in the amount of USD296,000.
Output 4.2: Mechanisms developed/expanded to encourage the adoption of wastewater treatment
and reuse applications by private individuals and businesses.
This output underscores and addresses the importance of individual and private sector buy-in, ownership
and adoption of wastewater treatment and reuse applications.
Activity 4.2.1: Develop a strategy and action plan to engage the private sector in the provision and
adoption of wastewater treatment technology and the utilization of wastewater by-products such as
activated sludge. This includes conducting an assessment to identify opportunities for public-private
partnership in the water and wastewater sector, especially for the expansion of the decentralized onsite
cluster wastewater systems. The strategy will also promote gender equality and women empowerment.
Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and identify recommendations for a gender sensitive and socially
inclusive incentive programme to encourage conservation, recycle, re-use. Incentives for water
conservation includes demand side management including pricing policies to incentivize reuse practices.
Proposed incentives can include: examine willingness to pay disaggregated by male and female headed

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30
B
households for non-potable reuse water versus payment for potable water as an incentive to use reuse
water. This could be done as a stakeholder survey; Consider a scaled water use billing system to encourage
water management and conservation; A reward system for individuals coming forward to identify potential
non-revenue water (e.g. hydrants leaking, wet areas that shouldn’t be wet, illegal water connections, etc.);
reduced development cost charges for residential and commercial developments that establish their own
water reclamation and reuse system; reducing impact on government infrastructure; reduced potable water
rates for residential and commercial developments that establish their own water reclamation and reuse
system; reducing impact on government infrastructure; reduced electrical power rates for residential and
commercial developments that establish PV systems that feed into the grid (Europe, Canada and the US
pay substantially more for green power that is privately produced); examine government fees related to
development costs and see if water and energy conservation measures can obtain credits or reduce fees as
incentive.
Activity 4.2.3: Expand and promote the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to provide
resources for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater systems.
Barriers to financial inclusion or access to financial resources can prevent vulnerable groups, including
female headed households from participating in climate change adaptation and/or mitigation actions. The
Barbados Water Authority (BWA) through the Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados
(WSRN S-Barbados) Project is establishing the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF). The RAFF aims
to mobilise funds for use in the water sector adaptation and mitigation initiatives including those identified as
priority in Barbados’ Climate Change Adaptation Water Master Plan. The broad objectives of the RAFF are
to:
i. Empower communities to adapt to climate change and variability.
ii. Mobilise funds for climate change adaptation and mitigation in Barbados.
iii. Strengthen households and public and private sector entities involvement in climate actions.
iv. Address the community needs for potable water by building resilience to climate change into the
infrastructure of the BWA.
v. Promote technology transfer by encouraging cost effective, efficient, and appropriate technologies
for water consumption and conservation; and,
vi. Build on existing climate change capacity building and awareness campaigns.
The establishment of the RAFF was initial funded by the BWA and Government of Barbaods; however, 3R-
CReWS presents an opportunity to expand and promote the RAFF to support the Private Sector’s
engagement in the wastewater sector. For example, adopting technologies that support the delivery and
utilization of tertiary reclaimed water. The RAFF is seen as a critical element to engage the private sector;
however, the existing RAFF needs to be examined and expanded to consider how resources could flow in
and out to support activities related to the adoption of decentralized treatment systems as well as dual
pumping, inter alia. See Annex 23 for the existing RAFF Charter as drafted under the WSRN project funded
by the BWA. This Charter is to be updated to cover wastewater treatment systems and reuse options and
other water sector considerations. Specifically, the 3R-CReWS project will engage consultant to update the
governing instruments, through a gender informed consultative process, identify potential sources for
increase the capital inflow, ensure that updates to the governing instrument continue to promote the needs
of vulnerable groups including persons living in poverty, and support the knowledge and promotion of the
financing facility.
It is important to note that no GCF proceeds will be use to directly capitalise the incentive programme or the
RAFF. GCF resources will be used be to strengthen the framework and create the knowledge products

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31
B
needed to guide the Government and BWA in the setting up of the incentive programme(s) and the
expansion and the RAFF.
The total budget of this output is USD352,000, which will be financed totally by GCF financing.
Output 4.3: Gender Sensitive Public Education and Awareness Campaign Implemented.
This output is aiming to promote the business case for this project, thereby securing more buy-in and
acceptance of this project’s scope and intended results. For instance, the nexus between climate change
and water availability, wastewater as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options etc. will be the
basis of some of the PEA topics that will be targeting a wide cross section of beneficiaries through various
mediums of information dissemination.
Activity 4.3.1: Re-educate communities, teachers, students, farmers and businesses about the
impact of climate change on water resources and their impact on water quality and quantity
(availability as well as the importance of water reuse activities and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to
building climate resilience in the Water Sector. Develop program to provide educational support materials
for teachers and participate in the delivery of public education programs and associated events that serve
to educate students. This increases the general knowledge within the community about water, so they can
make informed decisions, starting with the water cycle and basic facts about water use to protect public
safety before addressing water reuse. A change in public perception is required to be able to facilitate IPR.
Water reclamation and reuse is practiced globally to address limited water resource conditions and drought.
This also includes outreach programmes in schools, community-based organizations, and stakeholders’
groups across customer class as well as a Public Service Announcements and educational materials that
addresses best practices for efficient water use, conservation, and reuse. Further, this activity will develop
and provide information resources to private individuals and businesses for the adoption of decentralized
onsite wastewater systems. The re-education programs will ensure to promote equal opportunities and
access to men, women and the LGBTQIA community.
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness Campaign for
community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos, community town hall meetings, site tours
(demonstration of the plant technology and by-product reuse) and consultations. Emphasis will be placed on
assuring the general public about food safety to ensure there is public acceptance and trust in the agriculture
produce from local farms using the treated wastewater as well as the improved resilience of the water sector
and the direct and indirect benefits on ecosystem services and ecotourism. Share lessons learnt to spur
greater public and entrepreneurial involvement.
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Project Web Page and social media accounts, which is dedicated
to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge products, identify/host a link to the Redress Mechanism
and provide update to all stakeholders on the project activities. This page will include, to the best extent
possible, functions such as audio, sub-titles and/or sign language to encourage social inclusion from
disabled population. The project’s webpage will also ensure to report project results disaggregated by
gender, where possible.
The total budget of this output is USD0.9 million which will be financed totally by GCF financing.
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
3R-CReWS Governance Arrangements
In accordance with the Accreditation Master Agreement between the CCCCC and the GCF, the GCF will
enter into a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) with the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre
(CCCCC or referred to as “the Centre”), in the form of a grant agreement, under which CCCCC, in its capacity
as the Accredited Entity, shall administer the relevant GCF Proceeds to be used for the financing of the

--- Table 1 on Page 37 ---
needed to guide the Government and BWA in the setting up of the incentive programme(s) and the
expansion and the RAFF.
The total budget of this output is USD352,000, which will be financed totally by GCF financing.
Output 4.3: Gender Sensitive Public Education and Awareness Campaign Implemented.
This output is aiming to promote the business case for this project, thereby securing more buy-in and
acceptance of this project’s scope and intended results. For instance, the nexus between climate change
and water availability, wastewater as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options etc. will be the
basis of some of the PEA topics that will be targeting a wide cross section of beneficiaries through various
mediums of information dissemination.
Activity 4.3.1: Re-educate communities, teachers, students, farmers and businesses about the
impact of climate change on water resources and their impact on water quality and quantity
(availability as well as the importance of water reuse activities and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to
building climate resilience in the Water Sector. Develop program to provide educational support materials
for teachers and participate in the delivery of public education programs and associated events that serve
to educate students. This increases the general knowledge within the community about water, so they can
make informed decisions, starting with the water cycle and basic facts about water use to protect public
safety before addressing water reuse. A change in public perception is required to be able to facilitate IPR.
Water reclamation and reuse is practiced globally to address limited water resource conditions and drought.
This also includes outreach programmes in schools, community-based organizations, and stakeholders’
groups across customer class as well as a Public Service Announcements and educational materials that
addresses best practices for efficient water use, conservation, and reuse. Further, this activity will develop
and provide information resources to private individuals and businesses for the adoption of decentralized
onsite wastewater systems. The re-education programs will ensure to promote equal opportunities and
access to men, women and the LGBTQIA community.
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness Campaign for
community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos, community town hall meetings, site tours
(demonstration of the plant technology and by-product reuse) and consultations. Emphasis will be placed on
assuring the general public about food safety to ensure there is public acceptance and trust in the agriculture
produce from local farms using the treated wastewater as well as the improved resilience of the water sector
and the direct and indirect benefits on ecosystem services and ecotourism. Share lessons learnt to spur
greater public and entrepreneurial involvement.
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Project Web Page and social media accounts, which is dedicated
to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge products, identify/host a link to the Redress Mechanism
and provide update to all stakeholders on the project activities. This page will include, to the best extent
possible, functions such as audio, sub-titles and/or sign language to encourage social inclusion from
disabled population. The project’s webpage will also ensure to report project results disaggregated by
gender, where possible.
The total budget of this output is USD0.9 million which will be financed totally by GCF financing.
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
3R-CReWS Governance Arrangements
In accordance with the Accreditation Master Agreement between the CCCCC and the GCF, the GCF will
enter into a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) with the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre
(CCCCC or referred to as “the Centre”), in the form of a grant agreement, under which CCCCC, in its capacity
as the Accredited Entity, shall administer the relevant GCF Proceeds to be used for the financing of the

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32
B
Project. The Centre, as the Accredited Entity (AE), will guide implementation of this project in accordance
with its accreditation credentials as well as guided by the terms FAA. Guided by the Funded Activity
Agreement (FAA) to be entered into once this project is approved and the Accreditation Master Agreement
(AMA) between the CCCCC and the GCF, the CCCCC will also ensure gender and social inclusion
considerations are mainstreamed as much as possible into the execution of the project activities. All activities
will adhere to the CCCCC environmental and social safeguards, which complies with international standards
and includes consideration of the most vulnerable peoples and a mechanism and to address any grievance
that may arise (see Section G for further details on Grievance Redress).
CCCCC will be the sole administrator of GCF funding and utilise the resources in accordance with the FAA
to implement the to implement the activities as described in Section B.3 and detailed budget. The CCCCC
will work closely, through its Programme Development and Management Unit (PDMU) and sign subsidiary
agreements with the BWA to govern those activities that will be executed by the BWA. The Subsidiary
Agreement will be legally binding and outline the details associated financing and accounting, procurement
and implementation, as well as contain the relevant provisions for the compliance by BWA with the
requirements of the AMA and FAA. The CCCCC and BWA will co-execute this project. As a Co-Executing
Entity for this project, BWA will:
a. Provide technical support to CCCCC for the development of Terms of References and the
procurement of equipment, goods and service to realise all Outputs; and,
b. Be a part of the evaluation team that will review all expressions of interest, and technical and financial
proposals related to the Project.
c. Report to the CCCCC as guided by the terms set out in the Subsidiary Agreement, procurement
guidelines of the CCCCC and/or those of the Government of Barbados. This includes reporting to
CCCCC on a quarterly basis detailing accomplishments, status of project activities, foreseeable
delays and other risk at the time of reporting. These quarterly reports are essential to ensure
compliance with CCCCC policies and accreditation credentials. These quarterly reports will also feed
into annual and mid-term reports that will be submitted to the GCF. These reports will be coupled
with field visit and site monitoring missions, which will include primary data collection and
observations. There will be a final report at the end of the period of implementation. This report will
also be accompanied by the final project financial audit to be completed by an independent and
accredited auditor. All records on this project will be kept for at least five years for review by the GCF
or its authorized bodies after project completion.
The Subsidiary Agreement will outline the implementation arrangements for the 3R-CReWS project and
constitutes a requirement of the associated Funded Activity Agreement between the GCF and the CCCCC.
The Subsidiary Agreement will include clause that span the following areas: Definitions; Description,
Activities of the Project and Funding; Implementation of the Project; Additional Obligations of BWA;
Reporting Requirements of BWA; Representations, warranties and Covenants of BWA; Intellectual Property
and Ownership of Assets; Force Majeure; Duration of Agreement and Termination; Confidentiality; Notices;
Governing Law; Dispute Settlement and General Provisions. The schedules will include: Description and
Activities of the Project; Project Budget showing the Breakdown of each Party’s Contribution; Co-financiers
and contribution to Co-financing; Financial Management, Procurement and Implementation Arrangements;
Implementation Plan; Proposed Composition and Functions of the Project Steering Committee; GCF
Reporting Milestones; and, Events of Default.
CCCCC as, an executing entity, will manage, procure and account for all activities associated with the GCF
proceeds as well as monitor and report on the on project activities to the GCF and Government of Barbaos,
through the NDA office, in accordance with the FAA and AMA. Table 1 below identified the outputs/activities
to be implemented and the EE that will be responsible for the day to day management execution. The
CCCCC will continue to work closely with key stakeholders, such as the BWA, NDA, farmers, households,

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33
B
private sector, government agencies, NGOs, Civil Society and academia, will be kept engaged throughout
the project cycle. During the PPF stage of the project stakeholder consultations were carried out and there
is a general acceptance of the project and their responsibilities and the readiness to proceed with
implementing the project once GCF approves funding. Throughout the implementation phase, the
consultant/vendor, executing entities and the CCCCC will continuously liaise and work closely with all
relevant parties, in accordance with the Stakeholder Management and Engagement Plan and Gender Action
Plan, for the timely and inclusive execution of project activities and to produce quality products that are
aligned with the deliverables and outputs of this project.
Table 1: Responsibilities of Executing Entities
Output Key Activities EE
1.1 The Bridgetown Activity 1.1.1: Design, procure and convert/upgrade the existing conventional CCCCC
Sewage Treatment activated sludge (CAS) biological treatment process at the Bridgetown
Plant (BSTP) is Sewage Treatment Plant to tertiary filtration and disinfection for achieving
upgraded to treat national reclaimed water-quality standards.
wastewater to a tertiary
water-quality standard.
1.2 Tertiary wastewater Activity 1.2.1: Install reverse osmosis (RO) membrane filtration systems to CCCCC
is being reused to reduce the total dissolved solids concentration of the reclaimed water
supplement non- produced at the BSTP
potable use
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline and 6 aquifer recharge wells going from BWA
the BSTP for irrigation and aquifer recharge
1.3 Decision-support Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring programme that will include the CCCCC
tools and infrastructure installation of flow measurement and rain-gauging equipment at the BSTP to
implemented to identify and address sources of inflow and infiltration to the sewer.
mitigate potential Mechanisms that identify and reduce or mitigate vulnerabilities in the
climate change risks to wastewater collection systems will also be investigated.
the wastewater
collection and Activity 1.3.2: Establish on-site laboratory facilities and personnel at the BSTP CCCCC
treatment systems to generate influent and effluent water quality data to inform operations
control strategies that optimize operations and reduce energy consumption
and GHG emissions.
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Computerized Real-time Management System CCCCC
(CMMS) at the BSTP to inform decision making and climate resilient building
1.4 Decentralized Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater BWA
treatment systems or collection and treatment demonstration systems in Zone A locations to
cluster treatment produce reuse quality water for domestic/commercial non-potable water
systems installed applications.
2.1 Energy efficiency Activity 2.1.1: Install a grid-tied Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy Systems CCCCC
and renewable energy to offset increased power consumption associated with the centralized
technologies are treatment plant process upgrades using Category 3 hurricane resistant solar
implemented panels
Activity 2.1.2: Implement automated controls and energy efficiency measures CCCCC
within the upgraded centralized treatment processes to reduce the overall
energy footprint and reduce GHG emissions.
Activity 2.1.3: Install sludge dewatering equipment to improve energy CCCCC
efficiency and reduce the overall GHG and CO2 emissions associated with
the biosolids.

--- Table 1 on Page 39 ---
private sector, government agencies, NGOs, Civil Society and academia, will be kept engaged throughout
the project cycle. During the PPF stage of the project stakeholder consultations were carried out and there
is a general acceptance of the project and their responsibilities and the readiness to proceed with
implementing the project once GCF approves funding. Throughout the implementation phase, the
consultant/vendor, executing entities and the CCCCC will continuously liaise and work closely with all
relevant parties, in accordance with the Stakeholder Management and Engagement Plan and Gender Action
Plan, for the timely and inclusive execution of project activities and to produce quality products that are
aligned with the deliverables and outputs of this project.
Table 1: Responsibilities of Executing Entities
Output Key Activities EE
1.1 The Bridgetown Activity 1.1.1: Design, procure and convert/upgrade the existing conventional CCCCC
Sewage Treatment activated sludge (CAS) biological treatment process at the Bridgetown
Plant (BSTP) is Sewage Treatment Plant to tertiary filtration and disinfection for achieving
upgraded to treat national reclaimed water-quality standards.
wastewater to a tertiary
water-quality standard.
1.2 Tertiary wastewater Activity 1.2.1: Install reverse osmosis (RO) membrane filtration systems to CCCCC
is being reused to reduce the total dissolved solids concentration of the reclaimed water
supplement non- produced at the BSTP
potable use
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline and 6 aquifer recharge wells going from BWA
the BSTP for irrigation and aquifer recharge
1.3 Decision-support Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring programme that will include the CCCCC
tools and infrastructure installation of flow measurement and rain-gauging equipment at the BSTP to
implemented to identify and address sources of inflow and infiltration to the sewer.
mitigate potential Mechanisms that identify and reduce or mitigate vulnerabilities in the
climate change risks to wastewater collection systems will also be investigated.
the wastewater
collection and Activity 1.3.2: Establish on-site laboratory facilities and personnel at the BSTP CCCCC
treatment systems to generate influent and effluent water quality data to inform operations
control strategies that optimize operations and reduce energy consumption
and GHG emissions.
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Computerized Real-time Management System CCCCC
(CMMS) at the BSTP to inform decision making and climate resilient building
1.4 Decentralized Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater BWA
treatment systems or collection and treatment demonstration systems in Zone A locations to
cluster treatment produce reuse quality water for domestic/commercial non-potable water
systems installed applications.
2.1 Energy efficiency Activity 2.1.1: Install a grid-tied Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy Systems CCCCC
and renewable energy to offset increased power consumption associated with the centralized
technologies are treatment plant process upgrades using Category 3 hurricane resistant solar
implemented panels
Activity 2.1.2: Implement automated controls and energy efficiency measures CCCCC
within the upgraded centralized treatment processes to reduce the overall
energy footprint and reduce GHG emissions.
Activity 2.1.3: Install sludge dewatering equipment to improve energy CCCCC
efficiency and reduce the overall GHG and CO2 emissions associated with
the biosolids. |  |  | 
 | Output | Key Activities | EE
 | 1.1 The Bridgetown
Sewage Treatment
Plant (BSTP) is
upgraded to treat
wastewater to a tertiary
water-quality standard. | Activity 1.1.1: Design, procure and convert/upgrade the existing conventional
activated sludge (CAS) biological treatment process at the Bridgetown
Sewage Treatment Plant to tertiary filtration and disinfection for achieving
national reclaimed water-quality standards. | CCCCC
 | 1.2 Tertiary wastewater
is being reused to
supplement non-
potable use | Activity 1.2.1: Install reverse osmosis (RO) membrane filtration systems to
reduce the total dissolved solids concentration of the reclaimed water
produced at the BSTP
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline and 6 aquifer recharge wells going from
the BSTP for irrigation and aquifer recharge | CCCCC
BWA
 | 1.3 Decision-support
tools and infrastructure
implemented to
mitigate potential
climate change risks to
the wastewater
collection and
treatment systems | Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring programme that will include the
installation of flow measurement and rain-gauging equipment at the BSTP to
identify and address sources of inflow and infiltration to the sewer.
Mechanisms that identify and reduce or mitigate vulnerabilities in the
wastewater collection systems will also be investigated.
Activity 1.3.2: Establish on-site laboratory facilities and personnel at the BSTP
to generate influent and effluent water quality data to inform operations
control strategies that optimize operations and reduce energy consumption
and GHG emissions.
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Computerized Real-time Management System
(CMMS) at the BSTP to inform decision making and climate resilient building | CCCCC
CCCCC
CCCCC
 | 1.4 Decentralized
treatment systems or
cluster treatment
systems installed | Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater
collection and treatment demonstration systems in Zone A locations to
produce reuse quality water for domestic/commercial non-potable water
applications. | BWA
 | 2.1 Energy efficiency
and renewable energy
technologies are
implemented | Activity 2.1.1: Install a grid-tied Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy Systems
to offset increased power consumption associated with the centralized
treatment plant process upgrades using Category 3 hurricane resistant solar
panels
Activity 2.1.2: Implement automated controls and energy efficiency measures
within the upgraded centralized treatment processes to reduce the overall
energy footprint and reduce GHG emissions.
Activity 2.1.3: Install sludge dewatering equipment to improve energy
efficiency and reduce the overall GHG and CO2 emissions associated with
the biosolids. | CCCCC
CCCCC
CCCCC

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34
B
3.1 Improved Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide specialized and customized training to CCCCC
capabilities of support the operations and maintenance of wastewater collection and
wastewater technical treatment facilities including photovoltaic equipment
personnel to operate,
maintain and monitor Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Operational CCCCC
and implement climate Manual that addresses the requirements of the upgrades, preventative
change adaptation maintenance, operator safety, and environmental monitoring, including risks
planning strategies for posed by climate change and gender and social inclusion considerations.
wastewater
management Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement a risk management framework to CCCCC
support the sustainable management of BWA’s operations.
3.2 A strategic plan is Activity 3.2.1: Investigate and develop a strategic plan for the installation of CCCCC
developed to guide the water treatment facilities along the west coast corridor for augmenting water
replication of water supply and protecting the west coast ecosystem.
treatment facilities
along the west coast
corridor
4.1 Governance and Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative review to promote the Planning and CCCCC
planning roadmaps Development Act, Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related legislations for
enhanced to enable enhancing wastewater effluent quality, treatment options and re-use
use of reclaimed water requirements and applications.
in a controlled and
regulated manner Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation master plan that includes an
optimal combination of decentralized, cluster and centralized water BWA
reclamation and reuse applications, with the centralized reclaimed water
being transmitted and used for agricultural irrigation and/or industrial use
(such as lower cost of reclaimed water transmission).
4.2 Mechanisms Activity 4.2.1: Develop a strategy and action plan to engage the private sector CCCCC
developed/expanded to in the provision and adoption of wastewater treatment technology and the
encourage the utilization of wastewater by-products such as activated sludge.
adoption of wastewater
treatment and reuse Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and identify recommendations for a gender CCCCC
applications by private sensitive and socially inclusive incentive programme to encourage
individuals and conservation, recycle, re-use.
businesses
Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to CCCCC
provide resources for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater
systems.
4.3 Gender Sensitive Activity 4.3.1: Re-educate communities, teachers, students, farmers and CCCCC
Public Education and businesses about the impact of climate change on water resources and their
Awareness Campaign impact on water quality and quantity (availability as well as the importance of
Implemented. water reuse activities and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to building climate
resilience in the Water Sector.
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness CCCCC
Campaign for community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos,
community town hall meetings, site tours (demonstration of the plant
technology and by-product reuse) and consultations.
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Project Web Page and social media
accounts, which is dedicated to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge CCCCC
products, identify/host a link to the Redress Mechanism and provide update to
all stakeholders on the project activities.

--- Table 1 on Page 40 ---
3.1 Improved Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide specialized and customized training to CCCCC
capabilities of support the operations and maintenance of wastewater collection and
wastewater technical treatment facilities including photovoltaic equipment
personnel to operate,
maintain and monitor Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Operational CCCCC
and implement climate Manual that addresses the requirements of the upgrades, preventative
change adaptation maintenance, operator safety, and environmental monitoring, including risks
planning strategies for posed by climate change and gender and social inclusion considerations.
wastewater
management Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement a risk management framework to CCCCC
support the sustainable management of BWA’s operations.
3.2 A strategic plan is Activity 3.2.1: Investigate and develop a strategic plan for the installation of CCCCC
developed to guide the water treatment facilities along the west coast corridor for augmenting water
replication of water supply and protecting the west coast ecosystem.
treatment facilities
along the west coast
corridor
4.1 Governance and Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative review to promote the Planning and CCCCC
planning roadmaps Development Act, Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related legislations for
enhanced to enable enhancing wastewater effluent quality, treatment options and re-use
use of reclaimed water requirements and applications.
in a controlled and
regulated manner Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation master plan that includes an
optimal combination of decentralized, cluster and centralized water BWA
reclamation and reuse applications, with the centralized reclaimed water
being transmitted and used for agricultural irrigation and/or industrial use
(such as lower cost of reclaimed water transmission).
4.2 Mechanisms Activity 4.2.1: Develop a strategy and action plan to engage the private sector CCCCC
developed/expanded to in the provision and adoption of wastewater treatment technology and the
encourage the utilization of wastewater by-products such as activated sludge.
adoption of wastewater
treatment and reuse Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and identify recommendations for a gender CCCCC
applications by private sensitive and socially inclusive incentive programme to encourage
individuals and conservation, recycle, re-use.
businesses
Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to CCCCC
provide resources for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater
systems.
4.3 Gender Sensitive Activity 4.3.1: Re-educate communities, teachers, students, farmers and CCCCC
Public Education and businesses about the impact of climate change on water resources and their
Awareness Campaign impact on water quality and quantity (availability as well as the importance of
Implemented. water reuse activities and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to building climate
resilience in the Water Sector.
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness CCCCC
Campaign for community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos,
community town hall meetings, site tours (demonstration of the plant
technology and by-product reuse) and consultations.
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Project Web Page and social media
accounts, which is dedicated to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge CCCCC
products, identify/host a link to the Redress Mechanism and provide update to
all stakeholders on the project activities. | 3.1 Improved
capabilities of
wastewater technical
personnel to operate,
maintain and monitor
and implement climate
change adaptation
planning strategies for
wastewater
management | Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide specialized and customized training to
support the operations and maintenance of wastewater collection and
treatment facilities including photovoltaic equipment
Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Operational
Manual that addresses the requirements of the upgrades, preventative
maintenance, operator safety, and environmental monitoring, including risks
posed by climate change and gender and social inclusion considerations.
Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement a risk management framework to
support the sustainable management of BWA’s operations. | CCCCC
CCCCC
CCCCC
 | 3.2 A strategic plan is
developed to guide the
replication of water
treatment facilities
along the west coast
corridor | Activity 3.2.1: Investigate and develop a strategic plan for the installation of
water treatment facilities along the west coast corridor for augmenting water
supply and protecting the west coast ecosystem. | CCCCC
 | 4.1 Governance and
planning roadmaps
enhanced to enable
use of reclaimed water
in a controlled and
regulated manner | Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative review to promote the Planning and
Development Act, Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related legislations for
enhancing wastewater effluent quality, treatment options and re-use
requirements and applications.
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation master plan that includes an
optimal combination of decentralized, cluster and centralized water
reclamation and reuse applications, with the centralized reclaimed water
being transmitted and used for agricultural irrigation and/or industrial use
(such as lower cost of reclaimed water transmission). | CCCCC
BWA
 | 4.2 Mechanisms
developed/expanded to
encourage the
adoption of wastewater
treatment and reuse
applications by private
individuals and
businesses | Activity 4.2.1: Develop a strategy and action plan to engage the private sector
in the provision and adoption of wastewater treatment technology and the
utilization of wastewater by-products such as activated sludge.
Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and identify recommendations for a gender
sensitive and socially inclusive incentive programme to encourage
conservation, recycle, re-use.
Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to
provide resources for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater
systems. | CCCCC
CCCCC
CCCCC
 | 4.3 Gender Sensitive
Public Education and
Awareness Campaign
Implemented. | Activity 4.3.1: Re-educate communities, teachers, students, farmers and
businesses about the impact of climate change on water resources and their
impact on water quality and quantity (availability as well as the importance of
water reuse activities and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to building climate
resilience in the Water Sector.
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness
Campaign for community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos,
community town hall meetings, site tours (demonstration of the plant
technology and by-product reuse) and consultations.
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Project Web Page and social media
accounts, which is dedicated to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge
products, identify/host a link to the Redress Mechanism and provide update to
all stakeholders on the project activities. | CCCCC
CCCCC
CCCCC

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35
B
The CCCCC project components will be executed by a Project Management Office (PMO) whilst those
components under BWA will be executed under the management of the BWA Project Management Office
(PMO), through a dedicated Project Team. More specifically, the CCCCC will secure the services of a Project
Manager, a National Project Coordinator, a Project Engineer, a Procurement Officer, a Finance Officer and
two (2) Administrative Officers that will work closely with BWA’s Project Management Office. The BWA PMO
is staffed with Project Coordinators (one of which will be assigned to this project and will liaison closely with
CCCCC), Procurement and Accounting Officers, Project Engineer and Engineering Assistant and will also
draw upon the available collective resources of the BWA and project implementation partners. In addition,
the Project will be monitored by a Project Steering Committee comprising key stakeholders.
The BWA PMO will be required to report to the General Manager of BWA, who in turn will report to the BWA
Board of Directors and the Project Steering Committee (PSC). Additionally, the CCCCC PMO will also report
to the PSC. The PSC is to provide a mechanism for support, feedback, guidance, stakeholder participation
and interagency coordination during project implementation, and to act as a catalyst for an ongoing
coordination mechanism after implementation has been completed. The Committee will be required to meet
as necessary, but not less than biannually. The duties of PSC shall be as follows:
(a) familiarisation with the arrangements for project implementation, including the intended project
outcome, outputs, scope, financing arrangements, reporting requirements, implementation schedule,
and other details contained in the appraisal report and financing agreements;
(b) monitor progress in implementation of the Project towards achievement of the project output and
project outcome;
(c) ensure that potential threats to timely project implementation are identified and addressed;
(d) facilitate the taking of policy decisions by the relevant authorities to ensure timely fulfilment of funding
conditions;
(e) review work plans on a semi-annual basis and ensure that recommendations with respect to
adequate budgetary allocations are made, procurement activities are executed as scheduled, and
that adequate controls;
(f) ensure that stakeholder participation is appropriate and sustained throughout implementation and
that stakeholder expectations are addressed;
(g) facilitate a grievance redress mechanism that complies with GCF expectations on grievance redress
to address concerns and complaints from the stakeholders, including the general public, with regards
project implementation;
(h) ensure that the Project remains aligned to the policy and strategic objectives of the GOB;
(i) discuss the perspective of the entities from which its members are drawn on various issues, informed
by the consultation of PSC members with their respective organisations;
(j) monitor the performance of the Project Implementation Team; and
(k) champion the Project, advocating for achievement of the project outcomes.
The PSC will be chaired by the Executive Director of the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre and
co-chaired by General Manager of the BWA, with the Project Manager (PM) or Project Coordinator (PC)
serving as Secretary, who will be responsible for taking minutes for each PSC meeting and shared with the
relevant stakeholders. In addition, PSC shall comprise the following members:
(a) Permanent Secretary (PS), Ministry of Transport Works and Water Resources Management, or their
nominee;
(b) PS, Ministry of Agriculture and Food and Nutritional Security or their nominee;
(c) PS, Ministry of Finance Economic affairs and Investment or their nominee;
(d) PS, Ministry of Health and Wellness, or their nominee;
(e) PS, Ministry of Environment and National Beautification, or their nominee;
(f) PS, Ministry of Energy and Businesses Development and Entrepreneurship
(g) Director, Environmental Protection Department, or their nominee;
(h) Director, Planning and Development Department, or their nominee;

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36
B
(i) Director, Coastal Zone Management Unit, or their nominee;
(j) Head of the Bureau of Gender Affairs, or their nominee;
(k) Representative, Barbados Chamber of Commerce;
(l) Representative, Barbados Agricultural Development and Marketing Corporation;
(m) Representative, Barbados Agricultural Society;
(n) Representative, Government Press and Public Relations
(o) University of the West Indies (UWI)
Ably guided by this PSC, the CCCCC and BWA will have the final decision-making authority with respect to
the implementation of the project.The Government of Barbados, through the Ministry of Finance Economic
affairs and Investment and Ministry of Transport, Works & Water Resource Management, will be kept abreast
of progress of the project. The NDA and the Minister with responsibility for water will serve as a conduit for
updating the GOB on the process of the project and, where necessary, providing feedback to the project
board from the GOB. The BWA’s board of directors is expected to report to the Ministry on the status of
various activities identified in this proposal. See Figure 11 presents the project management and reporting
structure for the project.
The Technical Working Group is made of representatives from: BWA, Environmental Protection Department,
Ministry of Health and Wellness, Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Ministry of Finance Economic
Affairs and Investment, Coastal Zone Management Unit, Government Analytical Services, and Planning and
Development Department. This group guided the development of the proposal and will continue to guide the
implementation of the project.

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37
B
G R M
CC
G r e e n C lim a t e F u n d
( G C F )
N D A / C C C
a r ib b e a n C o m m u n it y
lim a te C h a n g e C e n tr e
( C C C C C )
C C C C C P r o g r a m m e
D e v e lo p m e n t a n d
M a n a g e m e n t U n it
S ta k e h
C
o
N
C
ld
D
e
A /
rs
G C
( s
F
ta
C
t
C
T
e
G o v e r n m e n t o f
B a r b a d o s
P S C m e m b e rs re p o rts
T o m in is trie s / d e p a rtm e n ts
C C C / B W A S u b s id ia ry A g r e e m e n
P ro je c t S te e r in g
C o m m it te e ( P S C )
T e c h n ica l g u id a n ce to
P S C , C C C C C a n d B W A
e c h n ic a l W o r k in g G r o u p
P ro je c t Im p le m e n ta t io n
T e a m
a n d n o n - s ta t e ) , B e n e fic ia
t
r
M/
ie
in istry
B o a rd
s , C o n
N
s
D
u
B a r b a d o s W a t e
A u t h o rit y
B o a r d o f D ir e c t o
A / B W A
B a r b a d o s W a t e r A u t
B W A P r o je c t
M a n a g e m e n t O f f
lta n ts
r
r s
h o
ic e
r ity
G R M
Figure 12a: Project Management and Reporting Structure for the project
Financial Flows and Implementation Arrangements
The funding for the 3R-CReWS project will come from: (1) the Green Climate Fund in the form of a grant;
and (2) the BWA in the form of a grant from the Government of Barbados. The BWA contribution will be
provided through the Ministry of Finance Economic Affairs and Investment, which has already sourced some
of the co-funding required including plans to allocate resources to the BWA from the revenue generated by
the Garbage and Sewage Contribution levy to fund the two decentralised wastewater treatment plant (Output
1.4).
CCCCC will not on grant any monies to the BWA nor will BWA on grant monies to the CCCCC. CCCCC will
manage, procure and account for all activities associated with the GCF proceeds. The CCCCC will procure
all major goods and services for the project using international best practice and the appropriate procurement
method in accordance with the procurement plan. The CCCCC in accordance with its Accreditation Master
Agreement, financial and accounting manual and procurement guidelines will procure goods, works and
services for the realisation of the project outputs. As is CCCCC policy, funding provided by the GCF is kept
in a separate project bank account. The partners, providing co-financing, will manage their co-financing
activities but will be obligated to the report to the CCCCC on the status of those activities. Those entities are
not obligated to transfer any monies to the CCCCC but must provide accounting evidence of transactions
and expenditures towards their co-financing obligations. These are essential for monitoring and reporting to
the GCF on an annual basis.

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38
B
Public Funds, International Financial Institutions (IFIs), & Other Donors Green Climate Fund (GCF)
Caribbean Community Climate Change
Ministry of Finance/Barbados Water Authority
Centre (CCCCC)
Parallel Financing Co-financing
GCF Financing
3R-CReWS Project (BSTP)
Expansion of BSTP Sewer Collection System
&
South Coast Project
South Coast Plant Upgrade
Renovations and Upgrades
Co-Financed Activities GCF Financed Activities
Private Sector Renewable Energy System
Mobilized Rehabilitation of Sea Outfall
Reclaimed Water Distribution
Expansion of Sewer Collection System Good, works and Good, works and services for the
& services for the execution of Activities 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 1.3.1,
Adoption of Decentralised Treatment execution of 1.3.2, 1.3.3, 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.3, 3.1.1,
Technologies Activities 1.2.2, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, 3.2.1, 4.1.1, 4.2.1, 4.2.2,
1.4.1, 4.1.2 4.2.3, 4.3.1, 4.3.2, 4.3.3
Figure 12b: Financial flows, inclusive of the system upgrades that are parallel financing
Capacity of the AE and EE to Implement
The 3R-CReWs project builds upon the Centre’s more than 15 years of experience as a regional leader
implementing catalytic pilot/demonstration type projects in the Caribbean Region, and scaling these up with
national governments. It also builds on the Centre’s established track record in implementing projects
related to climate change adaptation and mitigation. Further, as an Accredited Entity of the GCF, the Centre
does ensure that appropriate due diligence is carried out to ensure that all transactions are executed with
minimal transactional risk and all Executing Entities have to date, been assessed at a low or medium risk.
The due diligence exercised revealed that the CCCCC has sufficient capacity and autonomy to enter into
Agreements, with sufficient legal and juridical capacity in doing so (See Annex 9). In terms of institutional
due diligence, the CCCCC is properly constituted, and with Board approvals, is competent in taking on the
tasks assigned in the funding proposal in their various roles. Also, the Centre has an established track record
in Barbados and working with the BWA through its PMO that is implementing another GCF funded project
(FP060: Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados Project (WSRN S-Barbados)).
The BWA is responsible for managing, allocating and monitoring the water resources of the island with the
view to ensuring their best development, utilization, conservation and protection in the public interest. The
facilities of the Authority are situated in a number of locations across the country and these include pumping
stations, reservoirs and major storage centres at Bowmanston, St John and the Belle, St Michael. The BWA
supplies 97% of the island with water and obtains its water supply from twenty-four (24) groundwater wells,

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39
B
two (2) springs, one (1) main privately owned reverse osmosis desalination plant as well as a small
containerized desalination plant. This water is distributed through a network consisting of approximately two
thousand five hundred kilometres (2,500 km) of water mains, twenty-eight (28) reservoirs located both under
and above ground and seventeen (17) re-pumping stations (booster-pumps). It is also responsible for the
designing, construction, acquisition, provision, operation and maintenance of water and sewerage works for
the purpose of supplying water for public purposes and the receiving, treating and disposing of sewage,
respectively. Though the water system is island-wide, the sewerage works consist of two centralized
systems, the Bridgetown Sewerage Treatment Plant, a secondary treatment facility commissioned in 1980,
and the South Coast Sewerage Treatment Plant, an advanced preliminary treatment plant commissioned in
2003.
It is important to note that the BWA Act and the Interpretation Act of Barbados notes that the BWA Act
establishes the BWA as a Body Corporate and the Interpretation Act outlines that such a body has all the
powers of a legal person, which includes the power to enter into contracts in its own name and the power to
sue and be sued. It is against this legal standing that the CCCCC and BWA will enter into a subsidiary
agreement.
As a strong partner to the CCCCC, the BWA’s PMO has a track record of implementing water and
wastewater project and is currently managing 5 projects to a total value of USD82 million for the water and
wastewater sector running through to 2024. In addition to externally funded projects, the PMO handles
internally financed projects, processes payments, liaises with ministries, and prepares progress and financial
reports on projects. The BWA therefore has a resourced and experienced team of professionals working
within the PMO. It is also worth mentioning that the BWA has built it capacity (knowledge and understanding)
of the GCF and its reporting require. This was largely achieved through the development of, and ongoing
activities of, WSRN S-Barbados Project. Further, a Financial Management Capacity Assessment (FMCA) of
BWA’s operations was carried out to enable BWA to act as an executing entity for the WSRN S-Barbados
(See Annex 27).
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Barbados Economic State of Play
Since the financial crisis, 2008, the Barbadian economy remains sluggish and the onset of the COVID-19
pandemic has worsened this plight Inflation rates have been around 4% per year over the last 4 years and
is projected to remain at around 3% per year in the medium term. A combination of economic circumstances
and shock from exogenous factors (including international commodities prices, natural disasters and the
COVID-19 pandemic) led to a situation where public debt-to-GDP ratio increased consistently from 55% of
GDP in 2008 to 148% in 2017 37 and although it dropped to 120% in 2019, it increased to 144% by the end
of 2020.38 At the end of the first quarter of 2021 Barbados’s GDP is estimated to have contracted by 17.3%
and the current account deficit is expected to have increased to 7.8%39. The unemployment rate rose to
10.8% as of September 2019 following public sector layoffs of almost 1,000 persons in 2018 stemming from
37 World Bank (April 2021) Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices. Pages 92-93
38 Central Bank of Barbados (16, Feb 2021). See http://www.centralbank.org.bb/news/article/10200/why-barbados-debt-to-gdp-ratio-has-risen-again.
Accessed: 15 December 2021
39 World Bank (April 2021)

--- Table 1 on Page 45 ---
two (2) springs, one (1) main privately owned reverse osmosis desalination plant as well as a small
containerized desalination plant. This water is distributed through a network consisting of approximately two
thousand five hundred kilometres (2,500 km) of water mains, twenty-eight (28) reservoirs located both under
and above ground and seventeen (17) re-pumping stations (booster-pumps). It is also responsible for the
designing, construction, acquisition, provision, operation and maintenance of water and sewerage works for
the purpose of supplying water for public purposes and the receiving, treating and disposing of sewage,
respectively. Though the water system is island-wide, the sewerage works consist of two centralized
systems, the Bridgetown Sewerage Treatment Plant, a secondary treatment facility commissioned in 1980,
and the South Coast Sewerage Treatment Plant, an advanced preliminary treatment plant commissioned in
2003.
It is important to note that the BWA Act and the Interpretation Act of Barbados notes that the BWA Act
establishes the BWA as a Body Corporate and the Interpretation Act outlines that such a body has all the
powers of a legal person, which includes the power to enter into contracts in its own name and the power to
sue and be sued. It is against this legal standing that the CCCCC and BWA will enter into a subsidiary
agreement.
As a strong partner to the CCCCC, the BWA’s PMO has a track record of implementing water and
wastewater project and is currently managing 5 projects to a total value of USD82 million for the water and
wastewater sector running through to 2024. In addition to externally funded projects, the PMO handles
internally financed projects, processes payments, liaises with ministries, and prepares progress and financial
reports on projects. The BWA therefore has a resourced and experienced team of professionals working
within the PMO. It is also worth mentioning that the BWA has built it capacity (knowledge and understanding)
of the GCF and its reporting require. This was largely achieved through the development of, and ongoing
activities of, WSRN S-Barbados Project. Further, a Financial Management Capacity Assessment (FMCA) of
BWA’s operations was carried out to enable BWA to act as an executing entity for the WSRN S-Barbados
(See Annex 27).
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Barbados Economic State of Play
Since the financial crisis, 2008, the Barbadian economy remains sluggish and the onset of the COVID-19
pandemic has worsened this plight Inflation rates have been around 4% per year over the last 4 years and
is projected to remain at around 3% per year in the medium term. A combination of economic circumstances
and shock from exogenous factors (including international commodities prices, natural disasters and the
COVID-19 pandemic) led to a situation where public debt-to-GDP ratio increased consistently from 55% of
GDP in 2008 to 148% in 2017 37 and although it dropped to 120% in 2019, it increased to 144% by the end
of 2020.38 At the end of the first quarter of 2021 Barbados’s GDP is estimated to have contracted by 17.3%
and the current account deficit is expected to have increased to 7.8%39. The unemployment rate rose to
10.8% as of September 2019 following public sector layoffs of almost 1,000 persons in 2018 stemming from

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40
B
the introduction of the Barbados Economic Recovery and Transformation (BERT) Programme40 41. With the
onset of the pandemic, unemployment rates increased further 42 43 44
Further, Barbados has been increasing in the proportion of the population living in poverty from 15.1% in
2010 to 17.2% in 2016, according to the 2016-2017 Barbados Survey of Living Conditions. While there is no
estimate of monetary poverty since then, it is likely that the poverty rate increased in the two years leading
to 2020, in line with the observed economic slowdown due to job losses, business closures, and decline in
remittances caused by the pandemic. Furthermore, Barbados experienced a rapid spread of COVID-19 in
January 2021 and again in August 2021, with the latter rates including the Delta variant that is more
contagious. The high level of infectious rate of the delta variant is reflected in that statistics as the number
of new daily cases being reported for the month of October 2021 were in the 300s pushing Barbados to be
the fourth country in the world for the 7-day incidence rate (rating report for 6 October 2021)45.
On March 20, 2020, the Prime Minister announced a complement of social, monetary and financial policy
measures in response to the pandemic which increased public expenditure. For instance, a total of USD10
million was allocated for social assistance to allow for an increase in the transfers paid by the Welfare
Department, and the Household Survival Program. BWA was asked to reconnect the water supply for
households that had it cut off. Monetary policy changes included the Central Bank of Barbados reducing its
discount rate for overnight lending from 7% to 2%, it reduced the securities ratio for banks from 17.5% to 5%
and eliminated the 1.5% securities ratio for non-bank deposit taking licensees. The Central Bank also
announced its intention of collateralizing loans for up to six months as liquidity support for licensees, if
required. In terms of financial policy measures, the government requested additional financing support from
international financial institutions, which included the possibility of extending the IMF Extended Facility Fund
(EFE) envelope by USD100 million, to USD390 million, and disbursing a USD80 million policy-based loan
from IDB.
Apart from the recession and the global pandemic, Barbados has experienced two natural hazards in 2021
that has taken an additional toll on the economy. The first is the fallout from the eruption of the La Soufrière
Volcano in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, which erupted in April 2021 resulting in damages and losses
of approximately BBD87.1 million from impacts to a majority of the productive sectors; for example, in
agriculture, up to 40% of crops are expected to have a reduction in yields and the massive clean-up efforts
created significant impact on the water sector, as there was an unprecedented draw on water resources,
which put pressure on reservoir levels and compromised water availability to households and industries that
depend on water for production46.
The second natural hazard was the passage of Hurricane Elsa on 2 July 2021 that resulted in power outages,
fallen trees, flash flooding and damaged roofs. Whilst there were no reported deaths, it was the first hurricane
to hit Barbados in 65 years. No estimation of damage and losses were found but given that there was
significant disruption to businesses during a year where there was already significant disruption to economic
activity, it is safe to say that productivity of sectors was further stretched.
40 In June 2018, in response to the worsening fiscal and external liquidity position, the newly elected government announced the home-grown BERT Plan
aimed at restoring macroeconomic stability. It included the suspension of debt payments and a comprehensive restructuring of domestic and external
debt. The completion of the public debt restructuring in December 2019 reduced economic uncertainty prior to the coronavirus pandemic. Under BERT,
debt is targeted to reach 60 percent of GDP by FY2033/34. In addition, in 2018, Barbados entered into an adjustment program under the IMF’s Extended
Fund Facility. (World Bank (April 2021)
41 Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean. 2019. Pages 2-3
42 World Bank (April 2021)
43 IADB (2020)
44 World Bank (2021)
45 See OSCOVIDA Open Science COVID Analysis available at: https://oscovida.github.io/countries-incidence-rate.html Accessed: 6/10/2021. The rating is
based on the total number of cases over the past 7 days/total population
46 Barbados Loop News (July 10, 2021). Available at: https://barbados.loopnews.com/content/caddle-ashfall-causes-87-million-loss Accessed:
06/10/2021

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41
B
Level of Concessionality
Despite these setbacks, the Government has spent significantly and is still looking to further invest in building
the water sector’s resiliency due to the serious situation of the water infrastructure in Barbados and its role
in underpinning economic activity. The Government of Barbados has utilized funding from its budgetary
allotment47 (Fiscal), the Tourism Enhancement Fund and regional and international funding, including a
USD55 million loan from the IDB, to carry out upgrades and well needed repairs on sections of the systems48.
The 3R-CReWS project is one part of the larger endeavour on the part of the GoB to adapt to the impact of
climate change. The country is facing a climate crisis in which water availability to support the economy is
going to be curtailed and is already impacting food security through the high cost of importation, a situation
that is expected to be increasingly aggravated through the global impact of climate change on food and
supply chains. To counter this, Barbados is seeking to increase food production as an adaptation measure.
This ambition cannot be realised without making water accessible to farmers so it is imperative that means
be found to address current and future water scarcity constraints. At present large volumes of precious water
resources are going to waste through being disposed in the surrounding ocean after a single use. This linear
model of water provision and use has to change to a closed loop through reuse and replenishment.
BWA, the sole water service authority in Barbados, is critical to guaranteeing the water security of Barbados.
However, given the impending impacts of climate change, BWA needs to position itself to continue to
guarantee this security. It is expected that its function in the future will not only be limited to the production
and distribution of water but also demonstrating, raising awareness, and building capacity within localities
about water conservation, storage and treatment. The need for this comes against the background that BWA
needs to improve its efficiency and build greater resilience to climate variability and change. Here, efficiency
refers to minimizing its operation and maintenance costs and increasing the amount of water available to
the public whilst at the same time minimizing its impact on the environment. This project support the
Government of Barbaods and BWA efforts to build resilience in the water sector by closing the cycle of water
use and reuse by introducing reuse of reclaim water.
The use of reclaim water is not widespread and there are some reservations by the public to utilise the
resource hence the investment in upgrading the plants to generate water to quality reuse must be coupled
with enabling environment and public education needed to sustain the paradigm shift in behaviour and
attitude.
The GOB is seeking to provide that basic infrastructure and to use it as a platform to launch further expansion
of the Circular Economy as envisaged in the (Moore, et al., 2014) and the follow-on Partnership for Action
on Green Economy (PAGE) with the United Nations Environment Programme. To this end, the total
envisaged capital investment in provisioning infrastructure for the Bridgetown and South Coast System is
USD183 million in the short-term rising to USD251 million in the medium term. The Table 2 below captures
the relative contributions to capital costs planned for the water sector. Just looking at the capital investments
planned for the Bridgetown System – GCF's proportion is 57% and 37% in the short and medium terms,
respectively. At a national scale, GCF’s contribution amounts to 22% in the short-term, falling to 16% in the
medium term.. Details on the sources of capital funds is depicted in Table 3.
Table 2: Relative Short- and Medium-Term Contributions to Capital Costs
Item Green Climate BWA GoB Total
Fund
Bridgetown Short- Amount USD39.5m USD29.9m - USD69.4m
System term
47 Government of Barbados has recently pledged USD$12,000,000 to assist in the emergency operations for the two wastewater treatment facilities in
Barbados.
48 Amanda Lynch-Foster (2018), The South Coast Sewage Crisis: A Timeline, Nation News, Bridgetown, Barbados. Retrieved on August 5, 2018 from:
http://www.nationnews.com/nationnews/news/121736/south-coast-sewage-crisis-timeline .

--- Table 1 on Page 47 ---
Item |  |  |  |  |  |  | Green Climate
Fund | BWA | GoB | Total
 | Bridgetown |  |  | Short- |  | Amount | USD39.5m | USD29.9m | - | USD69.4m
 | System |  |  | term |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 47 ---
Green Climate
Fund

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42
B
% 57% 43% - 100%
Medium- Amount USD39.5m USD29.9m USD48.0m USD107.4m
term
% 37% 28% 35% 100%
South Short- Amount - USD2.3m USD111.3m USD113.5m
Coast term
System
% - 2% 98% 100%
Medium- Amount - USD2.3m USD131.3m USD133.6m
term
% - 1.7% 98.3% 100%
Total Short- Amount USD39.5m USD32.2m USD111.3m USD183.0m
term
% 22% 18% 60% 100%
Medium- Amount USD39.5m USD32.2m USD179.4m USD251.0m
term
% 16% 13% 71% 100%
Source: Cashman (2021)
Table 3: Source of Funding for Upgrades and Expansions to the Centralized Systems
Source of Funds
Capital Cost Item Green Climate Govt of Govt of Total
Fund Barbados Barbados
BWA Ministry of
Finance
Capital Costs Bridgetown
• Bridgetown Plant Upgrade US$38.682 US$38.682
• Renovations and Upgrades US$1.770
• Renewable Energy System US$1.770
• Reclaimed Water
Distribution US$0.840 US$0.840
• Expansion of Sewer
Collection System US$7.300
o Phase I US$7.300
o Phase II
o Phase III
o Phase IV US$10.070
o Phase V US$4.050 US$10.070
Subtotal US$2.675 US$4.050
US$4.050 US$2.675
US$4.050
US$29.915 US$48.0001 US$48.000
US$39.522 US$48.000 US$117.437
Capital Costs South Coast
• South Coast Plant Upgrade US$64.050 US$64.050
• Renovations and Upgrades
• Renewable Energy System US$1.410 US$1.410
• Rehabilitation of Sea Outfall
• Reclaimed Water US$0.840 US$0.840
Distribution
• Expansion of Sewer
US$12.000 US$12.000
Collection System
Subtotal
US$41.300 US$41.300
US$20.0002 US$20.000
US$2.250 US$131.350 US$133.600
Total US$39.522 US$32.165 US$179.350 US$251.037
15.7% 12.8% 71.5% 100%
Source: Cashman (2021)

--- Table 1 on Page 48 ---
 |  | % | 57% | 43% | - | 100%
 | Medium-
term | Amount | USD39.5m | USD29.9m | USD48.0m | USD107.4m
 |  | % | 37% | 28% | 35% | 100%
South
Coast
System | Short-
term | Amount | - | USD2.3m | USD111.3m | USD113.5m
 |  | % | - | 2% | 98% | 100%
 | Medium-
term | Amount | - | USD2.3m | USD131.3m | USD133.6m
 |  | % | - | 1.7% | 98.3% | 100%
Total | Short-
term | Amount | USD39.5m | USD32.2m | USD111.3m | USD183.0m
 |  | % | 22% | 18% | 60% | 100%
 | Medium-
term | Amount | USD39.5m | USD32.2m | USD179.4m | USD251.0m
 |  | % | 16% | 13% | 71% | 100%

--- Table 2 on Page 48 ---
Medium-
term

--- Table 3 on Page 48 ---
South
Coast
System

--- Table 4 on Page 48 ---
Short-
term

--- Table 5 on Page 48 ---
Medium-
term

--- Table 6 on Page 48 ---
Short-
term

--- Table 7 on Page 48 ---
Medium-
term

--- Table 8 on Page 48 ---
 | Source of Funds |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Capital Cost Item | Capital Cost Item |  | Green Climate
Fund |  |  | Govt of
Barbados
BWA |  |  |  | Govt of |  | Total | Total | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Barbados |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Ministry of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Finance |  |  |  | 
Capital Costs Bridgetown
• Bridgetown Plant Upgrade
• Renovations and Upgrades
• Renewable Energy System
• Reclaimed Water
Distribution
• Expansion of Sewer
Collection System
o Phase I
o Phase II
o Phase III
o Phase IV
o Phase V
Subtotal |  |  |  |  |  | US$1.770
US$7.300
US$10.070
US$4.050
US$2.675
US$4.050
US$29.915 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | US$38.682 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$38.682 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$1.770 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | US$0.840 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$0.840 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$7.300 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$10.070 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$4.050 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$2.675 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$4.050 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$48.0001 |  |  | US$48.000 | 
 |  |  |  | US$39.522 |  |  |  |  |  | US$48.000 |  |  | US$117.437 | 
Capital Costs South Coast
• South Coast Plant Upgrade
• Renovations and Upgrades
• Renewable Energy System
• Rehabilitation of Sea Outfall
• Reclaimed Water
Distribution
• Expansion of Sewer
Collection System
Subtotal |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$64.050 |  |  | US$64.050 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$1.410 |  |  |  |  |  | US$1.410 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$0.840 |  |  |  |  |  | US$0.840 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$12.000 |  |  | US$12.000 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$41.300 |  |  | US$41.300 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$20.0002 |  |  | US$20.000 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | US$2.250 |  |  | US$131.350 |  |  | US$133.600 | 
 | Total |  |  | US$39.522 |  |  | US$32.165 |  |  | US$179.350 |  |  | US$251.037 | 
 |  |  |  | 15.7% |  |  | 12.8% |  |  | 71.5% |  |  | 100% | 

--- Table 9 on Page 48 ---
Green Climate
Fund

--- Table 10 on Page 48 ---
Govt of
Barbados
BWA

--- Table 11 on Page 48 ---
Capital Costs Bridgetown
• Bridgetown Plant Upgrade
• Renovations and Upgrades
• Renewable Energy System
• Reclaimed Water
Distribution
• Expansion of Sewer
Collection System
o Phase I
o Phase II
o Phase III
o Phase IV
o Phase V
Subtotal

--- Table 12 on Page 48 ---


US$1.770




US$7.300



US$10.070
US$4.050
US$2.675
US$4.050

US$29.915

--- Table 13 on Page 48 ---
Capital Costs South Coast
• South Coast Plant Upgrade
• Renovations and Upgrades
• Renewable Energy System
• Rehabilitation of Sea Outfall
• Reclaimed Water
Distribution
• Expansion of Sewer
Collection System
Subtotal

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43
B
1 Future expenditure for expansion of the sewer collection system to service Greater Bridgetown –
post 2030.
2 Expenditure for the expansion of the sewer collection system to service the South Coast area –
2025.
The planned capital expenditure for the expansion of the sewer collection systems for the South Coast and
Greater Bridgetown would occur after the completion of the upgrades to the two Sewage Treatment Plants.
This level of concessional financing, given fiscal space and the programme on which the GOB is embarked
upon, is very appropriate when compared to the overall investment being made. It is critical to the realisation
of the financial and economic benefits that would flow from the programme. The project risk is being
shouldered by the GOB considering that more than 60% of the financing will come from long-term loans.
Given the fiscal position of the GOB and the BWA, and the need to provide a platform for low carbon climate
resilient development means that minimising the debt burden is imperative. In this light the level of
concessionality requested is considered minimal.
The concessionality will benefit the following stakeholders:
• 155 farmers through increased and assured availability of water for irrigation, enabling the expansion
of irrigated agriculture for new entrants,
• Communities through increased employment opportunities,
• Local businesses supporting the farming sector through increased economic activity,
• General population through increased food availability and security,
• The BWA through the reduction in the need to exploit additional water resources to support irrigated
agriculture and placing addition stress on scarce resources while meeting demand for potable water
supply, exacerbated by the impact of climate change,
• Visitors to Barbados through the maintenance and improvement of the marine environment and
ecosystems,
• Visitors and the general population through reduced public health risks associated with deterioration
in bathing water quality,
• The BWA through improved training and capacity to manage the operation and maintenance of
wastewater systems, minimization of the cost of operation and maintenance of the collection systems
and sewage treatment plants, and ability to conform to regulatory requirements concerning quality of
service and water quality regulations,
• The BWA through increased income generation through the sale of treated reclaimed water,
• The Government of Barbados through increased economic activity contributing to revenue income
by maintaining visitor numbers, increased economic activity and employment in the agriculture
sector, and stimulation of the circular economy development opportunities,
• The general population through increased awareness of the impacts of climate change and
incentives encouraging conservation, recycling and reuse.
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

--- Table 1 on Page 49 ---
1 Future expenditure for expansion of the sewer collection system to service Greater Bridgetown –
post 2030.
2 Expenditure for the expansion of the sewer collection system to service the South Coast area –
2025.
The planned capital expenditure for the expansion of the sewer collection systems for the South Coast and
Greater Bridgetown would occur after the completion of the upgrades to the two Sewage Treatment Plants.
This level of concessional financing, given fiscal space and the programme on which the GOB is embarked
upon, is very appropriate when compared to the overall investment being made. It is critical to the realisation
of the financial and economic benefits that would flow from the programme. The project risk is being
shouldered by the GOB considering that more than 60% of the financing will come from long-term loans.
Given the fiscal position of the GOB and the BWA, and the need to provide a platform for low carbon climate
resilient development means that minimising the debt burden is imperative. In this light the level of
concessionality requested is considered minimal.
The concessionality will benefit the following stakeholders:
• 155 farmers through increased and assured availability of water for irrigation, enabling the expansion
of irrigated agriculture for new entrants,
• Communities through increased employment opportunities,
• Local businesses supporting the farming sector through increased economic activity,
• General population through increased food availability and security,
• The BWA through the reduction in the need to exploit additional water resources to support irrigated
agriculture and placing addition stress on scarce resources while meeting demand for potable water
supply, exacerbated by the impact of climate change,
• Visitors to Barbados through the maintenance and improvement of the marine environment and
ecosystems,
• Visitors and the general population through reduced public health risks associated with deterioration
in bathing water quality,
• The BWA through improved training and capacity to manage the operation and maintenance of
wastewater systems, minimization of the cost of operation and maintenance of the collection systems
and sewage treatment plants, and ability to conform to regulatory requirements concerning quality of
service and water quality regulations,
• The BWA through increased income generation through the sale of treated reclaimed water,
• The Government of Barbados through increased economic activity contributing to revenue income
by maintaining visitor numbers, increased economic activity and employment in the agriculture
sector, and stimulation of the circular economy development opportunities,
• The general population through increased awareness of the impacts of climate change and
incentives encouraging conservation, recycling and reuse.
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44
B
Dimensions of Sustainability
The design of this project has strategically included key activities that will foster sustainability even after the
project is implemented. A snapshot of the dimensions of sustainability and the key contributing results and/or
activities of this project are presented in Figure 13. Additional context is provided below, and for more details
on any referenced activity or output, see Section B.3
Economic Sustainability
Multiple revenue
streams -GSC levy, sale
of nutrients and Institutional Sustainability
reclaimed water, Feed-in
Technical training for
Tarrifs
BWA staff Social Sustainability
Increased productivity
Decision support
systems -CMMS, EE,
sewer monitoring Greater food security Environmental Sustainability
and health of the
Updated SOPs and population
Operational manual Strongerpartnership, S gr a o f u e n g d u w ar a d t i e n r g q o u f a lity in Gender Equality
Risk Management leadershipand Zone A
Framework in place professionalismin the Gender sensitive PEA
Optimal staffing structure water sector T w e a r s t t ia e r w y a q te u r a l f i o ty r reuse, c p a ro m g p ra a m ig m n, e in , p ce ri n va tiv te e
Strengthened including aquifer sector engagement
partnerships with private recharge which reduces strategy, water reuse
sector saline intrustion strategy, BWA staffing
Long term strategy for Reduced vulnerabilities structure, project
urban water reuse to the sewer system and webpage, management
therefore reduced of the RAFF, SOPs and
Legislative review to
environmental operational manual
support wastewater
reuse contamination Diverse stakeholder
Reduced GHG consultations
emissions from
installation of renewable
energy and energy
efficiency technologies
Cease disposal of
wastewater to sea via
outfall
Figure 13: Snapshot of the dimensions of sustainability promoted by 3R-CReWS
Economic/Financial Sustainability
This project recognizes that in the face of adverse climate change related weather conditions, it is important
to have systems in place to manage and operate the wastewater infrastructure as efficiently as possible.
Therefore, the following monitoring systems will be implemented by this project to reduce damage to the
wastewater systems and also promote a culture of preventative maintenance that will extend the lifetime of
the equipment, reduce operational costs and increase financial sustainability in the long term: (i) the
development of a robust Computerized Real-time Management System (CMMS) to establish a core
electronic data collection, operation and maintenance programme (ii) the implementation of a sewer
monitoring program to identify sewer segments with a disproportionate amount of wastewater flow to the
incremental number of connections along that segment to mitigate against hydraulic surge impacts and load
variations as a result of major storm events; and (iii) establish on-site laboratory facilities and personnel at
the BSTP to generate influent and effluent water quality data to inform operations control strategies that
optimize operations and reduce energy consumption (See output 1.3).
Also, revenue generation will come from the following four sources, all of which will be institutionalized and
exist beyond the 5-year timeframe for this project49:
49 Cashman, 2021

--- Table 1 on Page 50 ---
Multiple revenue
streams -GSC levy, sale
of nutrients and
reclaimed water, Feed-in
Tarrifs
Increased productivity

--- Table 2 on Page 50 ---
Technical training for
BWA staff |  |  | 
Decision support
systems -CMMS, EE,
sewer monitoring
Updated SOPs and
Operational manual
Risk Management
Framework in place
Optimal staffing structure
Strengthened
partnerships with private
sector
Long term strategy for
urban water reuse
Legislative review to
support wastewater
reuse | Social Sustainability
Greater food security |  | 
 |  |  | 
 | Greater food security |  | 
 | and health of the
population
Strongerpartnership,
leadershipand
professionalismin the
water sector | Environmental Sustainability | 
 |  | Safeguarding of | 
 |  | groundwater quality in
Zone A
Tertiary quality
wastewater for reuse,
including aquifer
recharge which reduces
saline intrustion
Reduced vulnerabilities
to the sewer system and
therefore reduced
environmental
contamination
Reduced GHG
emissions from
installation of renewable
energy and energy
efficiency technologies
Cease disposal of
wastewater to sea via
outfall | Gender Equality
 |  |  | Gender sensitive PEA
 |  |  | campaign, incentive
programme, private
sector engagement
strategy, water reuse
strategy, BWA staffing
structure, project
webpage, management
of the RAFF, SOPs and
operational manual
Diverse stakeholder
consultations

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45
B
i. Income generated from GSC levy,
ii. The sale of nutrients/ fertilizer generated from the treatment of the wastewater,
iii. From Feed-In Tariffs for renewable energy generated onsite from Photo Voltaic solar panels,
iv. Sale of reclaimed treated wastewater.
Using the project’s investment in the PV system as an example, the PVs to be installed will generate 1MW
of PV that will yield 2,063MWh of clean solar power per year. This is enough to power the plant upgrades
and contribute to the local power grid, further reducing Barbados’ dependence on diesel for power and GHG
emissions. The applicable Feed-in Tariff for a PV system of between 1 MW and 5 MW is 23.25 BBD
cents/kWh50, which equates to earnings of USD479,647.50 per year to offset energy bills and free up
resources otherwise used for the electricity bill for maintenance of equipment and staff training, as needed.
Further, the BWA, on behalf of the people and government of Barbados, will take ownership of the major
outputs of this project as such it will be responsible for ensuring the sustainability of this assets and their
operations. As such revenue generated for these investments will be played back into their operation and
maintenance and will be complemented with resources from the Garbage and Sewage Collection Levy
(GSC), which was introduced by GOB in 2019 to cover the cost of operating and maintaining the wastewater
system. Currently, the GSC collects BD$0.25 per household/day to support operation and maintenance of
wastewater system. See the Feasibility and Financial Model for more details on the O&M costs required for
sustainability of this paradigm shift in the utilisation of reclaimed water.
At the national level, it is envisaged that the potential for advancing sustainable development (e.g. see
section D.3 for more details on linkages to the SDGs) through this project will be significant and will result in
Barbados being a more attractive investment destination for both regional and international tourists. Greater
water availability will positively impact residents and businesses throughout Barbados and can directly and
indirectly lead to greater employment.
The successful impetus to the private sector both through the envisaged measures under this project
(Outputs 4.2 and 4.3) and through the development of a circular economy would catalyse support for the
development of business opportunities for the private sector, creating job opportunities and having appositive
multiplier effect for government revenues. To expand on the approach and expectation of the private sector
investment, it is envisioned that the private sector will play a critical role in scaling up/replicating the
decentralized package plants and RO plants along the west coast, implement a waste to energy facility and
use by-products of the wastewater in production of fertilizer. The government is committed to de-risking the
sector to attract private sector investment, including the farmers (e.g. Agricultural Cooperatives), who may
utilise reclaimed water and by-products of wastewater treatment. This Project will expand the RAFF to
support the Private Sector’s engagement in the wastewater sector. For example, adopting technologies that
support the delivery and utilization of tertiary reclaimed water. In addition, the RAFF is seen as critical
element to engaging the private sector; however, the existing RAFF needs to examine and expand to
consider how resources could flow in and out to support activities related to the adoption of decentralize
treatment systems as well as dual pumping, inter alia.
Institutional Sustainability
This project addresses institutional strengthening and sustainability through the following key activities:
i. Ensuring that up-to-date training is provided to all BWA staff to create a skilled and competent human
resource pool to manage the upgraded STP (Activity 3.1.1)
50 Ibid

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46
B
ii. Integrating decision support systems such as the electronic CMMS information system, a sewer
monitoring programme, automated controls for improved energy efficiency, on-site laboratory to
inform better decision-making and planning by the BWA (All of output 1.3) and a risk management
framework (Activity 3.1.3)
iii. Updating the SOPs and Operational Manual to address the requirements of the upgraded system,
preventative maintenance, operator safety etc., and training on same to ensure there is institutional
knowledge and understanding of the operational procedures (Activities 3.1.2 and 3.1.1, respectively)
iv. Strengthening BWA’s partnerships with the private sector, civil society and public through a private
sector engagement strategy and action plan, PEA programme, expansion of the RAFF and a
designated project website (Activities 4.2.1, 4.3.2, 4.2.3 and 4.3.3, respectively)
v. Establishing a gender responsive water and sanitation master plan to guide long term planning for
the sustainable management of the water sector and for further strengthening resilience to climate
risks (Activity 4.1.2)
One of the main consideration in the development of the project was the capacity of the BWA to sustainable
operate and maintain the outputs of this project. The conclusion to retain a CAS treatment process
considered the O&M cost as well as the capacity of existing BWA staff. The feasibility study identify that the
CAS had the least O&M cost and the cost of training (re-training) BWA staff would be a fraction of the cost
if an another treatment process was to be adopted. Further, the BWA already has some capacity to manage
CAS system up to secondary treatment. By updating the SOPs and providing the incremental training the
capacity of the BWA will be enhance to support the operations and maintenance of the tertiary wastewater
treatment system. The BWA is committed to maintaining the human capacity necessary to sustain the
operations of the upgraded plants.
Social sustainability
Enhancing stakeholders’ (private sector, farmers, individuals): (I) engagement and buy-in (through the
engagement strategy and action plan) (ii) awareness and understanding of climate change and the water
sector (through the PEA and training programmes), and (iii) accessibility to funding resources (through the
RAFF) will collectively change the culture of the water sector in Barbados towards stronger partnerships,
leadership and professionalism that is needed to continually innovate and adapt to climate change, as well
as improve individuals’ well-being and economic viability. These are key elements for promoting social
sustainability after the project’s resources are used up. As noted above, the water and sanitation master
plan (Activity 4.1.2) to be developed with ensure there is a long-term plan in place to further strengthen the
well-being of the population as it relates to the water sector. Also notable is that agriculture continues to
compete with other sectors for scarce resources such as water, land, labour and capital, and the GoB has
increased its call for greater domestic food production through new and improved methods of farming as a
response to climate change. Greater water availability, for irrigation purposes, should also lead to improved
food security and health and well-being of the population. The outputs of Component 4 are critical to social
acceptance and spur demand. The component target farmers and communities. In particular, the
development of incentive programme and public awareness. During consultations with farmers, there was
overwhelming consensus coming out of the discussions. Farmers are supportive of the use of treated
wastewater. Farmers have been experiencing the impact of prolonged dry periods, which they say are
happening more frequently and they are losing income. So having access to water would be a great relief
to them. Some cited the benefit of the nutrients in the wastewater (See Baseline Report Wastewater
Demand and Market Analysis).
Environmental Sustainability
This project has the potential to significantly increase overall environmental sustainability through the
following activities:
i. Producing tertiary quality reclaimed water that is safer for the environment (Activities 1.1.1 and 1.2.1).
Previous studies by Irvine, Oxenford and Suckoo (2021) have demonstrated the positive impact that

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47
B
the implementation of centralised wastewater systems have on the marine environment. The higher
level of treatment and operation to be achieved through the upgrading, training and capacity building
will ensure that the two Sewage Treatment Works continue to make a positive contribution51
ii. Safeguarding of groundwater quality in Zone A through the installation of two decentralized
wastewater collection and treatment systems (Activity 1.4.1)
iii. Enhancing knowledge for the expansion of wastewater treatment technologies along the west coast
for augmenting water supply and protecting the west coast ecosystem (Activity 3.2.1)
iv. Frequently monitoring effluent characteristics and quality prior to reuse (aquifer recharge and/or
agriculture reuse) which will safeguard groundwater quality and agriculture soil quality (Activity 1.3.2)
v. Implementing a sewer monitoring programme that can reduce or mitigate vulnerabilities from
excessive flooding and/or stormwater runoff that can otherwise result in environmental pollution from
“overflowing” of the sewage system (Activity 1.3.1)
vi. Installing renewable energy and energy efficient technologies (PV, automated controls and sludge
dewatering) that will reduce GHG emissions (all of output 2.1)
vii. Promoting water conservation, recycle, re-use options (Activities 4.2.2, 4.3.1 and 4.3.2)
In summary, with respect to Circular Economy, the use of reclaimed water provides a positive means of
reducing demands on water resources. If this facility is not developed, then demand for water would have to
be met through greater groundwater abstraction, depleting aquifers and enhancing the risk of saline
intrusion.
The Government of Barbados through the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security have determined the
TDS concentration of reclaimed wastewater intended for agricultural irrigation applications must be less than
450 mg/L. Ayers and Westcot in 1985 (See Feasibility Study), has been repeatedly re-referenced for the
Water Quality for Agriculture guidance, which indicates that regardless of the nature of the soil or application,
a TDS of less than 450 mg/L is inconsequential, and TDS concentrations of up to 2000 mg/L may have a
slight to moderate impact on soil that can be managed or addressed. This water quality standard takes into
consideration the potential impact on existing irrigation systems that minimize the negative impact on the
efficiency of the irrigation systems. For example, sprinkler systems are not recommended. However, drip
irrigation is recommended and supported due to the characteristics of the TDS standard set by the
authorities. This is intended to minimizing the chances of system clogs. As part of the monitoring of water
quality process, the follow activities are critical:
• Activity 1.2.1: Install reverse osmosis (RO) membrane filtration systems to reduce the total dissolved
solids concentration of the reclaimed water produced at the BSTP
• Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring programme that will include the installation of flow
measurement and rain-gauging equipment at the BSTP to identify and address sources of inflow and
infiltration to the sewer. Mechanisms that identify and reduce or mitigate vulnerabilities in the
wastewater collection systems will also be investigated.
• Activity 1.3.2: Establish on-site laboratory facilities and personnel at the BSTP to generate influent
and effluent water quality data to inform operations control strategies that optimize operations and
reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions.
• Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Computerized Real-time Management System (CMMS) at the BSTP to
inform decision making and climate resilient building
• Activity 1.2.1 is important for bringing down the TDS levels in the water; whereas, Activity 1.3.2 will
support real time testing and monitoring of water quality, with protocols for shut off if there are
unfortunate contaminants detected. 1.3.3 will allow for real time monitoring and automatic and remote
shut-down of the system if need. This include the implementation of meters.
51 Cashman (2021)

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48
B
The planning for long-term assessment and monitoring of residual in the soil under irrigation by reclaimed
water has already started. The Ministry of Health and Ministry of Agriculture is developing protocol and
procedure for monitoring medium to long-term changes in soil chemistry. This aspect was discussed during
stakeholder consultation sessions and meetings of the Technical Working Group. Further, the monitoring of
water quality standard will be carried out firstly by BWA at the plant level (operational standards) and the
Ministry of Agriculture, in collaboration with Ministry of Health, through the Analytical Services Laboratory
will conduct periodic testing and analyse water and wastewater samples. The Ministry of Environment
through the Environment Protection Department, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Ministry of
Agriculture and Food Security, will monitor the water quality and enforce codes governing usage of this
treated wastewater.
Gender Equality
The issue of gender equality is high on the agenda for this project because issues emerging from the gender
analysis point to the fact that a gender gap exists within the BWA related to more men than women being
involved in the technical work of the Wastewater Sector Infrastructure and Services and that BWA appears
to lack the human resource, institutional and information capacity to identify the causes of vulnerability
among women and other vulnerable groups. The youth and community members will be considered beyond
consultation for training as they will form an integral part of the Training and outreach activities, which is
expected to result in the long-lasting paradigm shift. In addition, the public education plan and campaign
being prepared will address all sectors of the community, users of reclaimed water and potential users of
the produce or services, with targeted messages and sector specific town hall meetings and training.
The project, especially the co-financing component will continue to conform to the BWA’s recruitment policy
which does not discriminate based on gender, which is also in line with the GCF’s and AE’s policies and
guidelines on gender and social inclusion. In addition, as an example, the Project will conduct Gender
training with BWA staff and key stakeholders linked to Activity 3.1.1, inter alia, which aim for a 1:1
proportional representation of both genders engaged in these activities. The SOPs of the AE and the BWA
include provisions for representation of both genders as the Gender Action Plan aims to be congruent with
the obligations of the established Gender Action Commitments of the Green Climate Fund, which states: “By
adopting a gender-sensitive approach in its mandate on climate change, the Fund commits to contributing
to gender equality, as enshrined in international agreements and national constitutions, and other human
rights agreements.”
Therefore, the following key activities are earmarked for this project to strengthen gender equality within
BWA’s operations and the overall management of the water sector in Barbados:
i. There will be stakeholder consultations throughout the lifetime of the project that will aim to
engage women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings (all Components)
ii. There will be social and gender safeguards to ensure that women, children and the vulnerable
are protected during community infrastructure improvements (Activity 1.4.1)
iii. There will be gender sensitive community engagement to ensure that needs of both
female and male headed households are incorporated when installing decentralized
wastewater treatment systems in the Belle Zone A area and Bellevue Gap Zone A
(Activity 1.4.1)
iv. There will be a gender sensitivity training programme for BWA staff (Activity 3.1.1)
v. The updated SOPs and operational manual to include gender and social inclusion considerations,
including provisions of the prevention of SGBV (Activity 3.1.2)
vi. The legislative review will ensure to promote gender equality and limit gender biased legistliative
provisions (Activity 4.1.1)

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49
B
vii. The water and sanitation master plan Faignudr et 2h e engagement strategy for the private sector will
collectively mainstream gender and promote women empowerment, as appropriate (Activities
4.1.2 and 4.2.1)
viii. A gender sensitive and socially inclusive incentive programme will be developed to encourage
water conservation, recycle, re-use (Activity 4.2.2)
ix. The management of the expanded RAFF will ensure to promote gender equality as a requirement
(Activity 4.2.3)
x. The PEA campaign will be designed to be gender sensitive (Activity 4.3.2)
xi. The project’s webpage will also ensure to report project results disaggregated by gender, where
possible (Activity 4.3.3)
See Section G.2 for more details on gender mainstreaming in the 3r-CReWS

--- Table 1 on Page 55 ---
vii. The water and sanitation master plan Faignudr et 2h e engagement strategy for the private sector will
collectively mainstream gender and promote women empowerment, as appropriate (Activities
4.1.2 and 4.2.1)
viii. A gender sensitive and socially inclusive incentive programme will be developed to encourage
water conservation, recycle, re-use (Activity 4.2.2)
ix. The management of the expanded RAFF will ensure to promote gender equality as a requirement
(Activity 4.2.3)
x. The PEA campaign will be designed to be gender sensitive (Activity 4.3.2)
xi. The project’s webpage will also ensure to report project results disaggregated by gender, where
possible (Activity 4.3.3)
See Section G.2 for more details on gender mainstreaming in the 3r-CReWS


=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50
C
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested
Total amount Currency
GCF funding
(i + ii + iii + iv + v
39,390,913 USD
+ vi + vii)
GCF financial
Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
instrument
(i) Senior loans Enter amount Enter years Enter years Enter %
(ii) Subordinated
Enter amount Enter years Enter years Enter %
loans
Enter % equity
(iii) Equity Enter amount
return
(iv) Guarantees Enter amount Enter years
(v) Reimbursable
Enter amount
grants
(vi) Grants 39,390,913
(vii) Results-based
Enter amount
payments
(b) Co-financing Total amount Currency
information 10,608,150 USD
Name of Financial Tenor & Seniorit
Amount Currency Pricing
institution instrument grace y
GrantGr N/A N/A
Barbados Water ant Enter
10,608,150 USD ($)
Authority (BWA)
(c) Total Amount Currency
financing
(c) = (a)+(b) 49,999,063 USD
Tax Exemptions
Goods and Services procured with the GCF Proceeds for the implementation of the
Project will be exempt from eligible taxes and duties accorded under Article XIX and
Article XXVI of the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) Act, 2015
and Article 19 of the Agreement Establishing the Caribbean Community Climate Change
Centre (CCCCC). The BWA, as statutory body, also enjoys tax exemptions from eligible
taxes and duties. However, any applicable taxes that is not covered under the instrument
establishing the respective entities, the project shall be borne these cost and the Fund
(d) Other
financing shall not be required to make any additional contribution for the payment of taxes during
arrangements the implementation of the Project.
and
contributions Parallel Financing
(max. 250 words, The BSTP is public owned and is managed by the BWA, which is a Statutory
approximately
Body, charged with supplying the island with potable water as well as the
0.5 page)
provision of wastewater treatment and disposal services to the sewered areas of
Bridgetown and the South Coast. The BWA is also responsible for the monitoring,
assessment, control and protection of the water resources in the public’s
interest. Recalling Table 3; there is approximately USD133 Million in upgrades
planned for the SCSTP. In an effort to mitigate the effects of climate change on
the island’s potable and non-potable water supply and increase resilience to
climate change and reduce the impact of the primary treated effluent on the

--- Table 1 on Page 56 ---
FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) Requested |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF funding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (i + ii + iii + iv + v |  | 39,390,913 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | USD |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | + vi + vii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF financial |  | Amount |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  |  | Pricing |  |  | 
 | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(i) Senior loans |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  |  | 
 | (ii) Subordinated |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  |  | 
 | loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(iii) Equity |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Enter % equity
return |  |  | 
 | (iv) Guarantees |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (v) Reimbursable |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vi) Grants |  |  | 39,390,913 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vii) Results-based |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | payments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (b) Co-financing |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | information |  | 10,608,150 |  |  |  |  |  |  | USD |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Name of |  |  | Financial |  | Amount |  | Currency |  |  | Tenor & |  |  | Pricing |  |  | Seniorit | 
 | institution |  |  | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  | grace |  |  |  |  |  | y | 
Barbados Water
Authority (BWA) |  |  | GrantGr
ant |  |  | 10,608,150 |  | USD ($) |  | Enter |  |  |  | N/A |  | N/A |  | 
 | (c) Total |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 49,999,063 |  |  |  |  |  |  | USD |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (c) = (a)+(b) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(d) Other
financing
arrangements
and
contributions
(max. 250 words,
approximately
0.5 page) |  |  | Tax Exemptions
Goods and Services procured with the GCF Proceeds for the implementation of the
Project will be exempt from eligible taxes and duties accorded under Article XIX and
Article XXVI of the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) Act, 2015
and Article 19 of the Agreement Establishing the Caribbean Community Climate Change
Centre (CCCCC). The BWA, as statutory body, also enjoys tax exemptions from eligible
taxes and duties. However, any applicable taxes that is not covered under the instrument
establishing the respective entities, the project shall be borne these cost and the Fund
shall not be required to make any additional contribution for the payment of taxes during
the implementation of the Project.
Parallel Financing
The BSTP is public owned and is managed by the BWA, which is a Statutory
Body, charged with supplying the island with potable water as well as the
provision of wastewater treatment and disposal services to the sewered areas of
Bridgetown and the South Coast. The BWA is also responsible for the monitoring,
assessment, control and protection of the water resources in the public’s
interest. Recalling Table 3; there is approximately USD133 Million in upgrades
planned for the SCSTP. In an effort to mitigate the effects of climate change on
the island’s potable and non-potable water supply and increase resilience to
climate change and reduce the impact of the primary treated effluent on the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 56 ---
Barbados Water
Authority (BWA)

--- Table 3 on Page 56 ---
(d) Other
financing
arrangements
and
contributions
(max. 250 words,
approximately
0.5 page)

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51
C
marine environment, BWA secured funding for the upgrade of the SCSTP to
tertiary treatment level that is suitable for crop irrigation and recharge of
groundwater aquifers through a newly designed and constructed water
reclamation distribution network system. Specifically, non-potable water
reclamation involving use of reclaimed water for agricultural food crop irrigation
in River Plantation area and for non-potable aquifer recharge in Christ Church
aquifer will be advanced. Properly managed water reclamation projects are and
will continue to be essential for the island’s sustainable water resource
management and sustainable development.
In-Kind
Contributions are not identified in the budget above; however it is envisioned that
during implementation, the project will benefit from some in-kind contribution from
the Government of Barbados and the BWA through the provisions of
meeting/training rooms and the utilities and facilities to facilitate capacity building
and sensitization events. Further, the BWA mechanical machinery and
equipment are available and required these may be provided to support the
smooth implementation of the project activities. The BWA and CCCCC will keep
track of these in-kind contribution and report on these as deemed necessary.
C.2. Financing by component
Indicative cost GCF financing Co-financing
Component Output million USD ($) Amount Financial Amount Financial
Name of
Instrumen Instrumen
million million USD Institutions
t t
USD ($) ($)
Output 1.1 The
Bridgetown Sewage
Treatment Plant
(BSTP) is upgraded 25,672,660 25,672,660 Grants -
to treat wastewater
to a tertiary water-
quality standard.
Output 1.2 Tertiary
wastewater available
8,637,000 2,530,000 Grants 6,107,000.00 Grants GOB/BWA
to supplement non-
Component potable use
1: Output 1.3 Decision-
Wastewater support tools and
Reclamation infrastructure
and Reuse implemented to
mitigate potential 1,003,375 1,003,375 Grants
climate change risks
to the wastewater
collection and
treatment systems
Output 1.4
Decentralized
treatment plants or 3,230,000 - 3,230,000.00 Grants GOB/BWA
cluster treatment
facilities installed
Component Output 2.1 Energy
2: Renewable efficiency and
Energy and renewable energy 3,264,000 3,264,000 Grants
Energy technologies
Efficiency in implemented

--- Table 1 on Page 57 ---
 |  |  | marine environment, BWA secured funding for the upgrade of the SCSTP to
tertiary treatment level that is suitable for crop irrigation and recharge of
groundwater aquifers through a newly designed and constructed water
reclamation distribution network system. Specifically, non-potable water
reclamation involving use of reclaimed water for agricultural food crop irrigation
in River Plantation area and for non-potable aquifer recharge in Christ Church
aquifer will be advanced. Properly managed water reclamation projects are and
will continue to be essential for the island’s sustainable water resource
management and sustainable development.
In-Kind
Contributions are not identified in the budget above; however it is envisioned that
during implementation, the project will benefit from some in-kind contribution from
the Government of Barbados and the BWA through the provisions of
meeting/training rooms and the utilities and facilities to facilitate capacity building
and sensitization events. Further, the BWA mechanical machinery and
equipment are available and required these may be provided to support the
smooth implementation of the project activities. The BWA and CCCCC will keep
track of these in-kind contribution and report on these as deemed necessary. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
C.2. Financing by component |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component | Output |  |  | Indicative cost |  |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  | Amount |  |  | Financial
Instrumen
t |  | Amount |  |  | Financial
Instrumen
t | Name of
Institutions |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million |  |  |  |  | million USD |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  | ($) |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component
1:
Wastewater
Reclamation
and Reuse | Output 1.1 The
Bridgetown Sewage
Treatment Plant
(BSTP) is upgraded
to treat wastewater
to a tertiary water-
quality standard. |  | 25,672,660 |  |  | 25,672,660 |  |  | Grants |  | - |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Output 1.2 Tertiary
wastewater available
to supplement non-
potable use |  | 8,637,000 |  |  | 2,530,000 |  |  | Grants |  | 6,107,000.00 |  |  | Grants | GOB/BWA |  | 
 |  | Output 1.3 Decision-
support tools and
infrastructure
implemented to
mitigate potential
climate change risks
to the wastewater
collection and
treatment systems |  | 1,003,375 |  |  | 1,003,375 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Output 1.4
Decentralized
treatment plants or
cluster treatment
facilities installed |  | 3,230,000 |  |  | - |  |  |  |  | 3,230,000.00 |  |  | Grants | GOB/BWA |  | 
 | Component
2: Renewable
Energy and
Energy
Efficiency in | Output 2.1 Energy
efficiency and
renewable energy
technologies
implemented |  | 3,264,000 |  |  | 3,264,000 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 57 ---
Financial
Instrumen
t

--- Table 3 on Page 57 ---
Financial
Instrumen
t

--- Table 4 on Page 57 ---
Name of
Institutions

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52
C
Wastewater
Treatment
Output 3.1 Improved
technical capabilities
of waste water
technical personnel
Component
to operate, maintain
3:
and monitor and 1,139,056 1,139,056 Grants -
Capabilities
implement climate
to operate,
change adaptation
maintain,
planning strategies
expand and
for wastewater
monitor
management
wastewater
Output 3.2 A
and related
strategic plan is
renewable
developed to guide
energy
technologies
the replication of the
486,000 486,000 Grants -
brackish water RO
treatment plant
along the west coast
corridor
Output 4.1:
Governance and
planning roadmap
Component
developed to enable 445,000 149,000 Grants 296,000.00 Grants GOB/BWA
4: Capacities
wastewater reuse in
(regulatory,
the public and
governance,
private sectors.
awareness),
Ouput 4.2:
buy-in and
Mechanisms
ownership
developed/expande
within the
d to encourage the
private and
adoption of
public 352,000 352,000 Grants -
wastewater
sectors
treatment and reuse
improved for
applications by
climate
private individuals
resilient
and businesses
development
Output 4.3 Gender
planning for
Sensitive Public
the water
sector
Education and
858,785 858,785 Grants
Awareness
Campaign
Implemented.
Project Management
2,220,280 1,750,280 Grants 470,000.00 Grants GOB/BWA
Resources
Monitoring and
Project
evaluative data
Management 160,000 160,000 Grants
generation and
collection activities
Financial Audits 150,000 150,000 Grants
Indicative total cost (USD) 47,618,156 37,515,155.51 10,103,000.00
Contingency
* 2,380,908 1,875,757.78 505,150.00
Total 49,999,063 39,390,913.29 10,608,150.00

--- Table 1 on Page 58 ---
Wastewater
Treatment |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Component
3:
Capabilities
to operate,
maintain,
expand and
monitor
wastewater
and related
renewable
energy
technologies | Output 3.1 Improved
technical capabilities
of waste water
technical personnel
to operate, maintain
and monitor and
implement climate
change adaptation
planning strategies
for wastewater
management | 1,139,056 | 1,139,056 | Grants | - |  | 
 | Output 3.2 A
strategic plan is
developed to guide
the replication of the
brackish water RO
treatment plant
along the west coast
corridor | 486,000 | 486,000 | Grants | - |  | 
Component
4: Capacities
(regulatory,
governance,
awareness),
buy-in and
ownership
within the
private and
public
sectors
improved for
climate
resilient
development
planning for
the water
sector | Output 4.1:
Governance and
planning roadmap
developed to enable
wastewater reuse in
the public and
private sectors. | 445,000 | 149,000 | Grants | 296,000.00 | Grants | GOB/BWA
 | Ouput 4.2:
Mechanisms
developed/expande
d to encourage the
adoption of
wastewater
treatment and reuse
applications by
private individuals
and businesses | 352,000 | 352,000 | Grants | - |  | 
 | Output 4.3 Gender
Sensitive Public
Education and
Awareness
Campaign
Implemented. | 858,785 | 858,785 | Grants |  |  | 
Project
Management | Project Management
Resources | 2,220,280 | 1,750,280 | Grants | 470,000.00 | Grants | GOB/BWA
 | Monitoring and
evaluative data
generation and
collection activities | 160,000 | 160,000 | Grants |  |  | 
 | Financial Audits | 150,000 | 150,000 | Grants |  |  | 
Indicative total cost (USD) |  | 47,618,156 | 37,515,155.51 |  | 10,103,000.00 |  | 
Contingency
* |  | 2,380,908 | 1,875,757.78 |  | 505,150.00 |  | 
Total |  | 49,999,063 | 39,390,913.29 |  | 10,608,150.00 |  | 

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53
C
* Contingency is expected to cover unforeseeable expenditures and changes related unforeseen adjustment in prices,
particularly inflationary pressures that outside the control of the project, and unpredictable events during project
implementation which do not constitute a Major Change. Approval, in writing, for the use of contingency on a case by
case basis is required from the GCF.
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building
Yes ☒ No ☐
activities?
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology
Yes ☒ No ☐
development/transfer?
Capacity Building Activities
Outcomes 3 and 4 of this project will include targeted capacity building activities. Under outcome 3
there will be specialized and customized training for BWA employees to be able to operate, manage
and maintain the upgraded systems installed under this project (Activity 3.1.1). This includes training
in the PV installations, the CAS equipment upgrades, RO technology implemented, decentralized
treatment sites equipment installed, automated systems installed such as the CMMS, the sewer
monitoring instrumentation and the updated SOPs, and the operational manual and risk management
framework to be implemented (See Activities 3.1.2 and 3.1.3, respectively). There will also be training
in SCADA, which is currently in place but not operable since the BWA does not have the technical
knowledge or expertise to maintain it. Also, there will be a University of the West Indies Gender
Sensitivity Training program developed for BWA that examines climate change and the nexus with
the water sector and gender considerations. Notable is that some of these trainings will also be open
to the private sector, as appropriate, to support the sustainability of the investments made through
the RAFF mechanism. This Project will expand the RAFF to support the Private Sector’s engagement
in the wastewater sector. For example, adopting technologies that support the delivery and utilization
of tertiary reclaimed water. In addition, the RAFF is seen as critical element to engaging the private
sector; however, the existing RAFF needs to examine and expand to consider how resources could
flow in and out to support activities related to the adoption of decentralize treatment systems as well
as dual pumping, inter alia.
Under outcome 4, there will be capacity building at two levels: (i) re-education of communities on how
to use reclaimed water and best practice for agriculture and other non-potable uses, teachers,
students, farmers and businesses about the impact of climate change on water resources and their
impact on water quality and quantity (availability as well as the importance of water reuse activities
and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to building climate resilience (Activity 4.3.1); and (ii) a gender-
sensitive public education and awareness campaign examining the same issues of climate resilience
and the water sector and the role of wastewater treatment and reuse, conservation, recycling etc
(Activity 4.3.2). The key difference is that the first capacity building activity will be more structured,
such as short courses, whilst the second will be more mass media type information products. See
Section B.3 (Project description) for more details on these activities.
The combined budget for Activities 3.1.1, 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 is USD1.3 million.
Technology Transfer Activities
Majority of outcomes 1 and 2 of this project are heavily focused on technology solutions and
innovations that are instrumental for the move towards a low-emission and climate resilient pathway
water and wastewater sector in Barbados. Outcome 1 is primarily focused on upgrades to wastewater
treatment that will improve its quality to a level that is eligible for reuse functions including aquifer
recharge and irrigation of agricultural land. The upgrade option selected is the Conventional Activated
Sludge (Activity 1.1.1) with a Reverse Osmosis (RO) Plant (Activity 1.2.1) because of (I) lowest capital
cost, (ii) lowest power consumption & least Green House Gas associated emissions, (iii) lowest
expected operator staff time (operating cost), (iv) most familiar technology for operations staff, (v)
ability to meet the Barbados government’s proposed reuse water quality standard, (vi) and simplest
use of existing infrastructure and process components for the upgrade to the BSTP. Outcome 1 also

--- Table 1 on Page 59 ---
* Contingency is expected to cover unforeseeable expenditures and changes related unforeseen adjustment in prices,
particularly inflationary pressures that outside the control of the project, and unpredictable events during project
implementation which do not constitute a Major Change. Approval, in writing, for the use of contingency on a case by
case basis is required from the GCF. |  |  |  | 
 | C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) |  |  | 
 | C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ | 
 | activities? |  |  | 
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ | 
 | development/transfer? |  |  | 
Capacity Building Activities
Outcomes 3 and 4 of this project will include targeted capacity building activities. Under outcome 3
there will be specialized and customized training for BWA employees to be able to operate, manage
and maintain the upgraded systems installed under this project (Activity 3.1.1). This includes training
in the PV installations, the CAS equipment upgrades, RO technology implemented, decentralized
treatment sites equipment installed, automated systems installed such as the CMMS, the sewer
monitoring instrumentation and the updated SOPs, and the operational manual and risk management
framework to be implemented (See Activities 3.1.2 and 3.1.3, respectively). There will also be training
in SCADA, which is currently in place but not operable since the BWA does not have the technical
knowledge or expertise to maintain it. Also, there will be a University of the West Indies Gender
Sensitivity Training program developed for BWA that examines climate change and the nexus with
the water sector and gender considerations. Notable is that some of these trainings will also be open
to the private sector, as appropriate, to support the sustainability of the investments made through
the RAFF mechanism. This Project will expand the RAFF to support the Private Sector’s engagement
in the wastewater sector. For example, adopting technologies that support the delivery and utilization
of tertiary reclaimed water. In addition, the RAFF is seen as critical element to engaging the private
sector; however, the existing RAFF needs to examine and expand to consider how resources could
flow in and out to support activities related to the adoption of decentralize treatment systems as well
as dual pumping, inter alia.
Under outcome 4, there will be capacity building at two levels: (i) re-education of communities on how
to use reclaimed water and best practice for agriculture and other non-potable uses, teachers,
students, farmers and businesses about the impact of climate change on water resources and their
impact on water quality and quantity (availability as well as the importance of water reuse activities
and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to building climate resilience (Activity 4.3.1); and (ii) a gender-
sensitive public education and awareness campaign examining the same issues of climate resilience
and the water sector and the role of wastewater treatment and reuse, conservation, recycling etc
(Activity 4.3.2). The key difference is that the first capacity building activity will be more structured,
such as short courses, whilst the second will be more mass media type information products. See
Section B.3 (Project description) for more details on these activities.
The combined budget for Activities 3.1.1, 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 is USD1.3 million.
Technology Transfer Activities
Majority of outcomes 1 and 2 of this project are heavily focused on technology solutions and
innovations that are instrumental for the move towards a low-emission and climate resilient pathway
water and wastewater sector in Barbados. Outcome 1 is primarily focused on upgrades to wastewater
treatment that will improve its quality to a level that is eligible for reuse functions including aquifer
recharge and irrigation of agricultural land. The upgrade option selected is the Conventional Activated
Sludge (Activity 1.1.1) with a Reverse Osmosis (RO) Plant (Activity 1.2.1) because of (I) lowest capital
cost, (ii) lowest power consumption & least Green House Gas associated emissions, (iii) lowest
expected operator staff time (operating cost), (iv) most familiar technology for operations staff, (v)
ability to meet the Barbados government’s proposed reuse water quality standard, (vi) and simplest
use of existing infrastructure and process components for the upgrade to the BSTP. Outcome 1 also |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54
C
includes investments in decision support tools, which include a sewer monitoring programme that is
equipped with flow measurement and rain-gauging equipment at both the Bridgetown and South
Coast Sewage Treatment Plants to identify and address sources of inflow and infiltration to the sewer
(Activity 1.3.1) and a Computerized Real-time Management System (CMMS) to inform decision
making and climate resilient building (Activity 1.3.3). The final output for outcome 1 (output 1.4) is
highly innovative in nature since the GOB will be piloting decentralized wastewater collection and
treatment systems at two “Zone A” locations to produce reclaimed water for domestic/commercial
non-potable applications. The lessons emerging from this output will be critical for scaling up and
replicating this approach to wastewater management in communities not connected to the STPs (i.e.
95% of Barbados) as well as in other Caribbean countries
All of outcome 2 (installations of PV, automated controls for energy efficiency (EE) and sludge
dewatering) is about renewable energy (RE) and energy efficient technology transfer, which not only
supports the achievement of GCF’s low-emission impact potential, but the GOB’s goal to have zero
emission by 2030 as enshrined in the Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP) 2019-2030.
A key element of technology transfer is having the right incentives and legal framework in place. In
this regard, activities 4.1.1 (legislative review) and 4.2.2 (incentive programme) can be considered
as key.
The combined budget for Activities 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 1.3.1, 1.3.3, 1.4.1, 4.1.1, 4.2.2, 4.3.2 and all of
outcome 2 is USD42.9 million.

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55
D
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Contribution to the Fund’s Objectives
The 3R-CReWS project is directly aligned to the Fund’s strategic vision of promoting the paradigm shift
towards low-emission and climate-resilient development pathways in the context of sustainable development
and supporting developing countries, like Barbados, to implement the requirements of the Paris Agreement
and the UNFCCC. Overall, the project is anticipated to have an impact on 136,220 direct beneficiaries and
indirectly benefit 141,601 persons. Given the importance of water to the health sector and the two main
productive sectors of Barbados - agriculture and tourism, the importance of this project for promoting
sustainable development is underscored.
Mitigation Impact
It is expected that this project can avoid about 35,275 tCO e over 25 years (See Annex 22 for calculations).
2
The policy and regulatory environment in place in Barbados are currently highly conducive for the use of
renewable energy technologies. The GOB is pursuing a goal of zero emission by 2030 and the policy for a
climate-neutral Barbados is regulated in the Electric Light and Power Act (ELPA), which prescribes feed-in
tariffs related to solar, land-based wind, anaerobic digestion and solid biomass. This project will maximize
the renewable energy sources that can benefit from feed-in tariffs whilst also facilitating a shift to low-
emission sustainable development pathway in Barbados. The noted CO equivalent emission reduction from
2
this project is purely based on the 1 MW of PV to be installed to offset the increased power consumption
associated with the upgrades. However, it is also notable that EE will be increased through the installation
of variable frequency drives, EE pumps and a sludge dewatering system. There is not adequate information
available at the proposal stage, such as characteristics of the sludge, to estimate reduced emissions due to
EE; however, the monitoring plan for the project aims to track the changes in EE over the lifespan of the
project.
Also notable is that the BSTP is estimated to consume about 4,500 kWh of energy per day which equates
to energy costs of USD470,000 per year52. Currently there is 0.18MW of PV power installed and through this
project, an additional 1MW of PV panels will mounted to off-set the demands of the upgraded system.
Adaptation Impact
All of the components of this project are designed to contribute to increased climate-resilient sustainable
development with emphasis on the water and wastewater sector. The following specific details per
component of this project should be noted and how they promote climate-resilient sustainable development
in Barbados:
• Component 1 will not only install wastewater treatment technologies that are energy efficient, but
several decision support tools will be implemented to support the management and maintenance of
the upgraded STP, particularly for hydrometeorological hazards such as rainfall, including severe
storms. The decentralized package collection and treatment systems that will be constructed in two
communities located in Zone A will address severe water shortages for approximately 22553
households and is considered to be a “good demonstration” of strengthening the adaptive capacities
of individuals and businesses to climate risks associated with water availability
52 Cashman, 2021
53 The 225 households are to benefit in terms of “reducing water shortages” entails direct and indirect benefits from the decentralized treatment facilities
by establishing access to wastewater treatment facilities, thus resulting in reclaimed water for non-potable purposes and reducing the strain on the
potable water resources. In addition, this also increases their resilience to water shortages, as additional non-potable water resources would be available.

--- Table 1 on Page 61 ---
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA |  | 
 | This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the | 
 | GCF’s Initial Investment Framework. | 
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | Contribution to the Fund’s Objectives | 
 | The 3R-CReWS project is directly aligned to the Fund’s strategic vision of promoting the paradigm shift | 
 | towards low-emission and climate-resilient development pathways in the context of sustainable development | 
 | and supporting developing countries, like Barbados, to implement the requirements of the Paris Agreement | 
 | and the UNFCCC. Overall, the project is anticipated to have an impact on 136,220 direct beneficiaries and | 
 | indirectly benefit 141,601 persons. Given the importance of water to the health sector and the two main | 
 | productive sectors of Barbados - agriculture and tourism, the importance of this project for promoting | 
 | sustainable development is underscored. | 
 |  | 
 | Mitigation Impact | 
 | It is expected that this project can avoid about 35,275 tCO e over 25 years (See Annex 22 for calculations).
2 | 
 | The policy and regulatory environment in place in Barbados are currently highly conducive for the use of | 
 | renewable energy technologies. The GOB is pursuing a goal of zero emission by 2030 and the policy for a | 
 | climate-neutral Barbados is regulated in the Electric Light and Power Act (ELPA), which prescribes feed-in | 
 | tariffs related to solar, land-based wind, anaerobic digestion and solid biomass. This project will maximize | 
 | the renewable energy sources that can benefit from feed-in tariffs whilst also facilitating a shift to low- | 
 | emission sustainable development pathway in Barbados. The noted CO equivalent emission reduction from
2 | 
 | this project is purely based on the 1 MW of PV to be installed to offset the increased power consumption | 
 | associated with the upgrades. However, it is also notable that EE will be increased through the installation | 
 | of variable frequency drives, EE pumps and a sludge dewatering system. There is not adequate information | 
 | available at the proposal stage, such as characteristics of the sludge, to estimate reduced emissions due to | 
 | EE; however, the monitoring plan for the project aims to track the changes in EE over the lifespan of the | 
 | project. | 
 |  | 
 | Also notable is that the BSTP is estimated to consume about 4,500 kWh of energy per day which equates | 
 | to energy costs of USD470,000 per year52. Currently there is 0.18MW of PV power installed and through this | 
 | project, an additional 1MW of PV panels will mounted to off-set the demands of the upgraded system. | 
 |  | 
 | Adaptation Impact | 
 | All of the components of this project are designed to contribute to increased climate-resilient sustainable | 
 | development with emphasis on the water and wastewater sector. The following specific details per | 
 | component of this project should be noted and how they promote climate-resilient sustainable development | 
 | in Barbados: | 
 | • Component 1 will not only install wastewater treatment technologies that are energy efficient, but | 
 | several decision support tools will be implemented to support the management and maintenance of | 
 | the upgraded STP, particularly for hydrometeorological hazards such as rainfall, including severe | 
 | storms. The decentralized package collection and treatment systems that will be constructed in two | 
 | communities located in Zone A will address severe water shortages for approximately 22553 | 
 | households and is considered to be a “good demonstration” of strengthening the adaptive capacities | 
 | of individuals and businesses to climate risks associated with water availability | 

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56
D
• Component 2 is primarily focused on renewable energy and energy efficiency, however, climate
resilience is being promoted in the infrastructure installed, where appropriate, for example the PV
systems will utilize solar panels resistant of at least Category 3 hurricane.
• Components 3 and 4 will collectively create an enabling environment for the implementation of
climate-responsive wastewater technologies and the use of reclaimed water. This will be achieved
through the strengthening of (i) institutional and regulatory systems (ii) awareness of climate threats
and risk-reduction processes and (iii) adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. In
terms of institutional strengthening, the targeted training for operators will promote awareness of
water availability and the nexus with climate variability and change and SOPs to be developed will
be mindful of climate risks posted to the upgraded system and measures to mitigate/manage these
risks. The legislative review will ensure to promote climate change and the water sector as well as
identify any gaps for further strengthening of climate resilience. The public re-education and
awareness programmes will also highlight the nexus between water availability, climate change and
the role of reclaimed water in building resilience. This critical for enhancing knowledge and attitude
toward reclaim water as the famers, schools and communities will be engaged through various
medium, including formally organised events, training sessions, structure weekly TV and radio
programmes, and social media.
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
3R-CReWS paradigm shift
This project aims to enable a paradigm shift in the wastewater management practices of Barbados that
includes the use of low carbon and climate resilient water and energy management technologies and
strategies that ensures water is protected, managed, recycled, reused, and conserved to enhance the health,
wellbeing and productivity of Barbadians. Based on the TOC, this will be realized through four outcomes that
are inter-dependent and complementary to provide a holistic approach to achieving this goal. The medium-
term results (outcomes) of this project will enable the technology transfer required for adaptation to, and
mitigation of, climate change and will establish the foundation for sustainability, innovation and market
transformation through the strengthening of (i) governance and legislative frameworks, (ii) technical
capacities and capabilities among the key stakeholders of the project, and (iii) private sector and public buy-
in and leadership. For more details at the output and activity level in Sections B.2 (a) and B.3.
Achieving this paradigm shift required the project design to place emphasis towards putting processes,
structures, stakeholders, knowledge and systems in place that would catalyse scalability, replicability,
learning, and an enabling environment. The sections below demonstrate how the project addresses these
areas to increase the paradigm shift potential.
Scaling-up and replication
In the context of Barbados, the interest in the use of reclaimed water has been documented for some time;
for example, the IWRM Road Map for Barbados, which was drafted in 2008, identified the need to encourage
reclamation of wastewater as a key recommendation from stakeholder consultations. Further, additional
interviews that were undertaken during the PPF phase of this project confirmed that there is still strong
support for the use of reclaimed water for non-potable uses. Examples of types of non-potable uses and
level of support by interviewees are depicted in the Figure 14 below.

--- Table 1 on Page 62 ---
 | • Component 2 is primarily focused on renewable energy and energy efficiency, however, climate | 
 | resilience is being promoted in the infrastructure installed, where appropriate, for example the PV | 
 | systems will utilize solar panels resistant of at least Category 3 hurricane. | 
 | • Components 3 and 4 will collectively create an enabling environment for the implementation of | 
 | climate-responsive wastewater technologies and the use of reclaimed water. This will be achieved | 
 | through the strengthening of (i) institutional and regulatory systems (ii) awareness of climate threats | 
 | and risk-reduction processes and (iii) adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. In | 
 | terms of institutional strengthening, the targeted training for operators will promote awareness of | 
 | water availability and the nexus with climate variability and change and SOPs to be developed will | 
 | be mindful of climate risks posted to the upgraded system and measures to mitigate/manage these | 
 | risks. The legislative review will ensure to promote climate change and the water sector as well as | 
 | identify any gaps for further strengthening of climate resilience. The public re-education and | 
 | awareness programmes will also highlight the nexus between water availability, climate change and | 
 | the role of reclaimed water in building resilience. This critical for enhancing knowledge and attitude | 
 | toward reclaim water as the famers, schools and communities will be engaged through various | 
 | medium, including formally organised events, training sessions, structure weekly TV and radio | 
 | programmes, and social media. | 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 3R-CReWS paradigm shift | 
 | This project aims to enable a paradigm shift in the wastewater management practices of Barbados that | 
 | includes the use of low carbon and climate resilient water and energy management technologies and | 
 | strategies that ensures water is protected, managed, recycled, reused, and conserved to enhance the health, | 
 | wellbeing and productivity of Barbadians. Based on the TOC, this will be realized through four outcomes that | 
 | are inter-dependent and complementary to provide a holistic approach to achieving this goal. The medium- | 
 | term results (outcomes) of this project will enable the technology transfer required for adaptation to, and | 
 | mitigation of, climate change and will establish the foundation for sustainability, innovation and market | 
 | transformation through the strengthening of (i) governance and legislative frameworks, (ii) technical | 
 | capacities and capabilities among the key stakeholders of the project, and (iii) private sector and public buy- | 
 | in and leadership. For more details at the output and activity level in Sections B.2 (a) and B.3. | 
 |  | 
 | Achieving this paradigm shift required the project design to place emphasis towards putting processes, | 
 | structures, stakeholders, knowledge and systems in place that would catalyse scalability, replicability, | 
 | learning, and an enabling environment. The sections below demonstrate how the project addresses these | 
 | areas to increase the paradigm shift potential. | 
 |  | 
 | Scaling-up and replication | 
 | In the context of Barbados, the interest in the use of reclaimed water has been documented for some time; | 
 | for example, the IWRM Road Map for Barbados, which was drafted in 2008, identified the need to encourage | 
 | reclamation of wastewater as a key recommendation from stakeholder consultations. Further, additional | 
 | interviews that were undertaken during the PPF phase of this project confirmed that there is still strong | 
 | support for the use of reclaimed water for non-potable uses. Examples of types of non-potable uses and | 
 | level of support by interviewees are depicted in the Figure 14 below. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57
D
Figure 14: types of non-potable uses and level of support by interviewees
Source: Feasibility Study Report (2021)
Apart from a clear signal of interest, including at the policy level; the demand for reclaimed water from just
the perspective of the agriculture sector is high. For instance, the overall estimated volume of reclaimed
water that will become available (supply) from the upgrade to the BSTP is 5000 m3/day (baseline scenario)
with a projected 21,900 m3/day by 2050 and noting that in the southern part of Barbados alone, there is at
least 2,700 hectares54 of land eligible for irrigation, and given that the irrigation water needs is between 35
to 50 m3/hectare/day, then a minimum of 94,500 m3/day and a maximum of 118,500 m3/day would be
required (demand)55. The implication of these figures is that the demand for reclaimed water for agricultural
irrigation outweighs the volume that will be made available by this project; this high demand is testament of
the urgent need and high potential for scalability and replicability of this project.
Further, this project’s scalability and replicability will be enhanced by specifically targeting a combination of
activities targeting private sector engagement (see more details in Section B.3, Output 4.2 and some of
Output 4.3) since they can have an important role in scaling the decentralized wastewater collection and
treatment systems in areas not serviced by the BSTP or SCSTP. Recalling that these two plants only serve
5% of the population of Barbados, then the scope for scaling this technology is expansive.
Given that there is existing interest in the use of treated wastewater, coupled with the types of activities
targeted by this project that will enhance opportunities for the private sector and households to advance the
application of wastewater treatment technologies, then this project is further considered to have high
potential for scaling up without equally increasing the total costs of implementation.
Further, the highly innovative nature of this project provides strong potential for replication across the
Caribbean. It should be underscored that Barbados is a role model for the Caribbean leading in many
development areas, in particular, the country’s approach to climate change mitigation and adaptation. A
crucial example is the Barbados’ Roof to Reef programme (R2R). which has been recently applauded by the
GCF Executive Director, Dr. Glemarec. In a recent mission he stated that “We are indeed extremely
interested in the Roofs to Reefs Programme approach because it could serve as a model to a number of
countries on how to integrate water, land, agriculture, energy in a conservative approach. So for me this visit
54 2,700 is the total hectares of ln is eligible for irrigation in the southern part of the island; however, this project is delivering water to 235 hectares.
55 Cashman, 2021

--- Table 1 on Page 63 ---
 |  | 
 | Figure 14: types of non-potable uses and level of support by interviewees | 
 | Source: Feasibility Study Report (2021) | 
 |  | 
 | Apart from a clear signal of interest, including at the policy level; the demand for reclaimed water from just | 
 | the perspective of the agriculture sector is high. For instance, the overall estimated volume of reclaimed | 
 | water that will become available (supply) from the upgrade to the BSTP is 5000 m3/day (baseline scenario) | 
 | with a projected 21,900 m3/day by 2050 and noting that in the southern part of Barbados alone, there is at | 
 | least 2,700 hectares54 of land eligible for irrigation, and given that the irrigation water needs is between 35 | 
 | to 50 m3/hectare/day, then a minimum of 94,500 m3/day and a maximum of 118,500 m3/day would be | 
 | required (demand)55. The implication of these figures is that the demand for reclaimed water for agricultural | 
 | irrigation outweighs the volume that will be made available by this project; this high demand is testament of | 
 | the urgent need and high potential for scalability and replicability of this project. | 
 |  | 
 | Further, this project’s scalability and replicability will be enhanced by specifically targeting a combination of | 
 | activities targeting private sector engagement (see more details in Section B.3, Output 4.2 and some of | 
 | Output 4.3) since they can have an important role in scaling the decentralized wastewater collection and | 
 | treatment systems in areas not serviced by the BSTP or SCSTP. Recalling that these two plants only serve | 
 | 5% of the population of Barbados, then the scope for scaling this technology is expansive. | 
 |  | 
 | Given that there is existing interest in the use of treated wastewater, coupled with the types of activities | 
 | targeted by this project that will enhance opportunities for the private sector and households to advance the | 
 | application of wastewater treatment technologies, then this project is further considered to have high | 
 | potential for scaling up without equally increasing the total costs of implementation. | 
 |  | 
 | Further, the highly innovative nature of this project provides strong potential for replication across the | 
 | Caribbean. It should be underscored that Barbados is a role model for the Caribbean leading in many | 
 | development areas, in particular, the country’s approach to climate change mitigation and adaptation. A | 
 | crucial example is the Barbados’ Roof to Reef programme (R2R). which has been recently applauded by the | 
 | GCF Executive Director, Dr. Glemarec. In a recent mission he stated that “We are indeed extremely | 
 | interested in the Roofs to Reefs Programme approach because it could serve as a model to a number of | 
 | countries on how to integrate water, land, agriculture, energy in a conservative approach. So for me this visit | 

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58
D
is worth gold…” 56. This is to say that lessons and recommendations emerging from this project, which is
aligned to the delivery of the R2R, can provide guidance and serve as a model for other Caribbean countries
that are also exposed to the same climate risks and effects.
Knowledge Sharing and Learning
A majority of the components of this project have activities to support the creation or strengthening of
knowledge, collective learning processes or institutions. Component one will include the installation of
several decision-making tools to address data gaps that exist and facilitate enhanced management of the
upgraded STP. For example, the on-site laboratory at BWA (Activity 1.3.2) for monitoring influent and effluent
will collect data that is important for promoting transparency and accountability in terms of treated wastewater
quality, which in turn, will have an important role in building and maintaining consumers’ trust in wastewater
as a resource and the overall impact of this project and beyond its life. There are also important monitoring
systems that will be installed that will provide data on flow rates (Activity 1.3.1) for better managing climate
change related risks that can impact on the wastewater system. The resulting datasets from the various
monitoring systems will not only address a serious data gap that exists at the BWA, but more importantly, it
will allow for enhanced estimations of wastewater characteristics and the performance of the upgraded
system, including the impacts of climate change and GHG emissions (from biosolids). Components three
and four are heavily focused on training of technical wastewater personnel and Public Education and
Awareness (PEA), respectively. The former is important for strengthening institutions and the latter for further
strengthening buy-in for the adoption of wastewater technologies and use of reclaimed water. This project
will also have a monitoring and evaluation plan and a dedicated webpage (Activity 4.3.3) for reporting and
sharing of lessons and best practices.
Also notable is that the President of Barbados, who was the Chair of the Conference of Heads of Government
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) between January 1st and June 30th, 2020, serves as the Lead
Head of Government within CARICOM, bearing responsibility for the CARICOM Single Market and Economy
(CSME) 57. This provides a conduit for the President to share innovative technologies and case studies, such
as this project, among other Heads of Government for visibility and replication. In addition, the role of the
CCCCC, a CARICOM Specialized Agency, as the Accredited Entity that will implement this project means
that they are also well positioned to share lessons on this project for replications in other CARICOM States.
The BWA is member of The Caribbean Water and Wastewater Association (CWWA), which is a regional
non-governmental organization established by an Act of Parliament in Trinidad & Tobago in 1991. The
CWWA is a grouping of water, wastewater and solid waste professionals in the public and private sectors.
Through the avenue the BWA will share the lessons learnt. Further, the project will develop a project website,
which is critical knowledge management and dissemination tool. Lastly, the CCCCC as regional organization
is home to the largest repository of climate change data and information, including lessons learnt, for
CARICOM member states. The lessons learnt from this project will be shared with other countries in region.
Creating an Enabling Environment
Primarily components 3 and 4 of this project will have long lasting effects on the sustainability of outcomes
and results beyond completion of the intervention. Under component three, investments in technical
capacities to operate, maintain and monitor the wastewater and renewable energy technologies being
implemented is key for sustainability. This is why customized training certification will be developed by this
project in collaboration with academic institutions for access by all BWA employees with considerations for
access by contractors, project partners, and other key stakeholders in Barbados. Having a cadre of highly
trained operators at the BWA will ensure that there is a well-developed preventative maintenance (PM)
program to extend the life of the equipment and to keep it functioning at the design level to maintain effluent
56 https://barbadostoday.bb/2021/10/26/bdos-project-model-hailed-as-best-practice-for-climate-change-mitigation/
57 This is an arrangement among the CARICOM Member States for the creation of a single enlarged economic space through the removal of restrictions
resulting in the free movement of goods, services, persons, capital and technology.

--- Table 1 on Page 64 ---
 | is worth gold…” 56. This is to say that lessons and recommendations emerging from this project, which is | 
 | aligned to the delivery of the R2R, can provide guidance and serve as a model for other Caribbean countries | 
 | that are also exposed to the same climate risks and effects. | 
 |  | 
 | Knowledge Sharing and Learning | 
 | A majority of the components of this project have activities to support the creation or strengthening of | 
 | knowledge, collective learning processes or institutions. Component one will include the installation of | 
 | several decision-making tools to address data gaps that exist and facilitate enhanced management of the | 
 | upgraded STP. For example, the on-site laboratory at BWA (Activity 1.3.2) for monitoring influent and effluent | 
 | will collect data that is important for promoting transparency and accountability in terms of treated wastewater | 
 | quality, which in turn, will have an important role in building and maintaining consumers’ trust in wastewater | 
 | as a resource and the overall impact of this project and beyond its life. There are also important monitoring | 
 | systems that will be installed that will provide data on flow rates (Activity 1.3.1) for better managing climate | 
 | change related risks that can impact on the wastewater system. The resulting datasets from the various | 
 | monitoring systems will not only address a serious data gap that exists at the BWA, but more importantly, it | 
 | will allow for enhanced estimations of wastewater characteristics and the performance of the upgraded | 
 | system, including the impacts of climate change and GHG emissions (from biosolids). Components three | 
 | and four are heavily focused on training of technical wastewater personnel and Public Education and | 
 | Awareness (PEA), respectively. The former is important for strengthening institutions and the latter for further | 
 | strengthening buy-in for the adoption of wastewater technologies and use of reclaimed water. This project | 
 | will also have a monitoring and evaluation plan and a dedicated webpage (Activity 4.3.3) for reporting and | 
 | sharing of lessons and best practices. | 
 |  | 
 | Also notable is that the President of Barbados, who was the Chair of the Conference of Heads of Government | 
 | of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) between January 1st and June 30th, 2020, serves as the Lead | 
 | Head of Government within CARICOM, bearing responsibility for the CARICOM Single Market and Economy | 
 | (CSME) 57. This provides a conduit for the President to share innovative technologies and case studies, such | 
 | as this project, among other Heads of Government for visibility and replication. In addition, the role of the | 
 | CCCCC, a CARICOM Specialized Agency, as the Accredited Entity that will implement this project means | 
 | that they are also well positioned to share lessons on this project for replications in other CARICOM States. | 
 | The BWA is member of The Caribbean Water and Wastewater Association (CWWA), which is a regional | 
 | non-governmental organization established by an Act of Parliament in Trinidad & Tobago in 1991. The | 
 | CWWA is a grouping of water, wastewater and solid waste professionals in the public and private sectors. | 
 | Through the avenue the BWA will share the lessons learnt. Further, the project will develop a project website, | 
 | which is critical knowledge management and dissemination tool. Lastly, the CCCCC as regional organization | 
 | is home to the largest repository of climate change data and information, including lessons learnt, for | 
 | CARICOM member states. The lessons learnt from this project will be shared with other countries in region. | 
 |  | 
 | Creating an Enabling Environment | 
 | Primarily components 3 and 4 of this project will have long lasting effects on the sustainability of outcomes | 
 | and results beyond completion of the intervention. Under component three, investments in technical | 
 | capacities to operate, maintain and monitor the wastewater and renewable energy technologies being | 
 | implemented is key for sustainability. This is why customized training certification will be developed by this | 
 | project in collaboration with academic institutions for access by all BWA employees with considerations for | 
 | access by contractors, project partners, and other key stakeholders in Barbados. Having a cadre of highly | 
 | trained operators at the BWA will ensure that there is a well-developed preventative maintenance (PM) | 
 | program to extend the life of the equipment and to keep it functioning at the design level to maintain effluent | 

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59
D
quality and reduce any environmental impacts or health and safety issues. Majority of component four is
designed to strengthen the enabling environment. Specifically, the outputs will ensure that there is
awareness of the up-to-date legislation, mechanisms are in place bolstering private sector engagement in
the provision and adoption of wastewater treatment technology through various approaches (engagement
strategy, incentive programme, expanding the RAFF and targeted PEA materials). All of these activities are
considered to be essential in light of the baseline situation and once implemented successfully, the national
capacity would be strengthened to sustain and scale up the use of wastewater technologies and reclaimed
water in Barbados.
Regulatory Framework and Policies
The GOB, as an indication of their commitment to advancing water security in Barbados, has updated several
legislations (See details in Section B.3, Output 4.1). The aim of this project is to review them and outline a
road map for promoting them as well as highlighting recommendations for addressing any gaps identified,
particularly as it relates to ensuring sustainability of the results of this project. Further, a water and sanitation
master plan will be developed, which is a strategic planning document that will give life to the recently
updated legislations. Collectively, these outputs will help to strengthen the overall regulatory and policy
frameworks governing wastewater in Barbados.
Contribution to National Climate-Resilient Development Pathways
Component two of this project strongly supports the achievement of the Barbados National Energy Policy
(BNEP) 2019-2030, which aims to achieve the 100% renewable energy and zero emission by 2030.
Centralized wastewater management relies on expensive high-emission electricity supplied from
conventional power plants that use fossil resources, which not only increases operational costs but also
contributes to global warming.
This project is also in support of the achievement of the R2RP. The R2RP provides the overarching
framework that allows the integrated approach to addressing the negative impacts of climate change. The
R2RP is the Government’s sustainable development model for the next decade and represents the country
programme for Barbados. The primary focus is on improving the social and environmental circumstances of
the people in Barbados. The R2RP will enhance the country’s ability to recover from climatic events and is
hinged on six thematic areas: Shelter, Water, Energy, Waste, Land use, and Ecosystems Management. This
project is in alignment with 4 (Water, Energy, Waste and Ecosystems Management) of the 6 thematic areas.
Notable is that the thematic areas under the R2RP are also aligned to Barbados’ Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) priority areas.
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Linkages between 3R-CReWS and the SDGs
The benefits and priorities of this project are fully aligned with several SDGs. A mapping of the project results
to the SDGs shows that there is alignment with 8 out of the 17 SDG goals. See details in the Table 4 below.
Table 4: Linkages of the Project to the SDG Goals and Targets
Benefits and Priorities of 3R- Linkage to SDG Linkage to SDG Targets
CReWS Goals
Overall, the four components of Goal 6 6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing
this project aspire to achieve pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release
CLEAN WATER
Goal 6, 13 and 17 through the of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the
AND SANITATION
use of carbon neutral and climate proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially
resilient water and energy increasing recycling and safe reuse globally

--- Table 1 on Page 65 ---
 | quality and reduce any environmental impacts or health and safety issues. Majority of component four is |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | designed to strengthen the enabling environment. Specifically, the outputs will ensure that there is |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | awareness of the up-to-date legislation, mechanisms are in place bolstering private sector engagement in |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the provision and adoption of wastewater treatment technology through various approaches (engagement |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | strategy, incentive programme, expanding the RAFF and targeted PEA materials). All of these activities are |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | considered to be essential in light of the baseline situation and once implemented successfully, the national |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | capacity would be strengthened to sustain and scale up the use of wastewater technologies and reclaimed |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | water in Barbados. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Regulatory Framework and Policies |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | The GOB, as an indication of their commitment to advancing water security in Barbados, has updated several |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | legislations (See details in Section B.3, Output 4.1). The aim of this project is to review them and outline a |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | road map for promoting them as well as highlighting recommendations for addressing any gaps identified, |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | particularly as it relates to ensuring sustainability of the results of this project. Further, a water and sanitation |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | master plan will be developed, which is a strategic planning document that will give life to the recently |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | updated legislations. Collectively, these outputs will help to strengthen the overall regulatory and policy |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | frameworks governing wastewater in Barbados. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Contribution to National Climate-Resilient Development Pathways |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component two of this project strongly supports the achievement of the Barbados National Energy Policy |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (BNEP) 2019-2030, which aims to achieve the 100% renewable energy and zero emission by 2030. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Centralized wastewater management relies on expensive high-emission electricity supplied from |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | conventional power plants that use fossil resources, which not only increases operational costs but also |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | contributes to global warming. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | This project is also in support of the achievement of the R2RP. The R2RP provides the overarching |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | framework that allows the integrated approach to addressing the negative impacts of climate change. The |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | R2RP is the Government’s sustainable development model for the next decade and represents the country |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | programme for Barbados. The primary focus is on improving the social and environmental circumstances of |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the people in Barbados. The R2RP will enhance the country’s ability to recover from climatic events and is |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | hinged on six thematic areas: Shelter, Water, Energy, Waste, Land use, and Ecosystems Management. This |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | project is in alignment with 4 (Water, Energy, Waste and Ecosystems Management) of the 6 thematic areas. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Notable is that the thematic areas under the R2RP are also aligned to Barbados’ Nationally Determined |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Contribution (NDC) priority areas. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Linkages between 3R-CReWS and the SDGs |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | The benefits and priorities of this project are fully aligned with several SDGs. A mapping of the project results |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | to the SDGs shows that there is alignment with 8 out of the 17 SDG goals. See details in the Table 4 below. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Table 4: Linkages of the Project to the SDG Goals and Targets |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Benefits and Priorities of 3R- |  |  | Linkage to SDG |  | Linkage to SDG Targets | 
 |  | CReWS |  |  | Goals |  |  | 
 | Overall, the four components of
this project aspire to achieve
Goal 6, 13 and 17 through the
use of carbon neutral and climate
resilient water and energy | Overall, the four components of |  |  | Goal 6 |  | 6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing
pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release
of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the
proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse globally | 
 |  | this project aspire to achieve |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | CLEAN WATER |  |  | 
 |  | Goal 6, 13 and 17 through the |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | AND SANITATION |  |  | 
 |  | use of carbon neutral and climate |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | resilient water and energy |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 65 ---
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing
pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release
of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the
proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse globally

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60
D
management technologies and 6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources
strategies that ensures water is management at all levels, including through
protected, managed, recycled, transboundary cooperation as appropriate
reused, and conserved
6.6 By 2020, protect and restore water-related
ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands,
rivers, aquifers and lakes
6. By 2030, expand international cooperation and
capacity-building support to developing countries in
water- and sanitation-related activities and
programmes, including water harvesting, desalination,
water efficiency, wastewater treatment, recycling and
reuse technologies
6. B Support and strengthen the participation of local
communities in improving water and sanitation
management
Goal 13 13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to
climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all
CLIMATE ACTION
countries
13. A Implement the commitment undertaken by
developed-country parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change to a goal of
mobilizing jointly $100 billion annually by 2020 from all
sources to address the needs of developing countries
in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and
transparency on implementation and fully
operationalize the Green
13. B Climate Fund through its capitalization as soon
as possible
Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective
climate change-related planning and management in
least developed countries and small island developing
States, including focusing on women, youth and local
and marginalized communities
The upgrades to the BSTP Goal 17. 17.7 Promote the development, transfer, dissemination
(achieving tertiary reclaimed STRENGTHEN THE and diffusion of environmentally sound technologies to
water quality and renewable MEANS OF developing countries on favourable terms, including on
energy use) and the 2 IMPLEMENTATION concessional and preferential terms, as mutually
decentralized treatment systems AND REVITALIZE agreed
to be installed in Zone A are in THE GLOBAL
support of the transfer and PARTNERSHIP
dissemination of environmentally FOR
sound technologies
SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
Component 1: Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse
The production of high-quality Goal 2 2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production
reclaimed water suitable for systems and implement resilient agricultural practices
ZERO HUNGER
reuse by agriculture farms in that increase productivity and production, that help
Barbados will be particularly maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for

--- Table 1 on Page 66 ---
 | management technologies and
strategies that ensures water is
protected, managed, recycled,
reused, and conserved |  |  |  |  |  |  | 6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | management at all levels, including through |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | transboundary cooperation as appropriate |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 6.6 By 2020, protect and restore water-related |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | rivers, aquifers and lakes |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 6. By 2030, expand international cooperation and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capacity-building support to developing countries in |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | water- and sanitation-related activities and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | programmes, including water harvesting, desalination, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | water efficiency, wastewater treatment, recycling and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reuse technologies |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 6. B Support and strengthen the participation of local |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | communities in improving water and sanitation |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | management |  | 
 |  |  |  | Goal 13
CLIMATE ACTION |  |  |  | 13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | countries |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 13. A Implement the commitment undertaken by |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | developed-country parties to the United Nations |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Framework Convention on Climate Change to a goal of |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mobilizing jointly $100 billion annually by 2020 from all |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | sources to address the needs of developing countries |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | transparency on implementation and fully |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | operationalize the Green |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 13. B Climate Fund through its capitalization as soon |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | as possible |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | climate change-related planning and management in |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | least developed countries and small island developing |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | States, including focusing on women, youth and local |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and marginalized communities |  | 
 | The upgrades to the BSTP
(achieving tertiary reclaimed
water quality and renewable
energy use) and the 2
decentralized treatment systems
to be installed in Zone A are in
support of the transfer and
dissemination of environmentally
sound technologies |  |  |  | Goal 17. |  | 17.7 Promote the development, transfer, dissemination
and diffusion of environmentally sound technologies to
developing countries on favourable terms, including on
concessional and preferential terms, as mutually
agreed | 17.7 Promote the development, transfer, dissemination |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | STRENGTHEN THE |  |  | and diffusion of environmentally sound technologies to |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | MEANS OF |  |  | developing countries on favourable terms, including on |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | IMPLEMENTATION |  |  | concessional and preferential terms, as mutually |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | AND REVITALIZE |  |  | agreed |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | THE GLOBAL |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | PARTNERSHIP |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | FOR |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | SUSTAINABLE |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | DEVELOPMENT |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Component 1: Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | The production of high-quality |  | Goal 2
ZERO HUNGER |  |  |  | 2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production |  | 
 |  | reclaimed water suitable for |  |  |  |  |  | systems and implement resilient agricultural practices |  | 
 |  | reuse by agriculture farms in |  |  |  |  |  | that increase productivity and production, that help |  | 
 |  | Barbados will be particularly |  |  |  |  |  | maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 66 ---
management technologies and
strategies that ensures water is
protected, managed, recycled,
reused, and conserved

--- Table 3 on Page 66 ---
Goal 13
CLIMATE ACTION


--- Table 4 on Page 66 ---
The upgrades to the BSTP
(achieving tertiary reclaimed
water quality and renewable
energy use) and the 2
decentralized treatment systems
to be installed in Zone A are in
support of the transfer and
dissemination of environmentally
sound technologies

--- Table 5 on Page 66 ---
Goal 2
ZERO HUNGER

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61
D
beneficial during the dry season adaptation to climate change, extreme weather,
and drought periods, which are drought, flooding and other disasters and that
projected to be more severe due progressively improve land and soil quality
to climate change.
Less wastewater will be sent to Goal 11 11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita
the marine environment via environmental impact of cities, including by paying
SUSTAINABLE
outfalls special attention to air quality and municipal and other
CITIES AND
waste management
COMMUNITIES
Component 2: Renewable Energy and energy efficiency in wastewater treatment
A high priority of this project is to Goal 7 7.2 By 2030, increase substantially the share of
promote renewable energy to renewable energy in the global energy mix
AFFORDABLE
offset the additional energy
AND CLEAN 7.3 By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in
needs of the upgraded system
ENERGY energy efficiency
while contributing to GHG
emission reduction
7. B By 2030, expand infrastructure and upgrade
technology for supplying modern and sustainable
energy services for all in developing countries, in
particular least developed countries, small island
developing States, and land-locked developing
countries
The upgraded BSTP will be Goal 9 9.4 By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit
retrofitted with decision making industries to make them sustainable, with increased
INDUSTRY,
tools and infrastructure that resource-use efficiency and greater adoption of clean
INNOVATION AND
optimizes performance of the and environmentally sound technologies and industrial
INFRASTRUCTURE
upgraded system. processes, with all countries taking action in
accordance with their respective capabilities
9.a Facilitate sustainable and resilient infrastructure
development in developing countries through
enhanced financial, technological and technical
support to African countries, least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island
developing States
Component 3: Capabilities to operate, maintain, expand and monitor wastewater and related renewable
energy technologies
Component 4: Capacities (regulatory, governance, awareness), buy-in and ownership within the private
and public sectors are improved for climate resilient development planning for the water sector.
Training, PEA and employment Goal 5 5.5 Ensure women’s full and effective participation and
opportunities to promote equal equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of
GENDER
opportunities for men and decision making in political, economic and public life
EQUALITY
women.
5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and
The legislative review will include enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender
recommendations for enhancing equality and the empowerment of all women and girls
GOAL 4
equal opportunities and access to at all levels
men and women in the water and LIFELONG
wastewater sector. Also, the LEARNING
water and sanitation master plan OPPORTUNITIES
will take into consideration social FOR ALL
and gender related risks in the

--- Table 1 on Page 67 ---
 |  | beneficial during the dry season |  |  |  |  | adaptation to climate change, extreme weather,
drought, flooding and other disasters and that
progressively improve land and soil quality |  |  | 
 |  | and drought periods, which are |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | projected to be more severe due |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | to climate change. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Less wastewater will be sent to
the marine environment via
outfalls | Less wastewater will be sent to |  |  | Goal 11 |  | 11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita
environmental impact of cities, including by paying
special attention to air quality and municipal and other
waste management |  |  | 
 |  | the marine environment via |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | SUSTAINABLE |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | outfalls |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | CITIES AND |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | COMMUNITIES |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Component 2: Renewable Energy and energy efficiency in wastewater treatment |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | A high priority of this project is to
promote renewable energy to
offset the additional energy
needs of the upgraded system
while contributing to GHG
emission reduction | A high priority of this project is to |  | Goal 7
AFFORDABLE
AND CLEAN
ENERGY |  |  |  | 7.2 By 2030, increase substantially the share of |  | 
 |  | promote renewable energy to |  |  |  |  |  | renewable energy in the global energy mix |  | 
 |  | offset the additional energy |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 7.3 By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in |  | 
 |  | needs of the upgraded system |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | energy efficiency |  | 
 |  | while contributing to GHG |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | emission reduction |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 7. B By 2030, expand infrastructure and upgrade |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | technology for supplying modern and sustainable |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | energy services for all in developing countries, in |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | particular least developed countries, small island |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | developing States, and land-locked developing |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | countries |  | 
 | The upgraded BSTP will be
retrofitted with decision making
tools and infrastructure that
optimizes performance of the
upgraded system. |  |  | Goal 9
INDUSTRY,
INNOVATION AND
INFRASTRUCTURE |  |  |  | 9.4 By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | industries to make them sustainable, with increased |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | resource-use efficiency and greater adoption of clean |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and environmentally sound technologies and industrial |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | processes, with all countries taking action in |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | accordance with their respective capabilities |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 9.a Facilitate sustainable and resilient infrastructure |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | development in developing countries through |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | enhanced financial, technological and technical |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | support to African countries, least developed countries, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | landlocked developing countries and small island |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | developing States |  | 
 |  | Component 3: Capabilities to operate, maintain, expand and monitor wastewater and related renewable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | energy technologies |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Component 4: Capacities (regulatory, governance, awareness), buy-in and ownership within the private |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | and public sectors are improved for climate resilient development planning for the water sector. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Training, PEA and employment |  | Goal 5
GENDER
EQUALITY
GOAL 4
LIFELONG
LEARNING
OPPORTUNITIES
FOR ALL |  |  | 5.5 Ensure women’s full and effective participation and
equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of
decision making in political, economic and public life
5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and
enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls
at all levels | 5.5 Ensure women’s full and effective participation and |  | 
 |  | opportunities to promote equal |  |  |  |  |  | equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of |  | 
 |  | opportunities for men and |  |  |  |  |  | decision making in political, economic and public life |  | 
 |  | women. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and |  | 
 |  | The legislative review will include |  |  |  |  |  | enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender |  | 
 |  | recommendations for enhancing |  |  |  |  |  | equality and the empowerment of all women and girls |  | 
 |  | equal opportunities and access to |  |  |  |  |  | at all levels |  | 
 |  | men and women in the water and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | wastewater sector. Also, the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | water and sanitation master plan |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | will take into consideration social |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | and gender related risks in the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 67 ---
adaptation to climate change, extreme weather,
drought, flooding and other disasters and that
progressively improve land and soil quality

--- Table 3 on Page 67 ---
11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita
environmental impact of cities, including by paying
special attention to air quality and municipal and other
waste management

--- Table 4 on Page 67 ---
Goal 7
AFFORDABLE
AND CLEAN
ENERGY


--- Table 5 on Page 67 ---
The upgraded BSTP will be
retrofitted with decision making
tools and infrastructure that
optimizes performance of the
upgraded system.

--- Table 6 on Page 67 ---
Goal 9
INDUSTRY,
INNOVATION AND
INFRASTRUCTURE

--- Table 7 on Page 67 ---
Goal 5
GENDER
EQUALITY

GOAL 4
LIFELONG
LEARNING
OPPORTUNITIES
FOR ALL

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62
D
design and prioritization of water
reuse strategies.
In addition to the foregoing, the impact potential of this project from an environmental, social, economic and
gender-sensitive development perspective is highlighted below.
• Environmental co-benefits
- This project can avoid approximately 35,275 tCO e over the estimated 25 years’ lifespan of the
2
PV to be installed
- Improved testing capacities at BWA will ensure effluent meet environmental standards for use by
agriculture sector and aquifer recharge
- Improved air quality in the areas in proximity of the plants from the enhanced systems to deal
with biosolids.
- Reduced groundwater contamination at the sites within Zone A benefiting from decentralized
wastewater treatment systems
- Increase groundwater supply by using the reclaimed water to replenish aquifers thereby creating
a greater amount of potable water and increasing water security though indirect potable reuse.
- Reduced wastewater runoff and nutrient loading in the marine environment.
• Economic co-benefits
- Construction works to be done under this project at the BSTP and 9km pipeline will create jobs
and new opportunities for local business, which will lead to positive impacts on local income,
increased trading activities, empowerment of local contractors and suppliers. Construction will
create more than 100 temporary jobs which is significant considering the size of Barbados’ active
population (~100 thousand persons), all of which should be recruited locally. To this number,
dozens more temporary jobs will be added from the Consultancies related to baseline studies and
strategic plans to be developed under this project. Whilst these will be open to international
tender, there are local Universities and technical experts that exist and could potentially secure
some of the contracts
- As a statutory institution of the Government of Barbados, the project will reduce, in the short and
medium, the demand for foreign exchange and external debt financing. The mix of financing
instruments being use for development in the water and wastewater sector (no limited to 3R-
CReWS) will aid in easing the fiscal constraints facing the country.
- Increase in energy security and the achievement of low-carbon operations at the BSTP will
reduce operational costs
- Training will enhance preventative maintenance, which will extend the life cycle of the equipment
and help to reduce breakdown maintenance that can come with a high financial and
environmental cost
- There should be increased private sector interest and engagement in the adoption of wastewater
management technologies and use of reclaimed water and other by-products. This will promote
technology transfer and the emergency of a market related to wastewater sector that will generate
green jobs and have positive impacts on the economy.
• Social co-benefits
- There will be an increase in potable water security by eliminating potable water demands for
applications that can use non-potable reclaimed water, as well as the increased use of reclaimed
water would also allow the agricultural industry to be more resilient to the impacts of climate
change.
- Improve awareness and buy-in from the public, farmers, teachers, students, businesses, tourisms
and stakeholders (including the BWA) associated

--- Table 1 on Page 68 ---
 |  | design and prioritization of water |  |  |  | l
 |  | reuse strategies. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | In addition to the foregoing, the impact potential of this project from an environmental, social, economic and |  |  |  |  | 
 | gender-sensitive development perspective is highlighted below. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Environmental co-benefits |  |  |  |  | 
 | - This project can avoid approximately 35,275 tCO e over the estimated 25 years’ lifespan of the
2 |  |  |  |  | 
 | PV to be installed |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Improved testing capacities at BWA will ensure effluent meet environmental standards for use by |  |  |  |  | 
 | agriculture sector and aquifer recharge |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Improved air quality in the areas in proximity of the plants from the enhanced systems to deal |  |  |  |  | 
 | with biosolids. |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Reduced groundwater contamination at the sites within Zone A benefiting from decentralized |  |  |  |  | 
 | wastewater treatment systems |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Increase groundwater supply by using the reclaimed water to replenish aquifers thereby creating |  |  |  |  | 
 | a greater amount of potable water and increasing water security though indirect potable reuse. |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Reduced wastewater runoff and nutrient loading in the marine environment. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Economic co-benefits |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Construction works to be done under this project at the BSTP and 9km pipeline will create jobs |  |  |  |  | 
 | and new opportunities for local business, which will lead to positive impacts on local income, |  |  |  |  | 
 | increased trading activities, empowerment of local contractors and suppliers. Construction will |  |  |  |  | 
 | create more than 100 temporary jobs which is significant considering the size of Barbados’ active |  |  |  |  | 
 | population (~100 thousand persons), all of which should be recruited locally. To this number, |  |  |  |  | 
 | dozens more temporary jobs will be added from the Consultancies related to baseline studies and |  |  |  |  | 
 | strategic plans to be developed under this project. Whilst these will be open to internationa |  |  |  |  | 
 | tender, there are local Universities and technical experts that exist and could potentially secure |  |  |  |  | 
 | some of the contracts |  |  |  |  | 
 | - As a statutory institution of the Government of Barbados, the project will reduce, in the short and |  |  |  |  | 
 | medium, the demand for foreign exchange and external debt financing. The mix of financing |  |  |  |  | 
 | instruments being use for development in the water and wastewater sector (no limited to 3R- |  |  |  |  | 
 | CReWS) will aid in easing the fiscal constraints facing the country. |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Increase in energy security and the achievement of low-carbon operations at the BSTP will |  |  |  |  | 
 | reduce operational costs |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Training will enhance preventative maintenance, which will extend the life cycle of the equipment |  |  |  |  | 
 | and help to reduce breakdown maintenance that can come with a high financial and |  |  |  |  | 
 | environmental cost |  |  |  |  | 
 | - There should be increased private sector interest and engagement in the adoption of wastewater |  |  |  |  | 
 | management technologies and use of reclaimed water and other by-products. This will promote |  |  |  |  | 
 | technology transfer and the emergency of a market related to wastewater sector that will generate |  |  |  |  | 
 | green jobs and have positive impacts on the economy. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Social co-benefits |  |  |  |  | 
 | - There will be an increase in potable water security by eliminating potable water demands for |  |  |  |  | 
 | applications that can use non-potable reclaimed water, as well as the increased use of reclaimed |  |  |  |  | 
 | water would also allow the agricultural industry to be more resilient to the impacts of climate |  |  |  |  | 
 | change. |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Improve awareness and buy-in from the public, farmers, teachers, students, businesses, tourisms |  |  |  |  | 
 | and stakeholders (including the BWA) associated |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63
D
- Improved testing capacities at BWA will ensure effluent quality meets health standards.
- Improved data (from flow meters, laboratory tests, CMMS) will enhance evidence-based decision
making as it relates to the management of the BSTP for meeting the needs of its stakeholders
- The primary use of the water will be for irrigation purposes; however, when the demand for the
reclaimed water decreases the water will be used to recharge the aquifer. It is important to note
that although the primary use is for agricultural purposes, the recharge of the aquifers is
important; however, use for agriculture decreases the demand pressures on the aquifers.
• Gender-sensitive development impact
- Gender-sensitive development is a priority for this project as evident by its investment in long term
strategies and plans for the water sector that promote gender equality and women empowerment
and/or gender related risks to amplify the project’s gender sensitive development impact.
- A gender sensitive PEA campaign will ensure stakeholders are aware of their gendered impact
on water quality and quantity (availability) as well as the gendered effects of climate change on
the water sector. Appropriate mediums for information dissemination (including the project’s
webpage on BWA website) will be utilized to ensure that women and men and specific vulnerable
groups have access to the information
- The project will result in increased participation of women in the production and use of reclaimed
water.
- More details on the gender mainstreaming activities are details at sections B.6 (Exit Strategy and
Sustainability) and G.2 (Gender Assessment and Action Plan)
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Vulnerability of Barbados
Barbados exhibits many of the characteristics of Small Island Developing States (SIDS) that makes it
vulnerable to the effects of climate change and other extreme hydro-meteorological events. These
characteristics include relative geographical location, small physical size, concentrations of population and
infrastructure in narrow coastal areas, restricted economic base and reliance on natural resources, combined
with inadequate, technical and institutional capacity for adaptation (Mimura et al. 2007). Majority of
Barbados’s critical infrastructure, population and economic activity is located within the coastal zone.
Specifically, over 60% of the island’s total population is located in the three coastal parishes of St. James,
St. Michael and Christ Church on the west and south coasts. Therefore, the vulnerability of the population
and critical infrastructure to sea level rise, storm surge and inundation is high as a result of its location.
Environmental risks: Barbados faces the adverse effects of climate change and natural hazards, with their
attendant economic and social challenges, including unsustainable debt levels, arising in part from extreme
weather events and slow onset events impacting national income flows, increasing indebtedness and
impairing repayment capacity. For those reasons and given that the climate crisis affects both the natural
environment as well as the social and economic stability of the country, Barbados considers climate change
to be a significant threat to its growth and prosperity. When vulnerability is examined as an aggregate
function of demographic and socio-economic inputs, this country is among those Caribbean nations most
vulnerable to climate change. Further, there are factors unique to the country that add to or further complicate
its environmental risks, and include, among others58:
• Water scarcity as a result of Barbados’s unique hydrogeology;
• Relatively early socio-economic development compared to other SIDS in the region, which has led
to a highly modified natural environment, unsustainable development practices in the past, loss of
ecosystem services, lack of green spaces, ageing infrastructure and housing stock, among others;
and,
58 Stennett-Brown (2019) https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0219250.g008

--- Table 1 on Page 69 ---
 | - Improved testing capacities at BWA will ensure effluent quality meets health standards. | 
 | - Improved data (from flow meters, laboratory tests, CMMS) will enhance evidence-based decision | 
 | making as it relates to the management of the BSTP for meeting the needs of its stakeholders | 
 | - The primary use of the water will be for irrigation purposes; however, when the demand for the | 
 | reclaimed water decreases the water will be used to recharge the aquifer. It is important to note | 
 | that although the primary use is for agricultural purposes, the recharge of the aquifers is | 
 | important; however, use for agriculture decreases the demand pressures on the aquifers. | 
 |  | 
 | • Gender-sensitive development impact | 
 | - Gender-sensitive development is a priority for this project as evident by its investment in long term | 
 | strategies and plans for the water sector that promote gender equality and women empowerment | 
 | and/or gender related risks to amplify the project’s gender sensitive development impact. | 
 | - A gender sensitive PEA campaign will ensure stakeholders are aware of their gendered impact | 
 | on water quality and quantity (availability) as well as the gendered effects of climate change on | 
 | the water sector. Appropriate mediums for information dissemination (including the project’s | 
 | webpage on BWA website) will be utilized to ensure that women and men and specific vulnerable | 
 | groups have access to the information | 
 | - The project will result in increased participation of women in the production and use of reclaimed | 
 | water. | 
 | - More details on the gender mainstreaming activities are details at sections B.6 (Exit Strategy and | 
 | Sustainability) and G.2 (Gender Assessment and Action Plan) | 
 |  | 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | Vulnerability of Barbados | 
 | Barbados exhibits many of the characteristics of Small Island Developing States (SIDS) that makes it | 
 | vulnerable to the effects of climate change and other extreme hydro-meteorological events. These | 
 | characteristics include relative geographical location, small physical size, concentrations of population and | 
 | infrastructure in narrow coastal areas, restricted economic base and reliance on natural resources, combined | 
 | with inadequate, technical and institutional capacity for adaptation (Mimura et al. 2007). Majority of | 
 | Barbados’s critical infrastructure, population and economic activity is located within the coastal zone. | 
 | Specifically, over 60% of the island’s total population is located in the three coastal parishes of St. James, | 
 | St. Michael and Christ Church on the west and south coasts. Therefore, the vulnerability of the population | 
 | and critical infrastructure to sea level rise, storm surge and inundation is high as a result of its location. | 
 |  | 
 | Environmental risks: Barbados faces the adverse effects of climate change and natural hazards, with their | 
 | attendant economic and social challenges, including unsustainable debt levels, arising in part from extreme | 
 | weather events and slow onset events impacting national income flows, increasing indebtedness and | 
 | impairing repayment capacity. For those reasons and given that the climate crisis affects both the natural | 
 | environment as well as the social and economic stability of the country, Barbados considers climate change | 
 | to be a significant threat to its growth and prosperity. When vulnerability is examined as an aggregate | 
 | function of demographic and socio-economic inputs, this country is among those Caribbean nations most | 
 | vulnerable to climate change. Further, there are factors unique to the country that add to or further complicate | 
 | its environmental risks, and include, among others58: | 
 | • Water scarcity as a result of Barbados’s unique hydrogeology; | 
 | • Relatively early socio-economic development compared to other SIDS in the region, which has led | 
 | to a highly modified natural environment, unsustainable development practices in the past, loss of | 
 | ecosystem services, lack of green spaces, ageing infrastructure and housing stock, among others; | 
 | and, | 

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64
D
• High population density, which leads to high demand for already scarce resources, competition for
space, exacerbated risk of natural hazards, etc.
Social and economic risks: Climate change will impact already vulnerable groups disproportionately,
including youth and women, as well as lower income communities. Alongside the direct environmental effects
of climate change, the following social and economic impacts are equally important:
• Health: including increased heat stress and greater prevalence of water and vector-borne diseases;
• Tourism: including damage to coastal tourism infrastructure, biodiversity and landscape. Any
negative change in the quality of these tourism products will impact on the sector’s desirability,
demand and competitiveness.
• Water resources: reduced water availability for the population of Barbados resulting from drought or
groundwater contamination from flooding, soil or pollutant infiltration or saline intrusion; and
Fishery and agricultural industries: loss of domestic and/or international competitiveness resulting
from drought, flooding and storm damage, saline intrusion, pest and invasive species outbreaks and
spread, and ecosystem destruction.
This project directly addresses the risks of reduced water resources, which are further amplified by climate
change, through wastewater recycling and reuse, associated with climate change in Barbados. This is a
dilemma currently being faced by all persons in Barbados, albeit the vulnerable groups that this project will
address include farmers. The island’s drinking water supply is used extensively by small farmers as their
irrigation water supply. There is extensive use of conventional sprinkler systems and drip irrigation systems
since the government offers rebate incentives for the use of sprinkler and drip irrigation systems but there is
no surface irrigation (basin, furrow, flood recession) in the conventional sense, but the term is used to include
the use of garden-hose flooding and hand-watering; and there is little reuse of wastewater for irrigation. It
should further be recognized that women, who are among the most vulnerable to climate change, comprise
majority of the labour force involved in land preparation, weeding, crop protection and irrigation59.
Economic and Social Development Level of the Country
The Inter-American Development Bank’s Barbados Survey of Living Conditions 2016/2017 found that overall
levels of poverty were rising, up from 15% in 2010 to 17%. A further 11% of the population was considered
to be vulnerable. The Survey estimated that 21% of women were poor while 14% of men were poor. In
addition, 13% of women were considered vulnerable while 10% of men were considered vulnerable. Female
poverty and vulnerability stems both from direct and indirect discrimination, in the workplace and in social
contexts. The 2010 Country Assessment of Living Conditions found that 32% of children in Barbados live in
poverty. The child poverty rate was nearly double for those households in which females were the main
income earners than in those in which a male was the highest income earner: 41% compared to 22%60.
The overall unemployment rate is estimated to be around 10%, with female unemployment rate at 8.5% and
male unemployment rate at 11.6%. Women were also more likely than men to be under-employed: 1.7% of
employed women would work more hours, compared to 1.6% of employed men. Unpaid family workers tend
to be exclusively female61. This situation has been exacerbated since the onset of the COVID pandemic, as
evident by the findings of a rapid assessment survey undertaken by the IDB in June 2020 which indicated
that almost half of respondents that were employed before the pandemic reported losing their job (IDB 2020).
Not surprisingly, the shock affected low-income households more harshly (5 % reported job losses)
compared to middle and high-income ones (40% and 28%, respectively) 62. The adverse fiscal and GDP
impact of the pandemic has been significant. While the government achieved the targeted primary balance
surplus equivalent to 6% of GDP for the fiscal year 2019/20, the current account deficit increased to 6.2%
and real economic activity contracted by some 18% during 2020 and 3% in the first quarter of 2021, as the
59 FAO. 2015. AQUASTAT Country Profile – Barbados. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Rome, Italy
60 UNDP, UNICEF, UNWomen (2020). Barbados Covid-19 Heat Report. Human and Economic Assessment of Impact
61 Ibid
62 World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.

--- Table 1 on Page 70 ---
 | • High population density, which leads to high demand for already scarce resources, competition for | 
 | space, exacerbated risk of natural hazards, etc. | 
 | Social and economic risks: Climate change will impact already vulnerable groups disproportionately, | 
 | including youth and women, as well as lower income communities. Alongside the direct environmental effects | 
 | of climate change, the following social and economic impacts are equally important: | 
 | • Health: including increased heat stress and greater prevalence of water and vector-borne diseases; | 
 | • Tourism: including damage to coastal tourism infrastructure, biodiversity and landscape. Any | 
 | negative change in the quality of these tourism products will impact on the sector’s desirability, | 
 | demand and competitiveness. | 
 | • Water resources: reduced water availability for the population of Barbados resulting from drought or | 
 | groundwater contamination from flooding, soil or pollutant infiltration or saline intrusion; and | 
 | Fishery and agricultural industries: loss of domestic and/or international competitiveness resulting | 
 | from drought, flooding and storm damage, saline intrusion, pest and invasive species outbreaks and | 
 | spread, and ecosystem destruction. | 
 | This project directly addresses the risks of reduced water resources, which are further amplified by climate | 
 | change, through wastewater recycling and reuse, associated with climate change in Barbados. This is a | 
 | dilemma currently being faced by all persons in Barbados, albeit the vulnerable groups that this project will | 
 | address include farmers. The island’s drinking water supply is used extensively by small farmers as their | 
 | irrigation water supply. There is extensive use of conventional sprinkler systems and drip irrigation systems | 
 | since the government offers rebate incentives for the use of sprinkler and drip irrigation systems but there is | 
 | no surface irrigation (basin, furrow, flood recession) in the conventional sense, but the term is used to include | 
 | the use of garden-hose flooding and hand-watering; and there is little reuse of wastewater for irrigation. It | 
 | should further be recognized that women, who are among the most vulnerable to climate change, comprise | 
 | majority of the labour force involved in land preparation, weeding, crop protection and irrigation59. | 
 | Economic and Social Development Level of the Country | 
 | The Inter-American Development Bank’s Barbados Survey of Living Conditions 2016/2017 found that overall | 
 | levels of poverty were rising, up from 15% in 2010 to 17%. A further 11% of the population was considered | 
 | to be vulnerable. The Survey estimated that 21% of women were poor while 14% of men were poor. In | 
 | addition, 13% of women were considered vulnerable while 10% of men were considered vulnerable. Female | 
 | poverty and vulnerability stems both from direct and indirect discrimination, in the workplace and in social | 
 | contexts. The 2010 Country Assessment of Living Conditions found that 32% of children in Barbados live in | 
 | poverty. The child poverty rate was nearly double for those households in which females were the main | 
 | income earners than in those in which a male was the highest income earner: 41% compared to 22%60. | 
 | The overall unemployment rate is estimated to be around 10%, with female unemployment rate at 8.5% and | 
 | male unemployment rate at 11.6%. Women were also more likely than men to be under-employed: 1.7% of | 
 | employed women would work more hours, compared to 1.6% of employed men. Unpaid family workers tend | 
 | to be exclusively female61. This situation has been exacerbated since the onset of the COVID pandemic, as | 
 | evident by the findings of a rapid assessment survey undertaken by the IDB in June 2020 which indicated | 
 | that almost half of respondents that were employed before the pandemic reported losing their job (IDB 2020). | 
 | Not surprisingly, the shock affected low-income households more harshly (5 % reported job losses) | 
 | compared to middle and high-income ones (40% and 28%, respectively) 62. The adverse fiscal and GDP | 
 | impact of the pandemic has been significant. While the government achieved the targeted primary balance | 
 | surplus equivalent to 6% of GDP for the fiscal year 2019/20, the current account deficit increased to 6.2% | 
 | and real economic activity contracted by some 18% during 2020 and 3% in the first quarter of 2021, as the | 

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65
D
sharp decline in tourism negatively impacted the economy as a whole63. With a global economic recession
extending well into 2021, the outlook is negative.
Also notable is that between 2020 and 2021 alone, Barbados has had to manage the impacts suffered from
the synergies between the pandemic and two other crises: (1) the volcanic ash crisis, following the eruption
of La Soufrière in neighbouring St. Vincent and the Grenadines in early 2021, which has severely affected
Barbados’ agricultural sector, and more temporarily business and health and (2) the passage of Category 1
Hurricane Elsa on July 1, 2021 that was the first in 65 years causing widespread housing stock damage and
loss of key utilities such as power, internet and water causing further reduced productivity of key sectors
during the pandemic. The effect of these three shocks to the economy of Barbados coupled with its high
level of indebtedness will stymie the GOB’s capacities and resources to adapt to the further climate impacts
that will inevitably follow. This project is considered to be timely in advancing the much-needed adaptation
to climate change, as well as enabling Barbados to meet its aspirational goal to achieve a fossil fuel-free
economy and to reduce GHG emissions across all sectors to as close to zero as possible by 2030.
Furthermore, a recent assessment of the water and wastewater sector in Barbados revealed that there is
limited human and financial resources which limit the ability to monitor and enforce compliance with legal
and regulatory requirements pertaining to water and wastewater management in Barbados. Further, there is
need for better policy coordination across sectors particularly with respect to economic development
planning; tourism and agricultural development planning need to consider water availability and wastewater
management issues64. As such, a key component of this project is to provide the requisite training to the
operational staff at the BWA to ensure they can operate and maintain the new technologies to be installed.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
The GOB ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1994 and the
Kyoto Protocol in 2000. In September 2015, Barbados communicated its first Intended Nationally Determined
Contribution (INDC) to the UNFCCC Secretariat, then on 22 April 2016, Barbados signed and ratified the
Paris Agreement, which entered into force on 4 November 2016. The ambitions of the Paris Agreement to
limit the average temperature increase to 1.5 °C compared to pre-industrial temperatures meant that the
overall level of ambition in 2015 INDCs would be too low65. Notwithstanding Barbados' historically low level
of responsibility for the increase of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere, the GOB, in its 2019
Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP) and Implementation Plan, have set the aspirational goal to achieve
a fossil fuel-free economy and to reduce GHG emissions across all sectors to as close to zero as possible
by 2030.
In the area of climate change adaptation, Barbados maintains several important legal frameworks. Broadly
speaking, adaptation in Barbados is framed within the following legal tools: The Proclamation of the Planning
and Development Act, and the 2021 Physical Development Plan (PDP), which includes climate change
considerations for the first time and has been already approved by the Cabinet. The 2021 PDP addresses
the critical impacts of climate change on Barbados through policies and strategies that enable the people to
thrive and remain resilient under changing climate conditions. The Roofs-to-Roofs Programme (R2RP)
operationalizes the PDP and provides the vehicle through which public investment will be directed. R2RP
objectives are to:
(i) Make low- and middle-income homes more resilient to extreme weather events as well as possible
loss of the electricity grid and potable water distribution systems;
(ii) Increase freshwater storage capacity and water use efficiency;
63 2021 Barbados NDC Update (July 2021)
64 GEF (2019). National Package for Barbados under the CReW+: an integrated approach to water and wastewater management using innovative solutions
and promoting financing mechanisms in the Wider Caribbean Region (RG-G1016) Project
65 GOB (2021). Barbados 2021 Update of the First Nationally Determined Contribution. Available at:
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Barbados%20First/2021%20Barbados%20NDC%20update%20-
%2021%20July%202021.pdf. Accessed 20 November 2021

--- Table 1 on Page 71 ---
 | sharp decline in tourism negatively impacted the economy as a whole63. With a global economic recession | 
 | extending well into 2021, the outlook is negative. | 
 | Also notable is that between 2020 and 2021 alone, Barbados has had to manage the impacts suffered from | 
 | the synergies between the pandemic and two other crises: (1) the volcanic ash crisis, following the eruption | 
 | of La Soufrière in neighbouring St. Vincent and the Grenadines in early 2021, which has severely affected | 
 | Barbados’ agricultural sector, and more temporarily business and health and (2) the passage of Category 1 | 
 | Hurricane Elsa on July 1, 2021 that was the first in 65 years causing widespread housing stock damage and | 
 | loss of key utilities such as power, internet and water causing further reduced productivity of key sectors | 
 | during the pandemic. The effect of these three shocks to the economy of Barbados coupled with its high | 
 | level of indebtedness will stymie the GOB’s capacities and resources to adapt to the further climate impacts | 
 | that will inevitably follow. This project is considered to be timely in advancing the much-needed adaptation | 
 | to climate change, as well as enabling Barbados to meet its aspirational goal to achieve a fossil fuel-free | 
 | economy and to reduce GHG emissions across all sectors to as close to zero as possible by 2030. | 
 | Furthermore, a recent assessment of the water and wastewater sector in Barbados revealed that there is | 
 | limited human and financial resources which limit the ability to monitor and enforce compliance with legal | 
 | and regulatory requirements pertaining to water and wastewater management in Barbados. Further, there is | 
 | need for better policy coordination across sectors particularly with respect to economic development | 
 | planning; tourism and agricultural development planning need to consider water availability and wastewater | 
 | management issues64. As such, a key component of this project is to provide the requisite training to the | 
 | operational staff at the BWA to ensure they can operate and maintain the new technologies to be installed. | 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | The GOB ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1994 and the | 
 | Kyoto Protocol in 2000. In September 2015, Barbados communicated its first Intended Nationally Determined | 
 | Contribution (INDC) to the UNFCCC Secretariat, then on 22 April 2016, Barbados signed and ratified the | 
 | Paris Agreement, which entered into force on 4 November 2016. The ambitions of the Paris Agreement to | 
 | limit the average temperature increase to 1.5 °C compared to pre-industrial temperatures meant that the | 
 | overall level of ambition in 2015 INDCs would be too low65. Notwithstanding Barbados' historically low level | 
 | of responsibility for the increase of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere, the GOB, in its 2019 | 
 | Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP) and Implementation Plan, have set the aspirational goal to achieve | 
 | a fossil fuel-free economy and to reduce GHG emissions across all sectors to as close to zero as possible | 
 | by 2030. | 
 | In the area of climate change adaptation, Barbados maintains several important legal frameworks. Broadly | 
 | speaking, adaptation in Barbados is framed within the following legal tools: The Proclamation of the Planning | 
 | and Development Act, and the 2021 Physical Development Plan (PDP), which includes climate change | 
 | considerations for the first time and has been already approved by the Cabinet. The 2021 PDP addresses | 
 | the critical impacts of climate change on Barbados through policies and strategies that enable the people to | 
 | thrive and remain resilient under changing climate conditions. The Roofs-to-Roofs Programme (R2RP) | 
 | operationalizes the PDP and provides the vehicle through which public investment will be directed. R2RP | 
 | objectives are to: | 
 | (i) Make low- and middle-income homes more resilient to extreme weather events as well as possible | 
 | loss of the electricity grid and potable water distribution systems; | 
 | (ii) Increase freshwater storage capacity and water use efficiency; | 

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66
D
(iii) Reduce carbon emissions through the deployment of distributed renewable energy generation;
(iv) Decrease land-based sources of marine pollution;
(v) Implement more sustainable land (and marine space) use practices;
(vi) Make critical utility, water and sanitation and road infrastructure climate resilient; and
(vii) Restore the reduced coral reef ecosystem services particularly on the west and south coasts of the
island.
This project directly supports the achievement of objectives 3, 4 and 6 of the R2RP.
Also, the Barbados Growth and Development Strategy 2013-2020 analysed structural, systemic and
external factors that influence and impede sustainable growth in the Barbadian economy and proposes a
series of adjustments aimed at achieving reform, recovery and sustainability in the Barbadian economy
through new development pathways. The following sections of this Strategy have been identified to be
critically addressed by this project: section 2.1 Tourism, 2.2 Agriculture, 2.6 Reduction of GHGs, 3.1
Education and Training, 3.8 Environmental Sustainability and Green Economy. These sections are also
aligned with the Barbados’ National Climate Change Policy (NCCP), which was approved by Cabinet in
May 2012. The primary goal of the NCCP is to establish a national process for adapting to climate change
effects and minimizing greenhouse gas emissions over the short, medium and long term, in a manner that
is coordinated and consistent with the broader sustainable development aspiration which was one of the
mitigation demonstration measures approved by the National Climate Change Committee.
In addition, climate change adaptation and mitigation actions are incorporated into the following: White Paper
on the Development of Tourism in Barbados and National Adaptation; Coastal Zone Management Plan;
Storm Water Management Plan. Important to note that recent Cabinet Papers have included approval to
upgrade the South Coast Sewage Treatment Works to tertiary level treatment and a water reuse policy
paper. Green papers under development include a revision of the Groundwater Zoning Policy to change the
definition and extent of the existing zones, the development of an integrated wastewater management policy,
a stormwater management policy and a nearshore management policy. The aim of these initiatives is to
create a framework for the integrated management of water resources (IWRM). In addition to this, the BWA
has received funding to develop a Water and Wastewater Management Master Plan. Overall, there is an
impetus to overhaul the management of the water sector and to address the institutional challenges brought
to the fore by the 2015-16 drought and sewerage crisis on the South Coast that had become manifest over
the last five years. In 2020, a Government Green Paper “Water Protection and Land Use Zoning Policy”
(MEWR, 2020) set out proposals for changes in the Zoning taking into account the emerging threats,
proposing changes to the zoning and requirements for treatment of wastewaters. The Green Paper marks
a move towards a system where contamination of the groundwater is controlled at source. This entails: 1)
prohibiting suck wells as the primary means of wastewater treatment, 2) development of communal
wastewater treatment facilities, and 3) provision of guidance for wastewater treatment. Further, the
Government of Barbados (GOB) enacted a National Water Reuse Policy (NWRP), which states that “the
traditional interpretation of the term water must expand beyond conventional freshwater sources to
encompass treated wastewater (reclaimed water), storm water and other sources as part of the total water
resources”. These policies coupled with significant investment that the Government of Barbados is
channelling towards this sector are evident of the Government commitment to seeing a paradigm shift in the
how reclaimed water is managed and utilized.
The following are relevant legislation and policies from the water sector perspective: The Barbados Water
Authority Act (1980): establishes the Barbados Water Authority; Underground Water Control Act (1953):
provides for the control and use of the underground sources of water supply in the island. It establishes a
Water Board for the purpose of this Act. Licenses from the Board are required for the sinking of wells and
for the obstruction of underground water; Heath Services Act (1969): allows the Minister to divide Barbados
into health and sanitation districts. The Minister has the power to construct sewers. This Act also prohibits

--- Table 1 on Page 72 ---
 | (iii) Reduce carbon emissions through the deployment of distributed renewable energy generation; | 
 | (iv) Decrease land-based sources of marine pollution; | 
 | (v) Implement more sustainable land (and marine space) use practices; | 
 | (vi) Make critical utility, water and sanitation and road infrastructure climate resilient; and | 
 | (vii) Restore the reduced coral reef ecosystem services particularly on the west and south coasts of the | 
 | island. | 
 | This project directly supports the achievement of objectives 3, 4 and 6 of the R2RP. | 
 | Also, the Barbados Growth and Development Strategy 2013-2020 analysed structural, systemic and | 
 | external factors that influence and impede sustainable growth in the Barbadian economy and proposes a | 
 | series of adjustments aimed at achieving reform, recovery and sustainability in the Barbadian economy | 
 | through new development pathways. The following sections of this Strategy have been identified to be | 
 | critically addressed by this project: section 2.1 Tourism, 2.2 Agriculture, 2.6 Reduction of GHGs, 3.1 | 
 | Education and Training, 3.8 Environmental Sustainability and Green Economy. These sections are also | 
 | aligned with the Barbados’ National Climate Change Policy (NCCP), which was approved by Cabinet in | 
 | May 2012. The primary goal of the NCCP is to establish a national process for adapting to climate change | 
 | effects and minimizing greenhouse gas emissions over the short, medium and long term, in a manner that | 
 | is coordinated and consistent with the broader sustainable development aspiration which was one of the | 
 | mitigation demonstration measures approved by the National Climate Change Committee. | 
 | In addition, climate change adaptation and mitigation actions are incorporated into the following: White Paper | 
 | on the Development of Tourism in Barbados and National Adaptation; Coastal Zone Management Plan; | 
 | Storm Water Management Plan. Important to note that recent Cabinet Papers have included approval to | 
 | upgrade the South Coast Sewage Treatment Works to tertiary level treatment and a water reuse policy | 
 | paper. Green papers under development include a revision of the Groundwater Zoning Policy to change the | 
 | definition and extent of the existing zones, the development of an integrated wastewater management policy, | 
 | a stormwater management policy and a nearshore management policy. The aim of these initiatives is to | 
 | create a framework for the integrated management of water resources (IWRM). In addition to this, the BWA | 
 | has received funding to develop a Water and Wastewater Management Master Plan. Overall, there is an | 
 | impetus to overhaul the management of the water sector and to address the institutional challenges brought | 
 | to the fore by the 2015-16 drought and sewerage crisis on the South Coast that had become manifest over | 
 | the last five years. In 2020, a Government Green Paper “Water Protection and Land Use Zoning Policy” | 
 | (MEWR, 2020) set out proposals for changes in the Zoning taking into account the emerging threats, | 
 | proposing changes to the zoning and requirements for treatment of wastewaters. The Green Paper marks | 
 | a move towards a system where contamination of the groundwater is controlled at source. This entails: 1) | 
 | prohibiting suck wells as the primary means of wastewater treatment, 2) development of communal | 
 | wastewater treatment facilities, and 3) provision of guidance for wastewater treatment. Further, the | 
 | Government of Barbados (GOB) enacted a National Water Reuse Policy (NWRP), which states that “the | 
 | traditional interpretation of the term water must expand beyond conventional freshwater sources to | 
 | encompass treated wastewater (reclaimed water), storm water and other sources as part of the total water | 
 | resources”. These policies coupled with significant investment that the Government of Barbados is | 
 | channelling towards this sector are evident of the Government commitment to seeing a paradigm shift in the | 
 | how reclaimed water is managed and utilized. | 
 |  | 
 | The following are relevant legislation and policies from the water sector perspective: The Barbados Water | 
 | Authority Act (1980): establishes the Barbados Water Authority; Underground Water Control Act (1953): | 
 | provides for the control and use of the underground sources of water supply in the island. It establishes a | 
 | Water Board for the purpose of this Act. Licenses from the Board are required for the sinking of wells and | 
 | for the obstruction of underground water; Heath Services Act (1969): allows the Minister to divide Barbados | 
 | into health and sanitation districts. The Minister has the power to construct sewers. This Act also prohibits | 

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67
D
taking water from public taps without permission; Irrigation Act (1967): allows the Chief of Agriculture to carry
out surveys, investigation or research for irrigation purposes, to distribute water and to control or operate
waterworks; Prevention of Floods Act (1951): makes provision for measures for the prevention of floods;
National Water Conservation Plan: comprises two parts: long-term ongoing measures such as leakage
reduction and universal metering and short-term measures such as temporary shutdown of parts of the
system on a rotational basis or temporary licence restrictions on private abstractions (UN, 2004);
Groundwater Zoning Policy: implemented through the Town and Country Planning Office in collaboration
with the BWA, it controls development in areas of groundwater abstraction as a way of protecting
groundwater resources (2008).Most recently, the BWA established a Wastewater Department (WWD) to
properly manage Barbados’ wastewater problems, including building resilience into the country wastewater
systems. Also, a National Water Reuse Policy was enacted in October 2018, which sets as the vision that
water is a national resource which shall be used to improve the quality of life for citizens, maintain the natural
biodiversity of the land, and promote domestic, agricultural and industrial activities in support of sustainable
development and a green economy. The policy objective is to promote the safe use of reclaimed, storm and
non-potable water in urban, agricultural and the industrial sectors such that human health and environmental
quality is not compromised. Collectively, these policy and legal frameworks provide the basis for the
implementation of this project, which will also seek to strengthen gaps that exist, especially for
expanding/scaling-up wastewater reuse in Barbados.
Other notable policies which this project is aligned with include:
The Barbados Sustainable Development Policy (2004) sets out the landscape for sustainable
development from a Barbadian perspective. Embedded within the Policy are the adopted sustainable
development principles namely: quality of life, conservation of resources; economic efficiency; equity; and
participation. In the context of water resources management, the policy sought to conserve available
freshwater and within the agricultural sectors it encouraged the use of organic fertilizers and promoted
natural resources recycling and reuse, where possible.
The National Strategic Plan of Barbados 2006-2025 recognises that protecting and preserving our natural
and built environment is vital to achieving sustainable development. Goal four of the document sought to
promote and facilitate the sustainable use of our renewable resources, including the maintaining a safe and
reliable water supply, and the wise management of our non-renewable natural resources. The strategic plan
proposes a series of strategies which are designed to kindle the development of a green economy.
The foregoing indicates that there is strong political will and country ownership for implementing the results
of this project. Whilst Barbados does not have a finalized GCF country programme (currently being
undertaken through a readiness proposal with the GCF), technical capacities exist and are continually being
built for the management of GCF funded projects through the implementation of one project and two
readiness projects. The project, called the Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados
(WSRN S-Barbados), has a value of USD45.2 million (USD27.6 million financed by GCF) was launched in
May 2019 with a finalization date in 2024. This project is also focused on increasing the climate resiliency of
the water sector and has the CCCCC and the BWA as Executing Entities and are under the supervision of
the NDA.
The CCCCC coordinates the Caribbean region’s response to climate change, working on effective solutions
and projects to combat the existing and projected environmental impacts of climate variability, climate
change and extreme weather events. Guided by its Regional Strategic Framework – Achieving Development
Resilient to Climate Change (2009 – 2015), and its accompanying Implementation Plan (2011-2021) to
actualize the Framework, the Centre provides climate change related policy advice and guidelines to the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Member States through the CARICOM Secretariat and to the United
Kingdom (UK) Caribbean Overseas Territories. In its role as a Climate Centre, the entity is recognised by

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
 | taking water from public taps without permission; Irrigation Act (1967): allows the Chief of Agriculture to carry | 
 | out surveys, investigation or research for irrigation purposes, to distribute water and to control or operate | 
 | waterworks; Prevention of Floods Act (1951): makes provision for measures for the prevention of floods; | 
 | National Water Conservation Plan: comprises two parts: long-term ongoing measures such as leakage | 
 | reduction and universal metering and short-term measures such as temporary shutdown of parts of the | 
 | system on a rotational basis or temporary licence restrictions on private abstractions (UN, 2004); | 
 | Groundwater Zoning Policy: implemented through the Town and Country Planning Office in collaboration | 
 | with the BWA, it controls development in areas of groundwater abstraction as a way of protecting | 
 | groundwater resources (2008).Most recently, the BWA established a Wastewater Department (WWD) to | 
 | properly manage Barbados’ wastewater problems, including building resilience into the country wastewater | 
 | systems. Also, a National Water Reuse Policy was enacted in October 2018, which sets as the vision that | 
 | water is a national resource which shall be used to improve the quality of life for citizens, maintain the natural | 
 | biodiversity of the land, and promote domestic, agricultural and industrial activities in support of sustainable | 
 | development and a green economy. The policy objective is to promote the safe use of reclaimed, storm and | 
 | non-potable water in urban, agricultural and the industrial sectors such that human health and environmental | 
 | quality is not compromised. Collectively, these policy and legal frameworks provide the basis for the | 
 | implementation of this project, which will also seek to strengthen gaps that exist, especially for | 
 | expanding/scaling-up wastewater reuse in Barbados. | 
 | Other notable policies which this project is aligned with include: | 
 | The Barbados Sustainable Development Policy (2004) sets out the landscape for sustainable | 
 | development from a Barbadian perspective. Embedded within the Policy are the adopted sustainable | 
 | development principles namely: quality of life, conservation of resources; economic efficiency; equity; and | 
 | participation. In the context of water resources management, the policy sought to conserve available | 
 | freshwater and within the agricultural sectors it encouraged the use of organic fertilizers and promoted | 
 | natural resources recycling and reuse, where possible. | 
 | The National Strategic Plan of Barbados 2006-2025 recognises that protecting and preserving our natural | 
 | and built environment is vital to achieving sustainable development. Goal four of the document sought to | 
 | promote and facilitate the sustainable use of our renewable resources, including the maintaining a safe and | 
 | reliable water supply, and the wise management of our non-renewable natural resources. The strategic plan | 
 | proposes a series of strategies which are designed to kindle the development of a green economy. | 
 | The foregoing indicates that there is strong political will and country ownership for implementing the results | 
 | of this project. Whilst Barbados does not have a finalized GCF country programme (currently being | 
 | undertaken through a readiness proposal with the GCF), technical capacities exist and are continually being | 
 | built for the management of GCF funded projects through the implementation of one project and two | 
 | readiness projects. The project, called the Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados | 
 | (WSRN S-Barbados), has a value of USD45.2 million (USD27.6 million financed by GCF) was launched in | 
 | May 2019 with a finalization date in 2024. This project is also focused on increasing the climate resiliency of | 
 | the water sector and has the CCCCC and the BWA as Executing Entities and are under the supervision of | 
 | the NDA. | 
 |  | 
 |  | 
 | The CCCCC coordinates the Caribbean region’s response to climate change, working on effective solutions | 
 | and projects to combat the existing and projected environmental impacts of climate variability, climate | 
 | change and extreme weather events. Guided by its Regional Strategic Framework – Achieving Development | 
 | Resilient to Climate Change (2009 – 2015), and its accompanying Implementation Plan (2011-2021) to | 
 | actualize the Framework, the Centre provides climate change related policy advice and guidelines to the | 
 | Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Member States through the CARICOM Secretariat and to the United | 
 | Kingdom (UK) Caribbean Overseas Territories. In its role as a Climate Centre, the entity is recognised by | 

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68
D
the UNFCCC, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and other international agencies as the
focal point for climate change issues in the Caribbean. It has also been recognised by the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) as a Centre of Excellence, one of an elite few. Further, the
CCCCC has an established and proven track-record as the leader in climate change adaptation planning
and management studies throughout the Caribbean and have implemented substantial climate change
response initiatives projects funded by donors such as the European Union, the German Development Bank,
UN-ECLAC and IDB, to note a few. This proven track record will ensure effective and efficient project delivery
and guarantee the sustainability of programme outcomes and impacts. More importantly, the CCCCC is the
repository of current state-of-the-art climate change models in the Caribbean region.
As the AE, the CCCCC will provide overall management for the project and facilitate information sharing and
marketing via its online portal. Its role as an AE also includes having overall responsibility and oversight for
the project, which involves project implementation and supervision, financial management, and project
monitoring and reporting. The partners will share equally in the implementation of the respective portions of
the programme. Further, for better project coordination, and taking a programmatic approach, the CCCCC
has established the Programme Development and Management Unit (PDMU). The PDMU is comprised of
a Project Manager, a National Project Coordinator, a Project Engineer, a Procurement Officer, a Finance
Officer and two (2) Admin Officers and will draw upon the other collective expertise within the Centre to carry
out the Project Implementation function. All activities will be scrutinized alongside the Centre’s approved
Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS), Gender, Stakeholders’ Consultation and Anti-Money
Laundering and Countering Financing for Terrorism (AML/CFT) Policies to ensure they are in consonance
with the objectives of those Policies. Furthermore, gender and no-discriminatory considerations and strict
adherence to financial best practices will be pursued.
The NDA has and continue to support the development of this project and is committed to leading the charge
to see this project approved and implemented in Barbados. The NDA has provided a letter of no-objection
to accompany this projects submission to the GCF (See Annex 1). The NDA has also signal the willing lead
effort to ensure continued political buy-in and support at the highest levels of government and will function
as the GCF’s contact person in country. The NDA will provide in-kind support, through the Public Investment
Unit, to assist with the implementation of the project activities under the project, in particular those activities
that require coordination among line ministries and engagement with the GCF on reporting and verification.
Further, the technical-working group66, which is a cross-sectoral group of high-level technical officers, will
continue to provide technical guidance during implementation and draft cabinet papers for reporting the
cabinet on matter pertaining to the project.
Country ownership through stakeholder engagement and consultations is the cornerstone of the 3R-CReWS
project. Since its inception, even more so during the PPF stage, several stakeholders were engaged and
consulted. These consultations were critical to arrive at final proposal that response to needs of the people
of Barbados. The list of stakeholders consulted can be found in the stakeholder analysis as well as the
Feasibility Study. Going forward, as is demonstrated by the activities outline in Component 3 and 4, this
project will continue to engage all relevant national and community level stakeholders of Barbados, which
will encompass both the public and private sector. This is critical for the outputs to resulting in outcomes and
outcomes into desired paradigm shift, sustainability and impact beyond the life of the 3R-CReWS Project.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Adequacy of Financial Structure
The instrument of funding requested for the implementation of this project is a combination of grants from
the GCF and co-financing from the BWA. These funds will be used for creating a paradigm shift in the
66 The Technical Working Group has representatives from: BWA, Environmental Protection Department, Ministry of Health and Wellness, Ministry of
Agriculture and Food Security, Ministry of Finance Economic Affairs and Investment, Coastal Zone Management Unit, Government Analytical Services,
and Planning and Development Department.

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
 | the UNFCCC, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and other international agencies as the | 
 | focal point for climate change issues in the Caribbean. It has also been recognised by the United Nations | 
 | Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) as a Centre of Excellence, one of an elite few. Further, the | 
 | CCCCC has an established and proven track-record as the leader in climate change adaptation planning | 
 | and management studies throughout the Caribbean and have implemented substantial climate change | 
 | response initiatives projects funded by donors such as the European Union, the German Development Bank, | 
 | UN-ECLAC and IDB, to note a few. This proven track record will ensure effective and efficient project delivery | 
 | and guarantee the sustainability of programme outcomes and impacts. More importantly, the CCCCC is the | 
 | repository of current state-of-the-art climate change models in the Caribbean region. | 
 | As the AE, the CCCCC will provide overall management for the project and facilitate information sharing and | 
 | marketing via its online portal. Its role as an AE also includes having overall responsibility and oversight for | 
 | the project, which involves project implementation and supervision, financial management, and project | 
 | monitoring and reporting. The partners will share equally in the implementation of the respective portions of | 
 | the programme. Further, for better project coordination, and taking a programmatic approach, the CCCCC | 
 | has established the Programme Development and Management Unit (PDMU). The PDMU is comprised of | 
 | a Project Manager, a National Project Coordinator, a Project Engineer, a Procurement Officer, a Finance | 
 | Officer and two (2) Admin Officers and will draw upon the other collective expertise within the Centre to carry | 
 | out the Project Implementation function. All activities will be scrutinized alongside the Centre’s approved | 
 | Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS), Gender, Stakeholders’ Consultation and Anti-Money | 
 | Laundering and Countering Financing for Terrorism (AML/CFT) Policies to ensure they are in consonance | 
 | with the objectives of those Policies. Furthermore, gender and no-discriminatory considerations and strict | 
 | adherence to financial best practices will be pursued. | 
 | The NDA has and continue to support the development of this project and is committed to leading the charge | 
 | to see this project approved and implemented in Barbados. The NDA has provided a letter of no-objection | 
 | to accompany this projects submission to the GCF (See Annex 1). The NDA has also signal the willing lead | 
 | effort to ensure continued political buy-in and support at the highest levels of government and will function | 
 | as the GCF’s contact person in country. The NDA will provide in-kind support, through the Public Investment | 
 | Unit, to assist with the implementation of the project activities under the project, in particular those activities | 
 | that require coordination among line ministries and engagement with the GCF on reporting and verification. | 
 | Further, the technical-working group66, which is a cross-sectoral group of high-level technical officers, will | 
 | continue to provide technical guidance during implementation and draft cabinet papers for reporting the | 
 | cabinet on matter pertaining to the project. | 
 |  | 
 | Country ownership through stakeholder engagement and consultations is the cornerstone of the 3R-CReWS | 
 | project. Since its inception, even more so during the PPF stage, several stakeholders were engaged and | 
 | consulted. These consultations were critical to arrive at final proposal that response to needs of the people | 
 | of Barbados. The list of stakeholders consulted can be found in the stakeholder analysis as well as the | 
 | Feasibility Study. Going forward, as is demonstrated by the activities outline in Component 3 and 4, this | 
 | project will continue to engage all relevant national and community level stakeholders of Barbados, which | 
 | will encompass both the public and private sector. This is critical for the outputs to resulting in outcomes and | 
 | outcomes into desired paradigm shift, sustainability and impact beyond the life of the 3R-CReWS Project. | 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | Adequacy of Financial Structure | 
 | The instrument of funding requested for the implementation of this project is a combination of grants from | 
 | the GCF and co-financing from the BWA. These funds will be used for creating a paradigm shift in the | 

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69
D
wastewater management practices of Barbados through the deployment and transfer of appropriate
technologies and the promotion of an enabling environment that promotes institutional, financial, social and
environmental sustainability (See Section D.3).
A spreadsheet-based Dynamic Economic and Financial Model (DEFM) was developed for this project (See
Annex 3), which was premised on four development cases ranging from: a ‘base case’ of no development,
no reuse, and no climate change; a ‘no growth’ case with planned developments, climate change and reuse
of reclaimed water; a ‘business as usual’ case with more planned developments incorporated, climate
change, the reuse of reclaimed water, and modest population and economic growth, and; a ‘growth and
development’ case in which there is significant expansion of the wastewater collection systems and hence
flows through the treatment plants, climate change, the reuse of reclaimed water and moderate population
and economic growth (See more details in Annex 2). This model considered the programmatic approach
that is being utilised to transform the management of wastewater. The model considers the investments to
be made at the South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant (SCSTP) and a similar pipeline that is being
considered for delivery of reclaimed water associated with the SCSTP to farmers on the east of the island
(see Table 2 and 3 in Section B.5). The results of the DEFM are shown in the Table 5 below.
Table 5: Model Output Results
Base case No growth Business as usual Growth &
USD million development
USD million USD million USD million
Total NPV Capital &
US$209.70 US$302.76 US$302,76 US$372.89
Operational Costs
NPV Benefits US$73.37 US$139.60 US$195.17 US$451.53
Benefit Cost Ratio 0.34 0.46 0.64 1.21
IRR - - - 9.1%
GHG emissions
• Tonnes
avoided 42,800 75,155 90,971 164,713
• NPV Avoided US$0.45 US$0.78 US$1.82 US$3.10
costs
Net farm revenues
- US$121.578 US$148.866 US$258.877
generated
Multiplier effect of
- US$5.601 US$6.858 US$11.926
farming employment
Import substitution - US$21.75 US$43.50 US$72.49
Public health benefits US$0.34 US$0.34 US$0.34 US$0.34
Environmental
US $581.46 US $581.46 US $581.46 US $581.46
benefits
Social Cost Benefit
3.1 3.1 3.5 4.1
Ratio
Source: Cashman, 2021
The results indicate the sensitivity of outcomes to the volume of wastewater flow generated and supporting
irrigated agriculture. Financial viability improves due to a combination of increased treated water flows
supporting irrigated agriculture and the generation of additional income to farmers. The Cost-Benefit ratio
and Internal Rate of Return improve as more wastewater is generated. The results indicate that whilst the
capital and operational costs increase from the “Business as Usual” to the “Growth and Development” case
by 23%, the benefits increase by over 130%. When the economic benefits are taken into account, the Social
Cost-Benefit Ratio improves across the board due to the role a healthy marine environment plays in
supporting Barbados’ tourism sector. The positive Social Cost-Benefit ratios reflects the wider social and
environmental benefits that would flow from implementation of the project.
Also notable is that the DEFM also explored 5 sets of sensitivity analyses (I) alternative assumptions of
inflation and discount rates, (ii) the impact of water savings technology, (iii) the effect of Climate Change, (iv)
alternative tariffs for water supplied to agriculture, and (v) alternative Development Scenarios. Findings

--- Table 1 on Page 75 ---
 | wastewater management practices of Barbados through the deployment and transfer of appropriate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | technologies and the promotion of an enabling environment that promotes institutional, financial, social and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | environmental sustainability (See Section D.3). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | A spreadsheet-based Dynamic Economic and Financial Model (DEFM) was developed for this project (See |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Annex 3), which was premised on four development cases ranging from: a ‘base case’ of no development, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | no reuse, and no climate change; a ‘no growth’ case with planned developments, climate change and reuse |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of reclaimed water; a ‘business as usual’ case with more planned developments incorporated, climate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | change, the reuse of reclaimed water, and modest population and economic growth, and; a ‘growth and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | development’ case in which there is significant expansion of the wastewater collection systems and hence |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | flows through the treatment plants, climate change, the reuse of reclaimed water and moderate population |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and economic growth (See more details in Annex 2). This model considered the programmatic approach |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | that is being utilised to transform the management of wastewater. The model considers the investments to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | be made at the South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant (SCSTP) and a similar pipeline that is being |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | considered for delivery of reclaimed water associated with the SCSTP to farmers on the east of the island |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (see Table 2 and 3 in Section B.5). The results of the DEFM are shown in the Table 5 below. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Table 5: Model Output Results |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Base case |  |  | No growth |  | Business as usual
USD million |  |  |  | Growth & |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | development |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | USD million |  |  | USD million |  |  |  |  |  | USD million |  | 
 |  | Total NPV Capital & |  | US$209.70 |  |  | US$302.76 |  |  | US$302,76 |  |  | US$372.89 |  |  | 
 |  | Operational Costs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | NPV Benefits |  |  | US$73.37 |  |  | US$139.60 |  |  | US$195.17 |  |  | US$451.53 |  | 
 |  | Benefit Cost Ratio |  |  | 0.34 |  |  | 0.46 |  |  | 0.64 |  |  | 1.21 |  | 
 |  | IRR |  |  | - |  |  | - |  |  | - |  |  | 9.1% |  | 
 |  | GHG emissions |  | 42,800
US$0.45 |  |  | 75,155
US$0.78 |  |  | 90,971
US$1.82 |  |  | 164,713
US$3.10 |  |  | 
 |  | • Tonnes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | avoided |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | • NPV Avoided |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | costs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Net farm revenues |  | - |  |  | US$121.578 |  |  | US$148.866 |  |  | US$258.877 |  |  | 
 |  | generated |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Multiplier effect of |  | - |  |  | US$5.601 |  |  | US$6.858 |  |  | US$11.926 |  |  | 
 |  | farming employment |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Import substitution |  |  | - |  |  | US$21.75 |  |  | US$43.50 |  |  | US$72.49 |  | 
 |  | Public health benefits |  |  | US$0.34 |  |  | US$0.34 |  |  | US$0.34 |  |  | US$0.34 |  | 
 |  | Environmental |  | US $581.46 |  |  | US $581.46 |  |  | US $581.46 |  |  | US $581.46 |  |  | 
 |  | benefits |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Social Cost Benefit |  | 3.1 |  |  | 3.1 |  |  | 3.5 |  |  | 4.1 |  |  | 
 |  | Ratio |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Source: Cashman, 2021 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | The results indicate the sensitivity of outcomes to the volume of wastewater flow generated and supporting |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | irrigated agriculture. Financial viability improves due to a combination of increased treated water flows |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | supporting irrigated agriculture and the generation of additional income to farmers. The Cost-Benefit ratio |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and Internal Rate of Return improve as more wastewater is generated. The results indicate that whilst the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | capital and operational costs increase from the “Business as Usual” to the “Growth and Development” case |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | by 23%, the benefits increase by over 130%. When the economic benefits are taken into account, the Social |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Cost-Benefit Ratio improves across the board due to the role a healthy marine environment plays in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | supporting Barbados’ tourism sector. The positive Social Cost-Benefit ratios reflects the wider social and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | environmental benefits that would flow from implementation of the project. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Also notable is that the DEFM also explored 5 sets of sensitivity analyses (I) alternative assumptions of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | inflation and discount rates, (ii) the impact of water savings technology, (iii) the effect of Climate Change, (iv) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | alternative tariffs for water supplied to agriculture, and (v) alternative Development Scenarios. Findings |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 75 ---
Business as usual
USD million

--- Table 3 on Page 75 ---

42,800
US$0.45

--- Table 4 on Page 75 ---

75,155
US$0.78

--- Table 5 on Page 75 ---

90,971
US$1.82

--- Table 6 on Page 75 ---

164,713
US$3.10

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70
D
reconfirm the importance, from a financial standpoint, of having sewerage systems that are able to collect
and treat sufficient volumes of wastewater for reclamation and onward provision for reuse. The onward
provision for reuse of treated wastewater is critical to generating income to offset the capital and operational
costs. The initial costs of establishing the sewage and distribution infrastructure will be high, but the marginal
capital cost of treating wastewater and supplying reclaimed water decreases with each addition unit of
volume. At the same time the marginal benefit of having an extra unit of volume increases. The financial
Benefit-Cost ratios become positive as more water is collected and provided for irrigation. The Benefit-Cost
ratio increases to greater than 1 when the benefits from the development of irrigated agriculture are added
for the Business-as-usual case. The ratio continues to increase as more water is made available for reuse.
Hence, investment in the capital works that on the one side increase the volume of wastewater collected
and on the other make it available for productive reuse is a necessity in order to realise the potential benefits.
Secondly, the financial outcome is sensitive to the assumption of the tariff for the provision of irrigation water.
Whilst changes in tariffs have a similar effect as increasing wastewater collection volumes, increasing tariffs
is less desirable due to the likely substitution and income effects (Hicksian substitution). Increases in tariffs
might affect the level of economic activity by irrigation farmers with other effects on the local economy and
food imports.
In summary the DEMF found that the project will be financially sustainable given that with the investments
proposed the income revenue streams will be greater than the capital and operational expenses. This
assumes that GCF grant funding is made available and other complementary projects to 3R-CReWS project
are implemented. If it is not the case and debt financing instruments are used, then this will have a negative
effect on financial performance indicators. And the project has the capability of increasing revenues through
opportunities to expand collection coverage. In addition, the project will benefit the BWA through institutional
strengthening and capacity building improving its planning and management capabilities. It supports
initiatives within the BWA of structuring its activities towards a greater emphasis on forward planning and
the proposed implementation of an Innovations Division and a Strategic Planning and Regulation Division.
Use of Best Practices and Available Technologies
In additional to the findings of the financial and economic model, efficiency and effectiveness will be
promoted by this project through the following:
• The final upgrade considerations that were selected for this project met several criteria that were
hinged on efficiency and effectiveness. The evaluation criteria included: land area requirement,
operator skill level requirement, technology adaptability, capital cost, operating labour cost, energy
requirement, process robustness (including ability to accommodate wastewater variability), water
quality achieved and water reuse applications (See Integrated Sustainability 3R-CReWS Conceptual
Design Report: Section 3.5).
• The construction of smaller decentralized sewage collection and treatment sites with a cluster of
connections within sensitive groundwater extraction zones (Zone A) is a lower cost strategy that
focuses financial resources for wastewater management on areas with the greatest potential to
impact groundwater resources (environmental costs) and be impacted by climate change either due
to the need for additional water resources due to drought (social and economic costs)
• The PV systems to be installed will withstand of at least category 3 hurricanes thereby promoting
both climate change adaptation and mitigation benefits.
• Strengthening the engagement of the private sector through various avenues (RAFF mechanism,
training, engagement strategy, incentive programme)

--- Table 1 on Page 76 ---
 | reconfirm the importance, from a financial standpoint, of having sewerage systems that are able to collect | 
 | and treat sufficient volumes of wastewater for reclamation and onward provision for reuse. The onward | 
 | provision for reuse of treated wastewater is critical to generating income to offset the capital and operational | 
 | costs. The initial costs of establishing the sewage and distribution infrastructure will be high, but the marginal | 
 | capital cost of treating wastewater and supplying reclaimed water decreases with each addition unit of | 
 | volume. At the same time the marginal benefit of having an extra unit of volume increases. The financial | 
 | Benefit-Cost ratios become positive as more water is collected and provided for irrigation. The Benefit-Cost | 
 | ratio increases to greater than 1 when the benefits from the development of irrigated agriculture are added | 
 | for the Business-as-usual case. The ratio continues to increase as more water is made available for reuse. | 
 | Hence, investment in the capital works that on the one side increase the volume of wastewater collected | 
 | and on the other make it available for productive reuse is a necessity in order to realise the potential benefits. | 
 | Secondly, the financial outcome is sensitive to the assumption of the tariff for the provision of irrigation water. | 
 | Whilst changes in tariffs have a similar effect as increasing wastewater collection volumes, increasing tariffs | 
 | is less desirable due to the likely substitution and income effects (Hicksian substitution). Increases in tariffs | 
 | might affect the level of economic activity by irrigation farmers with other effects on the local economy and | 
 | food imports. | 
 | In summary the DEMF found that the project will be financially sustainable given that with the investments | 
 | proposed the income revenue streams will be greater than the capital and operational expenses. This | 
 | assumes that GCF grant funding is made available and other complementary projects to 3R-CReWS project | 
 | are implemented. If it is not the case and debt financing instruments are used, then this will have a negative | 
 | effect on financial performance indicators. And the project has the capability of increasing revenues through | 
 | opportunities to expand collection coverage. In addition, the project will benefit the BWA through institutional | 
 | strengthening and capacity building improving its planning and management capabilities. It supports | 
 | initiatives within the BWA of structuring its activities towards a greater emphasis on forward planning and | 
 | the proposed implementation of an Innovations Division and a Strategic Planning and Regulation Division. | 
 |  | 
 | Use of Best Practices and Available Technologies | 
 | In additional to the findings of the financial and economic model, efficiency and effectiveness will be | 
 | promoted by this project through the following: | 
 | • The final upgrade considerations that were selected for this project met several criteria that were | 
 | hinged on efficiency and effectiveness. The evaluation criteria included: land area requirement, | 
 | operator skill level requirement, technology adaptability, capital cost, operating labour cost, energy | 
 | requirement, process robustness (including ability to accommodate wastewater variability), water | 
 | quality achieved and water reuse applications (See Integrated Sustainability 3R-CReWS Conceptual | 
 | Design Report: Section 3.5). | 
 | • The construction of smaller decentralized sewage collection and treatment sites with a cluster of | 
 | connections within sensitive groundwater extraction zones (Zone A) is a lower cost strategy that | 
 | focuses financial resources for wastewater management on areas with the greatest potential to | 
 | impact groundwater resources (environmental costs) and be impacted by climate change either due | 
 | to the need for additional water resources due to drought (social and economic costs) | 
 | • The PV systems to be installed will withstand of at least category 3 hurricanes thereby promoting | 
 | both climate change adaptation and mitigation benefits. | 
 | • Strengthening the engagement of the private sector through various avenues (RAFF mechanism, | 
 | training, engagement strategy, incentive programme) | 

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71
E
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
E.1. Project/Programme Focus
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages)
Assessment Current state (baseline) Potential target How the project/programme will contribute
scenario
Dimension (Description)
Description Rating (Description)
The interest in wastewater reuse has been An additional 235 The 9km pipeline to be installed will enable the distribution
documented for some time; for example, the Hectares of agriculture of reclaimed water to farmers located in the parish of St.
IWRM Road Map for Barbados, which was land available to Michael, which is one of four options investigated in the
drafted in 2008, identified the need to implement irrigation, feasibility study. The option selected (9km pipeline) is
encourage wastewater reuse as a key aquifer recharge and other considered by the GOB to be the first phase of a larger
recommendation from stakeholder non-potable water uses. enterprise to extend and expand the use of reclaimed
consultations (CEHI, 2008). Further, the legal An increase in the volume water for irrigation, aquifer recharge and non-potable
regulatory framework in Barbados has been of wastewater captured water uses. It is envisioned that the distribution pipeline
recently updated to better inform wastewater and treated to tertiary should be extended further north along the west coast of
management and reuse options, quality and levels for non-potable Barbados and up to the parish of St Lucy to irrigate an
standards. These include the Zoning Policy, water uses. The marginal additional 235 hectares of agriculture land. The extension
Planning and Development Act, Wastewater capital cost of treating and of the pipeline coupled with the expansion of the
Reuse Bill to note a few. This signal of interest supplying reclaimed water decentralized wastewater treatment systems approach
Scale Low
in the use of treated wastewater is an important decreases with each will increase the volume of wastewater collected, treated
precondition for scaling up the scope and additional unit of volume of and reclaimed for irrigation, aquifer recharge and non-
impact of this project. However, there are no wastewater that becomes potable water uses. The latter will also be supported
pipelines installed to date to transport reclaimed available. An enabling through the legislative review, the water and sanitation
water for irrigation and aquifer recharge environment is masterplan and public education and awareness activities
purposes. strengthened for planned under this project. For instance, the promotion of
wastewater treatment dual system plumbing in households and businesses to
technology deployment, facilitate the use of reclaimed water for non-potable
dissemination and purposes in households and businesses. Also notable is
innovation that this project is specifically targeting a combination of
activities targeting private sector engagement since they
can have an important role in scaling-up the decentralized
wastewater treatment systems approach. Specifically, this

--- Table 1 on Page 77 ---
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.1. Project/Programme Focus |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Assessment
Dimension |  | Current state (baseline) |  |  | Potential target
scenario |  | How the project/programme will contribute
(Description) |  | 
 |  | Description | Rating |  | (Description) |  |  |  | 
Scale |  | The interest in wastewater reuse has been
documented for some time; for example, the
IWRM Road Map for Barbados, which was
drafted in 2008, identified the need to
encourage wastewater reuse as a key
recommendation from stakeholder
consultations (CEHI, 2008). Further, the legal
regulatory framework in Barbados has been
recently updated to better inform wastewater
management and reuse options, quality and
standards. These include the Zoning Policy,
Planning and Development Act, Wastewater
Reuse Bill to note a few. This signal of interest
in the use of treated wastewater is an important
precondition for scaling up the scope and
impact of this project. However, there are no
pipelines installed to date to transport reclaimed
water for irrigation and aquifer recharge
purposes. | Low | An additional 235
Hectares of agriculture
land available to
implement irrigation,
aquifer recharge and other
non-potable water uses.
An increase in the volume
of wastewater captured
and treated to tertiary
levels for non-potable
water uses. The marginal
capital cost of treating and
supplying reclaimed water
decreases with each
additional unit of volume of
wastewater that becomes
available. An enabling
environment is
strengthened for
wastewater treatment
technology deployment,
dissemination and
innovation | An additional 235 |  |  | The 9km pipeline to be installed will enable the distribution | 
 |  |  |  |  | Hectares of agriculture |  |  | of reclaimed water to farmers located in the parish of St. | 
 |  |  |  |  | land available to |  |  | Michael, which is one of four options investigated in the | 
 |  |  |  |  | implement irrigation, |  |  | feasibility study. The option selected (9km pipeline) is | 
 |  |  |  |  | aquifer recharge and other |  |  | considered by the GOB to be the first phase of a larger | 
 |  |  |  |  | non-potable water uses. |  |  | enterprise to extend and expand the use of reclaimed | 
 |  |  |  |  | An increase in the volume |  |  | water for irrigation, aquifer recharge and non-potable | 
 |  |  |  |  | of wastewater captured |  |  | water uses. It is envisioned that the distribution pipeline | 
 |  |  |  |  | and treated to tertiary |  |  | should be extended further north along the west coast of | 
 |  |  |  |  | levels for non-potable |  |  | Barbados and up to the parish of St Lucy to irrigate an | 
 |  |  |  |  | water uses. The marginal |  |  | additional 235 hectares of agriculture land. The extension | 
 |  |  |  |  | capital cost of treating and |  |  | of the pipeline coupled with the expansion of the | 
 |  |  |  |  | supplying reclaimed water |  |  | decentralized wastewater treatment systems approach | 
 |  |  |  |  | decreases with each |  |  | will increase the volume of wastewater collected, treated | 
 |  |  |  |  | additional unit of volume of |  |  | and reclaimed for irrigation, aquifer recharge and non- | 
 |  |  |  |  | wastewater that becomes |  |  | potable water uses. The latter will also be supported | 
 |  |  |  |  | available. An enabling |  |  | through the legislative review, the water and sanitation | 
 |  |  |  |  | environment is |  |  | masterplan and public education and awareness activities | 
 |  |  |  |  | strengthened for |  |  | planned under this project. For instance, the promotion of | 
 |  |  |  |  | wastewater treatment |  |  | dual system plumbing in households and businesses to | 
 |  |  |  |  | technology deployment, |  |  | facilitate the use of reclaimed water for non-potable | 
 |  |  |  |  | dissemination and |  |  | purposes in households and businesses. Also notable is | 
 |  |  |  |  | innovation |  |  | that this project is specifically targeting a combination of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | activities targeting private sector engagement since they | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | can have an important role in scaling-up the decentralized | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater treatment systems approach. Specifically, this | 

--- Table 2 on Page 77 ---
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)

--- Table 3 on Page 77 ---
The interest in wastewater reuse has been
documented for some time; for example, the
IWRM Road Map for Barbados, which was
drafted in 2008, identified the need to
encourage wastewater reuse as a key
recommendation from stakeholder
consultations (CEHI, 2008). Further, the legal
regulatory framework in Barbados has been
recently updated to better inform wastewater
management and reuse options, quality and
standards. These include the Zoning Policy,
Planning and Development Act, Wastewater
Reuse Bill to note a few. This signal of interest
in the use of treated wastewater is an important
precondition for scaling up the scope and
impact of this project. However, there are no
pipelines installed to date to transport reclaimed
water for irrigation and aquifer recharge
purposes.

=== PAGE 78 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72
E
project has earmarked the following activities that will
enhance the ability of the private sector to scale-up the
decentralized wastewater treatment systems approach: (i)
development of an action plan for the engagement of the
private sector in the provision and adoption of wastewater
treatment technology and the utilization of wastewater by-
product, (ii) expansion of the Revolving Adaptation Fund
Facility (RAFF) to provide resources to private individuals
and businesses for the adoption of decentralized onsite
wastewater systems (iii) development and implementation
of a gender sensitive and socially inclusive incentive
programme to encourage wastewater reuse applications
(iv) undertaking a review of the legislative framework to
support enforcement of what is in place and to identify
gaps that needs attention for the use of reclaimed water,
including in the engagement of the private sector (v) the
PEA campaign will include materials to encourage,
promote and train the private sector to take advantage of
the potential markets opportunities for the expansion of
decentralized onsite and cluster wastewater systems and
the adoption of water reclamation technologies
As of 2018, there were sixty-eight (68) private An additional 16 Zone A Recalling that the BSTP and the SCSTP plants only serve
wastewater treatment plants of which eighteen communities to benefit 10 to 15% of the population of Barbados, then the scope
(18) used the treated wastewater for reuse from the installation of for replicating the decentralized wastewater treatment
applications. However, there is no treatment of decentralized wastewater systems is expansive. Recently the Government of
wastewater and reuse in any of the identified treatment systems 2 -3 Barbados has identified 18 Zone A locations as priority
Zone A locations. There is 1 RO plant installed RO plants installed along areas for the installation of decentralized wastewater
along Spring Garden on the west coast of the west coast corridor treatment systems. Zone A areas are identified as
Barbados, which also happens to be privately Replication of this project locations most sensitive to groundwater contamination as
owned. A review by the GEF CReW+ initiative in at least 2 CARICOM a result of wastewater and are most sensitive to climate
Replicability Low
found that participating countries (Antigua and member states related risks with a limit to water resources. Therefore, the
Barbuda, Belize, Guyana, Saint Lucia, Trinidad decentralized wastewater treatment systems to be
and Tobago, Barbados, Jamaica, St. Vincent installed in the Belle Zone A area and Bellevue Gap Zone
and the Grenadines and Suriname) show A area under this project will serve as an opportunity to
evidence of establishing wastewater as a learn lessons for replication in the other 16 Zone A
national priority. However, activity towards locations in the near future. It is envisaged with
implementation of the Protocol Concerning strengthened private sector engagement through the
Pollution from Land-Based Sources and activities planned under this project, the decentralized
Activities (LBS Protocol) provisions is limited. wastewater treatment systems will be replicated across

--- Table 1 on Page 78 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | project has earmarked the following activities that will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | enhance the ability of the private sector to scale-up the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | decentralized wastewater treatment systems approach: (i) | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | development of an action plan for the engagement of the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | private sector in the provision and adoption of wastewater | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | treatment technology and the utilization of wastewater by- | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | product, (ii) expansion of the Revolving Adaptation Fund | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Facility (RAFF) to provide resources to private individuals | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | and businesses for the adoption of decentralized onsite | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater systems (iii) development and implementation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | of a gender sensitive and socially inclusive incentive | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | programme to encourage wastewater reuse applications | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (iv) undertaking a review of the legislative framework to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | support enforcement of what is in place and to identify | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | gaps that needs attention for the use of reclaimed water, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | including in the engagement of the private sector (v) the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | PEA campaign will include materials to encourage, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | promote and train the private sector to take advantage of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | the potential markets opportunities for the expansion of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | decentralized onsite and cluster wastewater systems and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | the adoption of water reclamation technologies | 
Replicability |  | As of 2018, there were sixty-eight (68) private |  | Low | An additional 16 Zone A
communities to benefit
from the installation of
decentralized wastewater
treatment systems 2 -3
RO plants installed along
the west coast corridor
Replication of this project
in at least 2 CARICOM
member states |  | Recalling that the BSTP and the SCSTP plants only serve | 
 |  | wastewater treatment plants of which eighteen |  |  |  |  | 10 to 15% of the population of Barbados, then the scope | 
 |  | (18) used the treated wastewater for reuse |  |  |  |  | for replicating the decentralized wastewater treatment | 
 |  | applications. However, there is no treatment of |  |  |  |  | systems is expansive. Recently the Government of | 
 |  | wastewater and reuse in any of the identified |  |  |  |  | Barbados has identified 18 Zone A locations as priority | 
 |  | Zone A locations. There is 1 RO plant installed |  |  |  |  | areas for the installation of decentralized wastewater | 
 |  | along Spring Garden on the west coast of |  |  |  |  | treatment systems. Zone A areas are identified as | 
 |  | Barbados, which also happens to be privately |  |  |  |  | locations most sensitive to groundwater contamination as | 
 |  | owned. A review by the GEF CReW+ initiative |  |  |  |  | a result of wastewater and are most sensitive to climate | 
 |  | found that participating countries (Antigua and |  |  |  |  | related risks with a limit to water resources. Therefore, the | 
 |  | Barbuda, Belize, Guyana, Saint Lucia, Trinidad |  |  |  |  | decentralized wastewater treatment systems to be | 
 |  | and Tobago, Barbados, Jamaica, St. Vincent |  |  |  |  | installed in the Belle Zone A area and Bellevue Gap Zone | 
 |  | and the Grenadines and Suriname) show |  |  |  |  | A area under this project will serve as an opportunity to | 
 |  | evidence of establishing wastewater as a |  |  |  |  | learn lessons for replication in the other 16 Zone A | 
 |  | national priority. However, activity towards |  |  |  |  | locations in the near future. It is envisaged with | 
 |  | implementation of the Protocol Concerning |  |  |  |  | strengthened private sector engagement through the | 
 |  | Pollution from Land-Based Sources and |  |  |  |  | activities planned under this project, the decentralized | 
 |  | Activities (LBS Protocol) provisions is limited. |  |  |  |  | wastewater treatment systems will be replicated across | 

--- Table 2 on Page 78 ---
An additional 16 Zone A
communities to benefit
from the installation of
decentralized wastewater
treatment systems 2 -3
RO plants installed along
the west coast corridor
Replication of this project
in at least 2 CARICOM
member states

=== PAGE 79 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73
E
These countries have pointed to the limited the country. Further, based on lessons learned from the
availability of financial resources for Spring Garden Reverse Osmosis Plant (See Feasibility
infrastructure, capacity-building, appropriate Study), which is the first of its kind in Barbados, this project
technology and research and development will support investigations and strategic planning for the
needed to make the much-needed installation of water treatment facilities along the west
improvements in the wastewater sector coast corridor for augmenting water supply and protecting
the west coast ecosystem (Activity 3.2.1). Finally, the role
of the CCCCC as the AE coupled with their role as a
CARICOM Specialized Agency implies that they are
ideally positioned to promote the lessons emerging from
the use of reclaimed water and creation of a wastewater
market to other CARICOM Member States. The likelihood
of replication in other SIDS is also increased by the fact
that the fourth and fifth IPCC reports indicated that there
will be increased water stress due to increasing
temperatures, reduced annual rainfall and salinization of
freshwater resources.
Policy, incentives and Legislation - the legal Paradigm shift in the use Under component three, enhancement of capabilities
regulatory framework in Barbados has been of reclaimed water among (technical and operations management) to operate,
recently updated to better inform wastewater the entire population of maintain and monitor the wastewater and renewable
management and reuse options, quality and Barbados (demand side) energy technologies will be advanced which is key for
standards. These include the Zoning Policy, Green jobs created and sustainability. Having a cadre of highly trained operators
Planning and Development Act, Wastewater sustained in the medium at the BWA will ensure that there is a well-developed
Reuse Bill to note a few. to long term through the preventative maintenance (PM) program to extend the life
Technical Capacity - a recent internal expansion of the of the equipment and to keep it functioning at the design
discussion paper (at BWA) noted that the knowledge and skills level to maintain effluent quality and reduce any
managerial span of control at BWA was too capacity and the creation environmental impacts or health and safety issues.
Low
wide and is inefficient and ineffective, of a market related to Majority of component four was designed to strengthen
Sustainability
particularly for the wastewater section. This is wastewater sector (supply the enabling environment for promoting sustainability.
coupled with the fact that external training side). Specifically, the outputs will ensure that there is adequate
opportunities are very limited, and an internal The project will make a legislation related to wastewater reuse and adoption of
training program is lacking at the BWA. positive contribution to the treatment technologies, bolstering private sector
Operations and equipment - the maintenance achievement of engagement in the provision and adoption of wastewater
focus at BWA has shifted from Preventative Sustainable Development treatment technology through various approaches
Maintenance (PM) towards emergency Goals, specifically Goals (engagement strategy), putting in place a long-term water
breakdown maintenance due to lack of 2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 17 and sanitation masterplan to guide long term planning for
dedicated staff and financial resources for PM. the sustainable management of the water sector and for
The operational manuals a very dated. There further strengthening its resilience to climate risks,
are no functional automated control systems recommending options for an incentive programme for

--- Table 1 on Page 79 ---
 | These countries have pointed to the limited
availability of financial resources for
infrastructure, capacity-building, appropriate
technology and research and development
needed to make the much-needed
improvements in the wastewater sector |  |  |  |  | the country. Further, based on lessons learned from the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Spring Garden Reverse Osmosis Plant (See Feasibility | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Study), which is the first of its kind in Barbados, this project | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | will support investigations and strategic planning for the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | installation of water treatment facilities along the west | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | coast corridor for augmenting water supply and protecting | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | the west coast ecosystem (Activity 3.2.1). Finally, the role | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | of the CCCCC as the AE coupled with their role as a | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | CARICOM Specialized Agency implies that they are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | ideally positioned to promote the lessons emerging from | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | the use of reclaimed water and creation of a wastewater | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | market to other CARICOM Member States. The likelihood | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | of replication in other SIDS is also increased by the fact | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | that the fourth and fifth IPCC reports indicated that there | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | will be increased water stress due to increasing | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | temperatures, reduced annual rainfall and salinization of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | freshwater resources. | 
Sustainability |  | Policy, incentives and Legislation - the legal | Low | Paradigm shift in the use
of reclaimed water among
the entire population of
Barbados (demand side)
Green jobs created and
sustained in the medium
to long term through the
expansion of the
knowledge and skills
capacity and the creation
of a market related to
wastewater sector (supply
side).
The project will make a
positive contribution to the
achievement of
Sustainable Development
Goals, specifically Goals
2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 17 |  | Under component three, enhancement of capabilities | 
 |  | regulatory framework in Barbados has been |  |  |  | (technical and operations management) to operate, | 
 |  | recently updated to better inform wastewater |  |  |  | maintain and monitor the wastewater and renewable | 
 |  | management and reuse options, quality and |  |  |  | energy technologies will be advanced which is key for | 
 |  | standards. These include the Zoning Policy, |  |  |  | sustainability. Having a cadre of highly trained operators | 
 |  | Planning and Development Act, Wastewater |  |  |  | at the BWA will ensure that there is a well-developed | 
 |  | Reuse Bill to note a few. |  |  |  | preventative maintenance (PM) program to extend the life | 
 |  | Technical Capacity - a recent internal |  |  |  | of the equipment and to keep it functioning at the design | 
 |  | discussion paper (at BWA) noted that the |  |  |  | level to maintain effluent quality and reduce any | 
 |  | managerial span of control at BWA was too |  |  |  | environmental impacts or health and safety issues. | 
 |  | wide and is inefficient and ineffective, |  |  |  | Majority of component four was designed to strengthen | 
 |  | particularly for the wastewater section. This is |  |  |  | the enabling environment for promoting sustainability. | 
 |  | coupled with the fact that external training |  |  |  | Specifically, the outputs will ensure that there is adequate | 
 |  | opportunities are very limited, and an internal |  |  |  | legislation related to wastewater reuse and adoption of | 
 |  | training program is lacking at the BWA. |  |  |  | treatment technologies, bolstering private sector | 
 |  | Operations and equipment - the maintenance |  |  |  | engagement in the provision and adoption of wastewater | 
 |  | focus at BWA has shifted from Preventative |  |  |  | treatment technology through various approaches | 
 |  | Maintenance (PM) towards emergency |  |  |  | (engagement strategy), putting in place a long-term water | 
 |  | breakdown maintenance due to lack of |  |  |  | and sanitation masterplan to guide long term planning for | 
 |  | dedicated staff and financial resources for PM. |  |  |  | the sustainable management of the water sector and for | 
 |  | The operational manuals a very dated. There |  |  |  | further strengthening its resilience to climate risks, | 
 |  | are no functional automated control systems |  |  |  | recommending options for an incentive programme for | 

--- Table 2 on Page 79 ---
These countries have pointed to the limited
availability of financial resources for
infrastructure, capacity-building, appropriate
technology and research and development
needed to make the much-needed
improvements in the wastewater sector

=== PAGE 80 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74
E
that optimizes energy efficiency of the current promoting the use of wastewater technologies and use of
water treatment systems. The SCADA system reclaimed water by households and businesses,
installed at the lift stations and the flow are not expanding the RAFF and targeted PEA materials.
operational at this time.
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)
Target
GCF Result IRMF
Means of Verification (MoV) Baseline Assumptions / Note
Area Indicator Mid-term Final67
Plant upgrades and PV
system implemented
one year before project
closure.
Reports of Solar Photovoltaic Energy
(PV) generation, BLP monthly Co2 grid emission
electricity bills and statements of factor is 0.684.
credit (from Feed in Tariffs) and
Core 1: GHG BWA Engineering in Operations and 1,635 tCO 2 e avoided Quantity of net
Total amount of emissions Maintenance Report No change by 2028 electricity generation
GHG emission
reduced, avoided
0
from by the 1MW PV is
reduction or BLP monthly electricity bills and baseline by 2,063 MWh per year
removed/sequest statements of credit (from Feed in 2026. 40,875 tCO 2 e avoided
ered over 25 years Assume life term of PV
Tariffs) and
system is
BWA Engineering in Operations
approximately 25
and Maintenance Report
years.
Energy efficient
technology and
controls are operating
optimally and reduction
in energy consumption
67 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end of the total lifespan
period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

--- Table 1 on Page 80 ---
 | that optimizes energy efficiency of the current
water treatment systems. The SCADA system
installed at the lift stations and the flow are not
operational at this time. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | promoting the use of wastewater technologies and use of
reclaimed water by households and businesses,
expanding the RAFF and targeted PEA materials. |  |  | 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
GCF Result
Area |  | IRMF
Indicator | Means of Verification (MoV) |  |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  |  | Assumptions / Note
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  |  | Final67 |  | 
Total amount of
GHG emission
reduction |  | Core 1: GHG
emissions
reduced, avoided
or
removed/sequest
ered | Reports of Solar Photovoltaic Energy
(PV) generation, BLP monthly
electricity bills and statements of
credit (from Feed in Tariffs) and
BWA Engineering in Operations and
Maintenance Report
BLP monthly electricity bills and
statements of credit (from Feed in
Tariffs) and
BWA Engineering in Operations
and Maintenance Report |  |  | 0 | No change
from
baseline by
2026. |  |  | 1,635 tCO e avoided
2
by 2028
40,875 tCO e avoided
2
over 25 years |  | Plant upgrades and PV
system implemented
one year before project
closure.
Co2 grid emission
factor is 0.684.
Quantity of net
electricity generation
by the 1MW PV is
2,063 MWh per year
Assume life term of PV
system is
approximately 25
years.
Energy efficient
technology and
controls are operating
optimally and reduction
in energy consumption

--- Table 2 on Page 80 ---
that optimizes energy efficiency of the current
water treatment systems. The SCADA system
installed at the lift stations and the flow are not
operational at this time

--- Table 3 on Page 80 ---
promoting the use of wastewater technologies and use of
reclaimed water by households and businesses,
expanding the RAFF and targeted PEA materials.

--- Table 4 on Page 80 ---
GCF Result
Area

--- Table 5 on Page 80 ---
IRMF
Indicator

=== PAGE 81 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75
E
of 328.5 MWh
achieved.
Plant upgrades and PV
system implemented
one year before project
closure.
Core 1: GHG Reports of Solar Photovoltaic Energy 1,411 tCO e avoided Co2 grid emission
2
emissions (PV) generation, BLP monthly No change by 2028 factor is 0.684.
MRA1 Energy
reduced, avoided electricity bills and statements of from
generation and 0
or credit (from Feed in Tariffs) and baseline by Quantity of net
access
removed/sequest BWA Engineering in Operations and 2026. 35,275 tCO 2 e avoided electricity generation
ered Maintenance Report over 25 years by the 1MW PV is
2,063 MWh per year
Assume life term of PV
system is
approximately 25
years.
Conditions are
favourable for the
Site inspections, equipment
installation of the PV
MRA1 Energy Supplementary specifications, procurement reports, No change
0.18 MW of 1.18 MW of solar panels.
generation and 1.3: Installed BWA Supervising Engineer's from
solar panels in power installed by The PV panels are
access renewable energy Certification of Completion, BWA baseline by
place at BSTP 2028 routinely monitored
capacity Engineering in Operations and 2026.
and maintained/
Maintenance Report
repaired to ensure they
function optimally.
BLP monthly electricity bills and Energy efficient
Core 1: GHG 224 tCO e avoided by
statements of credit (from Feed in 2 technology and
MRA3 Buildings, emissions 2028
Tariffs) and No change controls are operating
cities, industries reduced, avoided
and appliances or BWA Engineering in Operations and 0 from 5,600 tCO e avoided optimally and reduction
baseline. 2 in energy consumption
removed/sequest Maintenance Report over 25 years
of 328.5 MWh
ered
achieved.

--- Table 1 on Page 81 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | of 328.5 MWh
achieved.
MRA1 Energy
generation and
access | Core 1: GHG
emissions
reduced, avoided
or
removed/sequest
ered | Reports of Solar Photovoltaic Energy
(PV) generation, BLP monthly
electricity bills and statements of
credit (from Feed in Tariffs) and
BWA Engineering in Operations and
Maintenance Report | 0 | No change
from
baseline by
2026. | 1,411 tCO e avoided
2
by 2028
35,275 tCO e avoided
2
over 25 years | Plant upgrades and PV
system implemented
one year before project
closure.
Co2 grid emission
factor is 0.684.
Quantity of net
electricity generation
by the 1MW PV is
2,063 MWh per year
Assume life term of PV
system is
approximately 25
years.
MRA1 Energy
generation and
access | Supplementary
1.3: Installed
renewable energy
capacity | Site inspections, equipment
specifications, procurement reports,
BWA Supervising Engineer's
Certification of Completion, BWA
Engineering in Operations and
Maintenance Report | 0.18 MW of
solar panels in
place at BSTP | No change
from
baseline by
2026. | 1.18 MW of solar
power installed by
2028 | Conditions are
favourable for the
installation of the PV
panels.
The PV panels are
routinely monitored
and maintained/
repaired to ensure they
function optimally.
MRA3 Buildings,
cities, industries
and appliances | Core 1: GHG
emissions
reduced, avoided
or
removed/sequest
ered | BLP monthly electricity bills and
statements of credit (from Feed in
Tariffs) and
BWA Engineering in Operations and
Maintenance Report | 0 | No change
from
baseline. | 224 tCO e avoided by
2
2028
5,600 tCO e avoided
2
over 25 years | Energy efficient
technology and
controls are operating
optimally and reduction
in energy consumption
of 328.5 MWh
achieved.

=== PAGE 82 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76
E
BSTP fully upgraded
0 (Power and operational at
BLP monthly electricity bills and consumption at least one year before
MRA3 Buildings, Annual energy savings
Supplementary statements of credit (from Feed in BSTP 2017- No change project closure.
cities, industries of 328.5 MWh per year
1.1: Annual Tariffs) and 2020 averaged from
and appliances relative to the baseline
energy savings BWA Engineering in Operations and approximately baseline. Energy efficient
by 2028.
Maintenance Report 1,642.5 MWh technology and
per year.) controls are operating
optimally.
20,500 Assume successful
direct education and
beneficiarie 277,821 (136,132males communication
s by 2026 and 141,689 females) programs for
(10,045 (excluding tourists) communities and water
males and direct and indirect sector technical staff;
10,455 beneficiaries reached Participation in
Ministry of Agriculture
females) (1,377,200 if average awareness workshops
database/records on Farmers in annual tourists arrival and campaign, and
Total number of Core 2: Direct and target areas, registration forms for is included)68 by 2028 buy-in
direct and indirect training Assume policies and
0
indirect project beneficiaries events/workshops/consultations, 136,220 direct legislation change to
beneficiaries reached website analytics for project website beneficiaries by 2028 promote the use of
and social media accounts, site (66,748 males and reclaimed water for
visits, survey/questionnaire reports. 16,500 69,472 females) non-potable water
indirect uses including urban
beneficiarie 141,601, indirect irrigation of
s by 2026 beneficiaries by 2028 landscaped areas,
(8,085 (69,384 males and toilet and urinal
males and 72,217 females) flushing, vehicle, and
8,415 road surface washing,
females) building cooling, etc.
ARA1 Most Core 2: Direct and Ministry of Agriculture 20,000 Assume successful
0
vulnerable indirect database/records on Farmers in direct education and
68 Direct beneficiaries are considered to be all households connected to the STPs, users of reclaimed water, population benefiting from the decentralized system, participants of training, fishermen and the tourism
sector (through reduced impact from ocean outfalls). Individuals connected to the STP is estimated to be approximately 15% of the population. Using the median, of 15% of 277,821 = 41,674; Individuals benefiting
from the decentralized wastewater systems = 646; Users of the reclaimed water (total trained) = 155 (280) farmers; 400 employees at BWA from customized training; 750 students from school programme; 92,250
persons engaged at the community level consultations and public education and awareness efforts; 120 private businesses engaged and 100 new jobs created. wastewater Tourists = 1,237,200 average between
2014-2018 (WorldBank Data). Direct and indirect stakeholders: all of Barbados or 277,821 persons (based on the 2010 census of a total population of 277,821)

--- Table 1 on Page 82 ---
MRA3 Buildings,
cities, industries
and appliances | Supplementary
1.1: Annual
energy savings | BLP monthly electricity bills and
statements of credit (from Feed in
Tariffs) and
BWA Engineering in Operations and
Maintenance Report | 0 (Power
consumption at
BSTP 2017-
2020 averaged
approximately
1,642.5 MWh
per year.) | No change
from
baseline. | Annual energy savings
of 328.5 MWh per year
relative to the baseline
by 2028. | BSTP fully upgraded
and operational at
least one year before
project closure.
Energy efficient
technology and
controls are operating
optimally.
Total number of
direct and
indirect project
beneficiaries | Core 2: Direct and
indirect
beneficiaries
reached | Ministry of Agriculture
database/records on Farmers in
target areas, registration forms for
training
events/workshops/consultations,
website analytics for project website
and social media accounts, site
visits, survey/questionnaire reports. | 0 | 20,500
direct
beneficiarie
s by 2026
(10,045
males and
10,455
females)
16,500
indirect
beneficiarie
s by 2026
(8,085
males and
8,415
females) | 277,821 (136,132males
and 141,689 females)
(excluding tourists)
direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached
(1,377,200 if average
annual tourists arrival
is included)68 by 2028
136,220 direct
beneficiaries by 2028
(66,748 males and
69,472 females)
141,601, indirect
beneficiaries by 2028
(69,384 males and
72,217 females) | Assume successful
education and
communication
programs for
communities and water
sector technical staff;
Participation in
awareness workshops
and campaign, and
buy-in
Assume policies and
legislation change to
promote the use of
reclaimed water for
non-potable water
uses including urban
irrigation of
landscaped areas,
toilet and urinal
flushing, vehicle, and
road surface washing,
building cooling, etc.
ARA1 Most
vulnerable | Core 2: Direct and
indirect | Ministry of Agriculture
database/records on Farmers in | 0 | 20,000
direct |  | Assume successful
education and

=== PAGE 83 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77
E
people and beneficiaries target areas, registration forms for beneficiarie 93,300 direct communication
communities reached training s by 2026 beneficiaries by 2028 programs for
events/workshops/consultations, (9,800 (47,583 females, communities and water
website analytics for project website males and 45,717 males) sector technical staff;
10,200 Participation in
and social media accounts, site
females) 141,601, indirect awareness workshops
visits, survey/questionnaire reports.
beneficiaries by 2028 and campaign, and
16,500 (69,384 males and buy-in
indirect 72,217 females) Assume policies and
beneficiarie legislation change to
s by 2026 promote the use of
(8,085 reclaimed water for
males and non-potable water
8,415 uses including urban
females) irrigation of
landscaped areas,
toilet and urinal
flushing, vehicle, and
road surface washing,
building cooling, etc.
The 2010 census is
still reflective of the
120 population today
280 persons directly
persons Assume policies and
benefiting (168 males
(farmers legislation change to
and 112 females) by
directly) 2028 promote the use of
Ministry of Agriculture benefiting reclaimed water for
non-potable water
ARA2 Health, Core 2: Direct and database/records on Farmers in (72 males
uses including urban
well-being, food indirect target areas, site visits, and 48
0 irrigation of
and water beneficiaries survey/questionnaire reports, females) by
landscaped areas,
security reached census reports, by parish. BWA 2026.
toilet and urinal
water supply records. 116,000 indirect
flushing, vehicle, and
beneficiaries by 2028
road surface washing,
0 persons (56,850 males and building cooling, etc.
59,150 females) by
indirectly
2028
benefiting Persons will access
the RAFF and
implement wastewater

--- Table 1 on Page 83 ---
people and
communities | beneficiaries
reached | target areas, registration forms for
training
events/workshops/consultations,
website analytics for project website
and social media accounts, site
visits, survey/questionnaire reports. |  | beneficiarie
s by 2026
(9,800
males and
10,200
females)
16,500
indirect
beneficiarie
s by 2026
(8,085
males and
8,415
females) | 93,300 direct
beneficiaries by 2028
(47,583 females,
45,717 males)
141,601, indirect
beneficiaries by 2028
(69,384 males and
72,217 females) | communication
programs for
communities and water
sector technical staff;
Participation in
awareness workshops
and campaign, and
buy-in
Assume policies and
legislation change to
promote the use of
reclaimed water for
non-potable water
uses including urban
irrigation of
landscaped areas,
toilet and urinal
flushing, vehicle, and
road surface washing,
building cooling, etc.
ARA2 Health,
well-being, food
and water
security | Core 2: Direct and
indirect
beneficiaries
reached | Ministry of Agriculture
database/records on Farmers in
target areas, site visits,
survey/questionnaire reports,
census reports, by parish. BWA
water supply records. | 0 | 120
persons
(farmers
directly)
benefiting
(72 males
and 48
females) by
2026.
0 persons
indirectly
benefiting | 280 persons directly
benefiting (168 males
and 112 females) by
2028
116,000 indirect
beneficiaries by 2028
(56,850 males and
59,150 females) by
2028 | The 2010 census is
still reflective of the
population today
Assume policies and
legislation change to
promote the use of
reclaimed water for
non-potable water
uses including urban
irrigation of
landscaped areas,
toilet and urinal
flushing, vehicle, and
road surface washing,
building cooling, etc.
Persons will access
the RAFF and
implement wastewater

=== PAGE 84 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78
E
treatment technologies
and utilise reclaimed
water on farmes.
1000 private entities
will benefit from
lessons learnt and
strategy for involving
private sector in the
wastewater sector.
41,746 is
approximately 15% of
the population of
Barbados
Average household
size in Zone A areas is
550 2.87 persons.
42,880 individuals
individuals
(21,121 males and
(275 males
21,759 females)
BWA Reports, and 275 Number of jobs
directly benefiting by
females) created is estimated
ARA3 Core 2: Direct and Survey/questionnaire reports for 2028
directly based on procurement
Infrastructure indirect Zone A areas, Training workshop
0 benefiting plan and estimate
and built beneficiaries report and evaluation survey,
by 2026. number persons
environment reached Project Documents Report, site 129,249 indirect
required to exclude the
visit and observations. beneficiaries by 2028
works contract. 26
( 63,332 males and
0 persons individual contracts, 6
65,917 females) by
indirectly consulting firm
2028
benefiting contracts (3 persons
per contract) and 8
works and non-
consulting services
contracts (average 7
persons per contract).
13,410 individuals
(4624 Zone A

--- Table 1 on Page 84 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | treatment technologies
and utilise reclaimed
water on farmes.
1000 private entities
will benefit from
lessons learnt and
strategy for involving
private sector in the
wastewater sector.
ARA3
Infrastructure
and built
environment | Core 2: Direct and
indirect
beneficiaries
reached | BWA Reports,
Survey/questionnaire reports for
Zone A areas, Training workshop
report and evaluation survey,
Project Documents Report, site
visit and observations. | 0 | 550
individuals
(275 males
and 275
females)
directly
benefiting
by 2026.
0 persons
indirectly
benefiting | 42,880 individuals
(21,121 males and
21,759 females)
directly benefiting by
2028
129,249 indirect
beneficiaries by 2028
( 63,332 males and
65,917 females) by
2028 | 41,746 is
approximately 15% of
the population of
Barbados
Average household
size in Zone A areas is
2.87 persons.
Number of jobs
created is estimated
based on procurement
plan and estimate
number persons
required to exclude the
works contract. 26
individual contracts, 6
consulting firm
contracts (3 persons
per contract) and 8
works and non-
consulting services
contracts (average 7
persons per contract).
13,410 individuals
(4624 Zone A

=== PAGE 85 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79
E
households) will
indirectly benefiting
from knowledge and
lessons learnt for
implementation of the
two decentralise
plants.
SOP and Training of
BWA Staff will benefit
BWA entire customer
base.
Upgrade to the plant
will indirectly benefit
the population
(100,000 less direct
beneficiaries) of
Bridgetown.
The 2010 census is
still reflective of the
120
population today
persons
Assume policies and
(farmers
legislation change to
Supplementary Ministry of Agriculture directly) 280 persons directly promote the use of
ARA2 Health,
2.3: Beneficiaries database/records on Farmers in benefiting benefiting (168 males reclaimed water for
well-being, food
(female/male) target areas, site visits, (72 males and 112 females) by non-potable water
and water 0
with more climate- survey/questionnaire reports, census and 48 2028 uses including urban
security
resilient water reports, by parish. BWA water females) by irrigation of
security supply records. 2026. landscaped areas,
toilet and urinal
flushing, vehicle, and
road surface washing,
building cooling, etc.
ARA3: Supplementary 550 41,746 is
BWA Reports, Survey/questionnaire 42,880 individuals
Infrastructure 2.5: Beneficiaries individuals approximately 15% of
reports for Zone A areas, Training 0 (21,121 males and
and built (female/male) (275 males the population of
workshop report and evaluation 21,759 females)
environment adopting and 275 Barbados

--- Table 1 on Page 85 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | households) will
indirectly benefiting
from knowledge and
lessons learnt for
implementation of the
two decentralise
plants.
SOP and Training of
BWA Staff will benefit
BWA entire customer
base.
Upgrade to the plant
will indirectly benefit
the population
(100,000 less direct
beneficiaries) of
Bridgetown.
ARA2 Health,
well-being, food
and water
security | Supplementary
2.3: Beneficiaries
(female/male)
with more climate-
resilient water
security | Ministry of Agriculture
database/records on Farmers in
target areas, site visits,
survey/questionnaire reports, census
reports, by parish. BWA water
supply records. | 0 | 120
persons
(farmers
directly)
benefiting
(72 males
and 48
females) by
2026. | 280 persons directly
benefiting (168 males
and 112 females) by
2028 | The 2010 census is
still reflective of the
population today
Assume policies and
legislation change to
promote the use of
reclaimed water for
non-potable water
uses including urban
irrigation of
landscaped areas,
toilet and urinal
flushing, vehicle, and
road surface washing,
building cooling, etc.
ARA3:
Infrastructure
and built
environment | Supplementary
2.5: Beneficiaries
(female/male)
adopting | BWA Reports, Survey/questionnaire
reports for Zone A areas, Training
workshop report and evaluation | 0 | 550
individuals
(275 males
and 275 | 42,880 individuals
(21,121 males and
21,759 females) | 41,746 is
approximately 15% of
the population of
Barbados

=== PAGE 86 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80
E
innovations that survey, Project Documents Report, females) directly benefiting by
strengthen site visit and observations. directly 2028.
climate benefiting Average household
change resilience by 2026. size in Zone A areas is
(number of 2.87 persons.
individuals)
Number of jobs
created is estimated
based on procurement
plan and estimate
number persons
required to exclude the
works contract. 26
individual contracts, 6
consulting firm
contracts (3 persons
per contract) and 8
works and non-
consulting services
contracts (average 7
persons per contract).
13,410 individuals
(4624 Zone A
households) will
indirectly benefiting
from knowledge and
lessons learnt for
implementation of the
two decentralise
plants.
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)

--- Table 1 on Page 86 ---
 | innovations that
strengthen
climate
change resilience
(number of
individuals) | survey, Project Documents Report,
site visit and observations. |  | females)
directly
benefiting
by 2026. | directly benefiting by
2028. | Average household
size in Zone A areas is
2.87 persons.
Number of jobs
created is estimated
based on procurement
plan and estimate
number persons
required to exclude the
works contract. 26
individual contracts, 6
consulting firm
contracts (3 persons
per contract) and 8
works and non-
consulting services
contracts (average 7
persons per contract).
13,410 individuals
(4624 Zone A
households) will
indirectly benefiting
from knowledge and
lessons learnt for
implementation of the
two decentralise
plants.

=== PAGE 87 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81
E
Baseline context Rating for current Target scenario
Core Indicator How the project will contribute Coverage
(description) state (baseline) (description)
Policy, incentives and The overall aim of the project's
Legislation - the legal emphasis on the legislative framework
regulatory framework in is to create a roadmap that (i)
Barbados has been promotes what is now being
recently updated to institutionalized for the wastewater
better inform wastewater sector, as well as (ii) strengthening
management and reuse any gaps identified (See Activity
options, quality and 4.1.1). Hence, this project will play a
standards. These key role in strengthening the
include the Zoning legislative framework. Further, the
Policy, Planning and project will be developing a long-term
Core Indicator 5: Degree Development Act, water and sanitation master plan that
to which GCF Wastewater Reuse Bill High degree to which will be based on international best
to note a few. Barbados the GCF investment practice and takes into consideration
investments contribute
has adopted an strengthens institutional the current water protection, land use
to strengthening
incentive approach, and regulatory and water reuse policies, recent National
institutional and
using market medium frameworks for low studies and assessments in the water level (one
regulatory frameworks
instruments to achieve emission climate- and sanitation sectors as well as country)
for low emission climate-
sustainable tourism resilient development current and planned capital
resilient development
practices. The Tourism pathways in a country- expenditure projects, including the
pathways in a country- Development Act driven manner 3R-CReWS, when approved. Hence,
driven manner (2002), states that an this master plan will support and
operator who incurs promote a coherent and
expenditure in improving comprehensive planning approach to
the wastewater disposal the management of the water and
system be allowed a tax sanitation sector. There will be a high
credit of 20% of the attainment on institutional
capital cost of fittings, strengthening given the project's
pipes and pumps used contribution to building technical
in the improvement of capacities of BWA through targeted
the wastewater system. and customized training (SCADA,
The policy and operator, CAS, RO, CMMS etc.),
regulatory environment enhancing operational effectiveness

--- Table 1 on Page 87 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Core Indicator | Baseline context
(description) |  | Rating for current
state (baseline) | Target scenario
(description) | How the project will contribute |  | Coverage
Core Indicator 5: Degree
to which GCF
investments contribute
to strengthening
institutional and
regulatory frameworks
for low emission climate-
resilient development
pathways in a country-
driven manner |  | Policy, incentives and | medium | High degree to which
the GCF investment
strengthens institutional
and regulatory
frameworks for low
emission climate-
resilient development
pathways in a country-
driven manner |  | The overall aim of the project's | National
level (one
country)
 |  | Legislation - the legal |  |  |  | emphasis on the legislative framewor | 
 |  | regulatory framework in |  |  |  | is to create a roadmap that (i) | 
 |  | Barbados has been |  |  |  | promotes what is now being | 
 |  | recently updated to |  |  |  | institutionalized for the wastewater | 
 |  | better inform wastewate |  |  |  | sector, as well as (ii) strengthening | 
 |  | management and reuse |  |  |  | any gaps identified (See Activity | 
 |  | options, quality and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | standards. These |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | include the Zonin |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Policy, Planning an |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Development Act, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | in the improvement of |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | the wastewater system. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | The policy and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | regulatory environment |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 87 ---
Baseline context
(description)

--- Table 3 on Page 87 ---
Rating for current
state (baseline)

--- Table 4 on Page 87 ---
Target scenario
(description)

--- Table 5 on Page 87 ---
key role in strengthening the
legislative framework. Further, the
project will be developing a long-term
water and sanitation master plan that
will be based on international best
practice and takes into consideration
the current water protection, land use
and water reuse policies, recent
studies and assessments in the wate
and sanitation sectors as well as
current and planned capital
expenditure projects, including the
3R-CReWS, when approved. Hence,
this master plan will support and
promote a coherent and
comprehensive planning approach to
the management of the water and
sanitation sector. There will be a high
attainment on institutional
strengthening given the project's
contribution to building technical

--- Table 6 on Page 87 ---
to note a few. Barbados
has adopted an
incentive approach,
using market

--- Table 7 on Page 87 ---
Development Act
(2002), states that an
operator who incurs
expenditure in improvin
the wastewater disposa
system be allowed a tax
credit of 20% of the
capital cost of fittings,

--- Table 8 on Page 87 ---
and customized training (SCADA,
operator, CAS, RO, CMMS etc.)

=== PAGE 88 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82
E
in place in Barbados are and efficiency (automating control
currently highly systems, updating SOPs and
conducive for the use of operational manuals, establishing an
renewable energy onsite laboratory, implementing sewer
technologies. The GOB monitoring and risk management
is pursuing a goal of protocols etc,) and providing
complete sustainable financing streams from
decarbonisation by 2030 the expansion of the RAFF whilst
and the policy reducing operational costs through
the implementation of 1.0 MW of solar
power and establishing a preventative
maintenance programme.
Currently both STPs are There will be a high attainment of
only able to achieve technology deployment and
secondary water quality innovation by this project that will not
and hence limiting the only increase resilience to climate
use of reclaimed water. change, but will also aid in the
mitigation of climate change. Firstly,
Further, there is a currently there is no tertiary level
recurring issue of break- wastewater treatment facility on the
down of equipment and island. The primary objective of this
Core Indicator 6: Degree limited interoperability project is to achieve tertiary level
to which GCF due to dated equipment High degree to which reclaimed water quality for building
being used or some not GCF investments resilience to climate change. The
investments contribute
functioning e.g. the contribute to technology technologies that will be adopted for National
to technology
dissolved oxygen low deployment, the upgrades are of international level (one
deployment,
sensors in the tanks do dissemination, standards. Also notable is that country)
dissemination,
not work, the pump is development or transfer decentralized wastewater treatment
development or transfer
dated and cannot and innovation systems to date is only being done by
and innovation communicate with the a few private sectors, for instance, the
SCADA computerized Coverly Housing Development, which
real-time management integrated this technology from the
system that is in place. design stage. This project will allow
the Government of Barbados and the
A very small number of BWA to further deploy decentralized
businesses and none of wastewater treatment systems across
the communities in the the island, particularly to existing
18 Zone A locations housing developments/communities
utilize decentralized not served by the centralized

--- Table 1 on Page 88 ---
 | in place in Barbados are
currently highly
conducive for the use of
renewable energy
technologies. The GOB
is pursuing a goal of
complete
decarbonisation by 2030
and the policy |  |  |  | and efficiency (automating contro
 |  |  |  |  | systems, updating SOPs and
 |  |  |  |  | operational manuals, establishing an
 |  |  |  |  | onsite laboratory, implementing sew
 |  |  |  |  | monitoring and risk management
 |  |  |  |  | protocols etc,) and providing
 |  |  |  |  | the implementation of 1.0 MW of sol
 |  |  |  |  | power and establishing a preventativ
 |  |  |  |  | maintenance programme.
Core Indicator 6: Degree
to which GCF
investments contribute
to technology
deployment,
dissemination,
development or transfer
and innovation | Currently both STPs are
only able to achieve
secondary water quality
and hence limiting the
use of reclaimed water.
Further, there is a
recurring issue of break-
down of equipment and
limited interoperability
due to dated equipment
being used or some not
functioning e.g. the
dissolved oxygen
sensors in the tanks do
not work, the pump is
dated and cannot
communicate with the
SCADA computerized
real-time management
system that is in place.
A very small number of
businesses and none of
the communities in the
18 Zone A locations
utilize decentralized | low | High degree to which
GCF investments
contribute to technology
deployment,
dissemination,
development or transfer
and innovation |  | There will be a high attainment of
 |  |  |  |  | technology deployment and
 |  |  |  |  | innovation by this project that will no
 |  |  |  |  | only increase resilience to climat
 |  |  |  |  | change, but will also aid in the
 |  |  |  |  | mitigation of climate change. Firstly,
 |  |  |  |  | currently there is no tertiary level
 |  |  |  |  | systems to date is only being done b
 |  |  |  |  | a few private sectors, for instance, th
 |  |  |  |  | Coverly Housing Development, whic
 |  |  |  |  | integrated this technology from the
design stage. This project will allow
 |  |  |  |  | the Government of Barbados and th
 |  |  |  |  | BWA to further deploy decentralized
 |  |  |  |  | wastewater treatment systems acros
 |  |  |  |  | the island, particularly to existing
 |  |  |  |  | housing developments/communities
 |  |  |  |  | not served by the centralized

--- Table 2 on Page 88 ---
in place in Barbados are
currently highly
conducive for the use of
renewable energy
technologies. The GOB
is pursuing a goal of
complete
decarbonisation by 2030
and the policy

--- Table 3 on Page 88 ---

National
level (one
country)

--- Table 4 on Page 88 ---
resilience to climate change. The
technologies that will be adopted for
the upgrades are of international
standards. Also notable is that

=== PAGE 89 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83
E
wastewater treatment wastewater treatment facilities (i.e.
systems. SCSTP and BSTP). Based on lessons
learned from the Spring Garden
There is 1 RO plant Reverse Osmosis Plant (See
installed along Spring Feasibility Study), which is the first of
Garden on the west its kind in Barbados, this project will
coast of Barbados, support investigations and strategic
which also happens to planning for the installation of water
be privately owned. treatment facilities along the west
coast corridor for augmenting water
supply and protecting the west coast
ecosystem (Activity 3.2.1). A climate
responsive management of the
centralized wastewater systems will
be implemented by this project. This
project is deploying technologies that
will strengthen response to short term
and long terms climate related
hazards by implementing decision-
support tools and infrastructure such
as the sewer monitoring programme
and CMMS (Output 3.1).
The legal regulatory This entire project can be considered
framework in Barbados as a key driver for market
has been recently development/transformation as it
updated to better inform pertains to wastewater treatment and
wastewater reuse options within the water sector
Core indicator 7: Degree management and reuse context but will have national
High Degree to which
to which GCF options, quality and ramifications given the importance of
GCF Investments
Investments contribute standards. Barbados water to our daily lifestyles, not to National
contribute to market
to market has also adopted an medium mention Barbados' agriculture sector. level (one
development/transforma
development/transforma incentive approach, country)
tion at the sectoral,
tion at the sectoral, using market The first two components of this
local, or national level
local, or national level instruments to achieve project showcase the technologies
sustainable tourism that can make water reclamation
practices. The Tourism viable whilst reducing risks to climate
Development Act variability and change and also
(2002), states that an contributing to GHG emission
operator who incurs reduction. The latter of which

--- Table 1 on Page 89 ---
 | wastewater treatment
systems.
There is 1 RO plant
installed along Spring
Garden on the west
coast of Barbados,
which also happens to
be privately owned. |  |  |  |  | wastewater treatment facilities (i.e. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | SCSTP and BSTP). Based on lesso | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | learned from the Spring Garden | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Reverse Osmosis Plant (See | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Feasibility Study), which is the first o | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | its kind in Barbados, this project will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | support investigations and strategic | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | planning for the installation of water | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | treatment facilities along the west | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | coast corridor for augmenting water | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | supply and protecting the west coas | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | ecosystem (Activity 3.2.1). A climate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | responsive management of the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | centralized wastewater systems will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | be implemented by this project. This | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | project is deploying technologies tha | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | will strengthen response to short ter | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | and long terms climate related | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | support tools and infrastructure such | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | as the sewer monitoring programme | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | and CMMS (Output 3.1). | 
Core indicator 7: Degree
to which GCF
Investments contribute
to market
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral,
local, or national level |  | The legal regulatory | medium | High Degree to which
GCF Investments
contribute to market
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral,
local, or national level | This entire project can be considered
as a key driver for market
development/transformation as it
pertains to wastewater treatment and
reuse options within the water sector
context but will have national
ramifications given the importance of
water to our daily lifestyles, not to
mention Barbados' agriculture sector.
The first two components of this
project showcase the technologies
that can make water reclamation
viable whilst reducing risks to climate
variability and change and also
contributing to GHG emission
reduction. The latter of which |  | National
level (one
country)
 |  | framework in Barbados |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | has been recently |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | updated to better inform |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | wastewater |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | management and reus |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | options, quality and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | standards. Barbado |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | has also adopted an |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | incentive approach, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | using market |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | instruments to achieve |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | sustainable tourism |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | practices. The Tourism |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Development Act |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | (2002), states that a |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | operator who incurs |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 89 ---
There is 1 RO plant
installed along Sprin
Garden on the west
coast of Barbados,

=== PAGE 90 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84
E
expenditure in improving contributes to significant savings from
the wastewater disposal use of renewable energy, which
system be allowed a tax provides contributions for the
credit of 20% of the expansion of the RAFF mechanism
capital cost of fittings, that will in turn be used to support
pipes and pumps used local investment (individuals and
in the improvement of businesses) in the adoption of
the wastewater system. wastewater treatment and reuse
technologies.
Yet, a very small
number of businesses The engagement of the private sector
and none of the is a key feature of this project. There
communities in the 18 will be a strategic plan for the
Zone A locations utilize engagement of the private sector in
decentralized the provision of wastewater treatment
wastewater treatment services (e.g. the replication of
systems. replication along the west coast
corridor and the implementation of
There are limited PEA decentralized wastewater treatment
campaigns on systems in new developments) and
wastewater technologies the utilisation of wastewater by-
and non-potable reuse products (e.g. energy recovery and
options as well as on organic fertilizers). Further, there will
any of the legislative and be incentives for small businesses
incentive frameworks in through the development of an
place. incentive programme (Activity 4.2.2)
and the expansion of the RAFF
(Activity 4.2.3).
Market transformation is further
strengthened through the creation of
an enabling and an investor friendly
environment. This project's
investment in building technical
capacities of wastewater personnel
(Activity 3.1.1), promoting public and
targeted stakeholders (businesses,
schools) buy-in and support for the
use of reclaimed water (output 4.3)

--- Table 1 on Page 90 ---
 | expenditure in improving
the wastewater disposal
system be allowed a tax
credit of 20% of the
capital cost of fittings,
pipes and pumps used
in the improvement of
the wastewater system.
Yet, a very small
number of businesses
and none of the
communities in the 18
Zone A locations utilize
decentralized
wastewater treatment
systems.
There are limited PEA
campaigns on
wastewater technologies
and non-potable reuse
options as well as on
any of the legislative and
incentive frameworks in
place. |  |  | contributes to significant savings from
use of renewable energy, which
provides contributions for the
expansion of the RAFF mechanism
that will in turn be used to support
local investment (individuals and
businesses) in the adoption of
wastewater treatment and reuse
technologies.
The engagement of the private sector
is a key feature of this project. There
will be a strategic plan for the
engagement of the private sector in
the provision of wastewater treatment
services (e.g. the replication of
replication along the west coast
corridor and the implementation of
decentralized wastewater treatment
systems in new developments) and
the utilisation of wastewater by-
products (e.g. energy recovery and
organic fertilizers). Further, there will
be incentives for small businesses
through the development of an
incentive programme (Activity 4.2.2)
and the expansion of the RAFF
(Activity 4.2.3).
Market transformation is further
strengthened through the creation of
an enabling and an investor friendly
environment. This project's
investment in building technical
capacities of wastewater personnel
(Activity 3.1.1), promoting public and
targeted stakeholders (businesses,
schools) buy-in and support for the
use of reclaimed water (output 4.3) | 

--- Table 2 on Page 90 ---
expenditure in improving
the wastewater disposal
system be allowed a tax
credit of 20% of the
capital cost of fittings,
pipes and pumps used
in the improvement of
the wastewater system.

=== PAGE 91 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85
E
and undertaking a legislative review
and gap analysis related to
wastewater reuse in Barbados
(Activity 4.1.1).
Knowledge generation The generation of knowledge and
and learning is currently building of learning processes are
limited at the BWA due important elements for this project
to limited financial since they are key to the sustainability
capacities and to some strategy of the project. Under
extent technical component 1, there are a number of
capacities. For example: decision support tools, as noted at
valuable hard-copy data core indicator 6 above, that will be put
was destroyed by fire in in place to enhance the management
the past. There is limited of the BSTP that not only enhance
to no historical cost effectiveness of the BSTP
information on flow and operations (reduced energy
raw or treated consumption, preventative
Core indicator 8: Degree
wastewater constituents. High degree to which maintenance programme) but also
to which GCF
There is no laboratory at GCF investments builds resilience to climate change.
investments contribute the BSTP to provide contribute to effective Under component 3, the project will
to effective knowledge information on influent knowledge generation provide targeted and specialised National
generation and learning and effluent qualities. low and learning processes, training for BWA and other key level (one
processes, and use of and use of good agencies to manage, monitor and country)
good practices, These fundamental data practices, maintain the upgraded system as well
methodologies and sets would be imperative methodologies and as on key outputs of the project such
to better understand the standards as updated manuals, SOPs, the risk
standards
baseline situation of the management framework to be put in
wastewater sector and place etc. Further, the risk
to inform the use of management framework (Activity
appropriate technologies 3.1.3) itself is considered to contribute
and setting standards. to effective learning since it calls for
an iterative process to identify the risk
register, existing controls and further
actions needed and opportunities for
improvement. Component 4 will have
a gender sensitive public education
and awareness campaign that
includes targeted training for
teachers, students, farmers and

--- Table 1 on Page 91 ---
 |  |  |  | and undertaking a legislative review
and gap analysis related to
wastewater reuse in Barbados
(Activity 4.1.1). | 
Core indicator 8: Degree
to which GCF
investments contribute
to effective knowledge
generation and learning
processes, and use of
good practices,
methodologies and
standards | Knowledge generation
and learning is currently
limited at the BWA due
to limited financial
capacities and to some
extent technical
capacities. For example:
valuable hard-copy data
was destroyed by fire in
the past. There is limited
to no historical
information on flow and
raw or treated
wastewater constituents.
There is no laboratory at
the BSTP to provide
information on influent
and effluent qualities.
These fundamental data
sets would be imperative
to better understand the
baseline situation of the
wastewater sector and
to inform the use of
appropriate technologies
and setting standards. | low | High degree to which
GCF investments
contribute to effective
knowledge generation
and learning processes,
and use of good
practices,
methodologies and
standards | The generation of knowledge and
building of learning processes are
important elements for this project
since they are key to the sustainability
strategy of the project. Under
component 1, there are a number of
decision support tools, as noted at
core indicator 6 above, that will be put
in place to enhance the management
of the BSTP that not only enhance
cost effectiveness of the BSTP
operations (reduced energy
consumption, preventative
maintenance programme) but also
builds resilience to climate change.
Under component 3, the project will
provide targeted and specialised
training for BWA and other key
agencies to manage, monitor and
maintain the upgraded system as well
as on key outputs of the project such
as updated manuals, SOPs, the risk
management framework to be put in
place etc. Further, the risk
management framework (Activity
3.1.3) itself is considered to contribute
to effective learning since it calls for
an iterative process to identify the risk
register, existing controls and further
actions needed and opportunities for
improvement. Component 4 will have
a gender sensitive public education
and awareness campaign that
includes targeted training for
teachers, students, farmers and | National
level (one
country)

=== PAGE 92 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86
E
businesses and the general public,
including tourists on the impact of
climate change on water resources
and their impact on water quality and
quantity (availability as well as the
importance of water reuse activities
and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to
building climate resilience in the
Water Sector. There will also be a
dedicated project webpage with an
associated knowledge management
strategy to effectively share
information and promote learning or
awareness building regarding the
various outputs of the project.
In terms of the use of good practices,
methodologies and standards, the
feasibility studies that informed the
design of this project ensured that
international best practices and
standards are being met for
technologies being implemented.
Further, the highly innovative nature
of the project, the scale at which it is
being implemented and the urgent
need for adaptation to climate change
risks for the water sector, as
demonstrated by the climate rationale
(Section B1), makes the learning
potential and opportunity for
identifying good practices and
standards a high priority for this
project. This is why the M&E plan for
this project sets out a mid-term and
end-of-term evaluation and the project
team will include M&E specialisation
to ensure that case studies on best

--- Table 1 on Page 92 ---
 |  |  |  | businesses and the general public,
including tourists on the impact of
climate change on water resources
and their impact on water quality and
quantity (availability as well as the
importance of water reuse activities
and indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to
building climate resilience in the
Water Sector. There will also be a
dedicated project webpage with an
associated knowledge management
strategy to effectively share
information and promote learning or
awareness building regarding the
various outputs of the project.
In terms of the use of good practices,
methodologies and standards, the
feasibility studies that informed the
design of this project ensured that
international best practices and
standards are being met for
technologies being implemented.
Further, the highly innovative nature
of the project, the scale at which it is
being implemented and the urgent
need for adaptation to climate change
risks for the water sector, as
demonstrated by the climate rationale
(Section B1), makes the learning
potential and opportunity for
identifying good practices and
standards a high priority for this
project. This is why the M&E plan for
this project sets out a mid-term and
end-of-term evaluation and the project
team will include M&E specialisation
to ensure that case studies on best | 

=== PAGE 93 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87
E
practices can be documented.
Further, the role of the CCCCC, a
CARICOM Specialized Agency, as
the Accredited Entity that will
implement this project means that
they are also well positioned to share
lessons on this project for replications
in other CARICOM States.
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)
Target
Project/programme
Project/programme Means of Verification
results Baseline Mid-term by Assumptions / Note
specific Indicator (MoV) Final by 2028
(outcomes/ outputs) 2026
Volume of treated BWA consumption figures 0 2.25 million m3 There is public buy-in for
wastewater (water meters installed at Currently the per year being the use of treated
(reclaimed water) farms along the 9km secondary treated utilize for wastewater
utilized for aquifer pipeline and at infiltration wastewater from No change from aquifer
recharge and/or wells) BSTP is piped to baseline recharge
agricultural irrigation a sea outfall and/or
agricultural
per year
Outcome 1: irrigation
Enhanced availability, Quality of the BWA laboratory reports, There is no No change Reclaim water The on-site laboratory is
management and use of reclaimed water interviews with farmers wastewater flow from baseline. meeting the operational and able to
tertiary level reclaimed and other users or Plant upgrade required total monitor the quality of the
water to improve the influent/effluent ongoing. dissolved effluent regularly
water sector’s resilience water quality data solids of less
to climate change available for the than 450 mg/L
BSTP. This (established by
challenge is the Barbados
complicated by Ministry of
the fact that there Agriculture)
is no onsite
laboratory or lab Onsite
technician laboratory

--- Table 1 on Page 93 ---
 |  |  |  | practices can be documented.
Further, the role of the CCCCC, a
CARICOM Specialized Agency, as
the Accredited Entity that will
implement this project means that
they are also well positioned to share
lessons on this project for replications
in other CARICOM States. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 93 ---
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project/programme
results
(outcomes/ outputs) |  |  | Means of Verification
(MoV) | Baseline |  |  |  | Target |  |  |  | Assumptions / Note
 | Project/programme |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term by
2026 |  | Final by 2028 |  |  | 
 | specific Indicator |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Outcome 1:
Enhanced availability,
management and use of
tertiary level reclaimed
water to improve the
water sector’s resilience
to climate change | Volume of treated |  | BWA consumption figures
(water meters installed at
farms along the 9km
pipeline and at infiltration
wells) | 0
Currently the
secondary treated
wastewater from
BSTP is piped to
a sea outfall |  |  | No change from
baseline |  |  | 2.25 million m3 |  | There is public buy-in for
the use of treated
wastewater
 | wastewater |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | per year being |  | 
 | (reclaimed water) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | utilize for |  | 
 | utilized for aquifer |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | aquifer |  | 
 | recharge and/or |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | recharge |  | 
 | agricultural irrigation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and/or |  | 
 | per year |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | agricultural |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | irrigation |  | 
 |  |  | BWA laboratory reports,
interviews with farmers
and other users |  | There is no |  | No change
from baseline.
Plant upgrade
ongoing. |  | Reclaim water
meeting the
required total
dissolved
solids of less
than 450 mg/L
(established by
the Barbados
Ministry of
Agriculture)
Onsite
laboratory |  |  | The on-site laboratory is
operational and able to
monitor the quality of the
effluent regularly
 |  |  |  |  | wastewater flow |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | or |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | influent/effluent |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | water quality data |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | available for the |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | BSTP. This |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | challenge is |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | complicated by |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | the fact that there |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | is no onsite |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | laboratory or lab |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | technician |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 93 ---
Project/programme
results
(outcomes/ outputs)

--- Table 4 on Page 93 ---
Means of Verification
(MoV)

--- Table 5 on Page 93 ---
Mid-term by
2026

--- Table 6 on Page 93 ---
BWA consumption figures
(water meters installed at
farms along the 9km
pipeline and at infiltration
wells)

--- Table 7 on Page 93 ---
0
Currently the
secondary treated
wastewater from
BSTP is piped to
a sea outfall

--- Table 8 on Page 93 ---
There is public buy-in for
the use of treated
wastewater

--- Table 9 on Page 93 ---
No change from
baseline

--- Table 10 on Page 93 ---
Outcome 1:
Enhanced availability,
management and use of
ertiary level reclaimed
water to improve the
water sector’s resilience
o climate change

--- Table 11 on Page 93 ---
Quality of the
reclaimed water

--- Table 12 on Page 93 ---
BWA laboratory reports,
interviews with farmers
and other users

--- Table 13 on Page 93 ---
No change
from baseline.
Plant upgrade
ongoing.

--- Table 14 on Page 93 ---
The on-site laboratory is
operational and able to
monitor the quality of the
effluent regularly

=== PAGE 94 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88
E
being utilise to
monitor water
quality and
producing
reports.
# of direct BWA project reports, 0 No change 155 farmers There is public buy-in for
beneficiaries BWA consumer reports from baseline. (60% males the use of reclaimed
(Disaggregated by for decentralized Pipeline and and 40% water for augment
type and sex). Type: locations and farms, MOA plant upgrade females) along groundwater supplies,
farmers (by sex), reports on farmer ongoing. the 9k pipeline and the future indirect
households (by sex of beneficiaries route, 225 potable reuse of same
HH head) households
(approximately
646 HHs( from
the 2
communities
benefiting from
reclaimed
water and
utilizing
decentralized
wastewater
systems
# of STPs that can Laboratory reports, BSTP and No change 1 Tertiary GOB authorities remain
treat water to tertiary reports of contractors SCSTP are from baseline. Level STP committed to the
water quality standard hired to upgrade the currently Upgrade (BSTP) upgrades and co-
Output 1.1: The BSTP, BWA progress secondary should be financing materialize, as
Bridgetown Sewage reports, site treatment plants ongoing. committed. Expertise
Treatment Plant is visits/observation, that are not exists for the installation
upgraded to treat Supervising Engineer's suitable for of the required upgrades.
wastewater to a tertiary Certification of wastewater reuse Favourable conditions
water-quality standard Completion such as aquifer exist for the construction
recharge and works to be done.
agricultural
irrigation.

--- Table 1 on Page 94 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | being utilise to
monitor water
quality and
producing
reports. |  |  | 
 | # of direct
beneficiaries
(Disaggregated by
type and sex). Type:
farmers (by sex),
households (by sex of
HH head) | BWA project reports,
BWA consumer reports
for decentralized
locations and farms, MOA
reports on farmer
beneficiaries | 0 |  |  | No change
from baseline.
Pipeline and
plant upgrade
ongoing. |  | 155 farmers |  | There is public buy-in for
the use of reclaimed
water for augment
groundwater supplies,
and the future indirect
potable reuse of same
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (60% males |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and 40% |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | females) along |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the 9k pipeline |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | route, 225 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | households |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (approximately |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 646 HHs( from |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the 2 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | communities |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | benefiting from |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reclaimed |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | water and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | utilizing |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | decentralized |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | systems |  | 
Output 1.1: The
Bridgetown Sewage
Treatment Plant is
upgraded to treat
wastewater to a tertiary
water-quality standard | # of STPs that can
treat water to tertiary
water quality standard | Laboratory reports,
reports of contractors
hired to upgrade the
BSTP, BWA progress
reports, site
visits/observation,
Supervising Engineer's
Certification of
Completion |  | BSTP and |  | No change
from baseline.
Upgrade
should be
ongoing. | 1 Tertiary
Level STP
(BSTP) | 1 Tertiary |  | GOB authorities remain
committed to the
upgrades and co-
financing materialize, as
committed. Expertise
exists for the installation
of the required upgrades.
Favourable conditions
exist for the construction
works to be done.
 |  |  |  | SCSTP are |  |  |  | Level STP |  | 
 |  |  |  | currently |  |  |  | (BSTP) |  | 
 |  |  |  | secondary |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | treatment plants |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | that are not |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | suitable for |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | wastewater reuse |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | such as aquifer |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | recharge and |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | agricultural |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | irrigation. |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 94 ---
# of direct
beneficiaries
Disaggregated by
ype and sex). Type:
armers (by sex),
households (by sex of
HH head)

--- Table 3 on Page 94 ---
BWA project reports,
BWA consumer reports
for decentralized
locations and farms, MOA
reports on farmer
beneficiaries

--- Table 4 on Page 94 ---
No change
from baseline.
Pipeline and
plant upgrade
ongoing.

--- Table 5 on Page 94 ---
There is public buy-in for
the use of reclaimed
water for augment
groundwater supplies,
and the future indirect
potable reuse of same

--- Table 6 on Page 94 ---
# of STPs that can
reat water to tertiary
water quality standard

--- Table 7 on Page 94 ---
Laboratory reports,
reports of contractors
hired to upgrade the
BSTP, BWA progress
reports, site
visits/observation,
Supervising Engineer's
Certification of
Completion

--- Table 8 on Page 94 ---
No change
from baseline.
Upgrade
should be
ongoing.

--- Table 9 on Page 94 ---
GOB authorities remain
committed to the
upgrades and co-
financing materialize, as
committed. Expertise
exists for the installation
of the required upgrades.
Favourable conditions
exist for the construction
works to be done.

--- Table 10 on Page 94 ---
Output 1.1: The
Bridgetown Sewage
Treatment Plant is
upgraded to treat
wastewater to a tertiary
water-quality standard

=== PAGE 95 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89
E
Km of pipeline Site visits/observation, 0 km of pipeline 3 km pipeline 9 km pipeline GOB authorities remain
installed for Supervising Engineer's installed installed committed to the
transporting tertiary Certification of upgrades and co-
treated wastewater Completion financing materialize, as
Output 1.2: Tertiary
committed. Continued
treated reclaimed water
stakeholder buy-in
is available to
Volume (m3) tertiary Reports from flow meter 0 0 5000 m3 of There is public buy-in for
supplement non-potable
treated waste water installed at BSTP, treated the use of reclaimed
use
made available per laboratory reports on wastewater per water for augment
day water quality day groundwater supplies,
and the future indirect
potable reuse of same
# of decision-support Consultant/contractors There are limited 10 flow meters 1 CMMS in Appropriate technical
tools and equipment reports, equipment functional installed place skillsets exist to conduct
implemented to purchase orders, site decision support 10 flow meters flow measurements and
mitigate potential visits/observation, tools at the installed gather and analyse
climate change risks Supervising Engineer's BSTP. The 1 on-site samples; adequate
(Disaggregate by type Certification of influent and laboratory testing and reporting is
- CMMS, flow meters, Completion for effluent flow retrofitted enforced. Willingness
laboratory) Laboratory, BWA Monthly meters are not and ability of staff to
Output 1.3: Decision- flow rate reports working. In utilize/adopt CMMS
support tools and December 2021 system, update regularly,
infrastructure a flow meter was ensure all documentation
implemented to mitigate installed at the is completed and
potential climate change BSTP. The filed/stored properly.
risks to the wastewater SCADA system
collection and treatment that operates that
systems is in place is not
fully automated
since some of the
equipment it
should manage
are too old to be
linked to the
SCADA, e.g. the
pumps at the

--- Table 1 on Page 95 ---
Output 1.2: Tertiary
treated reclaimed water
is available to
supplement non-potable
use | Km of pipeline
installed for
transporting tertiary
treated wastewater | Site visits/observation,
Supervising Engineer's
Certification of
Completion | 0 km of pipeline |  |  | 3 km pipeline
installed | 9 km pipeline
installed |  | GOB authorities remain | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | committed to the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | upgrades and co- | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | financing materialize, as | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | committed. Continued | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | stakeholder buy-in | 
 | Volume (m3) tertiary
treated waste water
made available per
day | Reports from flow meter
installed at BSTP,
laboratory reports on
water quality | 0 |  |  | 0 | 5000 m3 of
treated
wastewater per
day |  | There is public buy-in for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the use of reclaimed | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | water for augment | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | groundwater supplies, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and the future indirect | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | potable reuse of same | 
Output 1.3: Decision-
support tools and
infrastructure
implemented to mitigate
potential climate change
risks to the wastewater
collection and treatment
systems | # of decision-support
tools and equipment
implemented to
mitigate potential
climate change risks
(Disaggregate by type
- CMMS, flow meters,
laboratory) | Consultant/contractors
reports, equipment
purchase orders, site
visits/observation,
Supervising Engineer's
Certification of
Completion for
Laboratory, BWA Monthly
flow rate reports |  | There are limited |  | 10 flow meters
installed | 1 CMMS in
place
10 flow meters
installed
1 on-site
laboratory
retrofitted | Appropriate technical
skillsets exist to conduct
flow measurements and
gather and analyse
samples; adequate
testing and reporting is
enforced. Willingness
and ability of staff to
utilize/adopt CMMS
system, update regularly,
ensure all documentation
is completed and
filed/stored properly. | Appropriate technical | 
 |  |  |  | functional |  |  |  |  | skillsets exist to conduct | 
 |  |  |  | decision support |  |  |  |  | flow measurements and | 
 |  |  |  | tools at the |  |  |  |  | gather and analyse | 
 |  |  |  | BSTP. The |  |  |  |  | samples; adequate | 
 |  |  |  | influent and |  |  |  |  | testing and reporting is | 
 |  |  |  | effluent flow |  |  |  |  | enforced. Willingness | 
 |  |  |  | meters are not |  |  |  |  | and ability of staff to | 
 |  |  |  | working. In |  |  |  |  | utilize/adopt CMMS | 
 |  |  |  | December 2021 |  |  |  |  | system, update regularly, | 
 |  |  |  | a flow meter was |  |  |  |  | ensure all documentation | 
 |  |  |  | installed at the |  |  |  |  | is completed and | 
 |  |  |  | BSTP. The |  |  |  |  | filed/stored properly. | 
 |  |  |  | SCADA system |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | that operates that |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | is in place is not |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | fully automated |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | since some of the |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | equipment it |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | should manage |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | are too old to be |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | linked to the |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | SCADA, e.g. the |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | pumps at the |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 95 ---
Km of pipeline
nstalled for
ransporting tertiary
reated wastewater

--- Table 3 on Page 95 ---
Site visits/observation,
Supervising Engineer's
Certification of
Completion

--- Table 4 on Page 95 ---
3 km pipeline
installed

--- Table 5 on Page 95 ---
9 km pipeline
installed

--- Table 6 on Page 95 ---
Output 1.2: Tertiary
reated reclaimed water
s available to
supplement non-potable
use

--- Table 7 on Page 95 ---
Volume (m3) tertiary
reated waste water
made available per
day

--- Table 8 on Page 95 ---
Reports from flow meter
installed at BSTP,
laboratory reports on
water quality

--- Table 9 on Page 95 ---
5000 m3 of
treated
wastewater per
day

--- Table 10 on Page 95 ---
# of decision-support
ools and equipment
mplemented to
mitigate potential
climate change risks
Disaggregate by type
CMMS, flow meters,
aboratory)

--- Table 11 on Page 95 ---
Consultant/contractors
reports, equipment
purchase orders, site
visits/observation,
Supervising Engineer's
Certification of
Completion for
Laboratory, BWA Monthly
flow rate reports

--- Table 12 on Page 95 ---
10 flow meters
installed

--- Table 13 on Page 95 ---
1 CMMS in
place
10 flow meters
installed
1 on-site
laboratory
retrofitted

--- Table 14 on Page 95 ---
Output 1.3: Decision-
support tools and
nfrastructure
mplemented to mitigate
potential climate change
isks to the wastewater
collection and treatment
systems

=== PAGE 96 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90
E
BSTP, and the lift
station do not
have automated
valve. Further,
there is also need
for more
computers and
training for
technical staff to
better interface
with SCADA
# of decentralized site visit/observation, No decentralized 2 decentralized 2 decentralized GOB authorities remain
treatment plants photographs, interviews wastewater wastewater wastewater committed to the
Output 1.4: operational with neighbouring treatment plants treatment treatment upgrades and co-
Decentralized communities, reports of currently plants plants financing materialize, as
treatment systems or contractors hired to build managed by implemented in implemented in committed. Continued
cluster treatment the decentralized BWA. 2 communities 2 communities stakeholder buy-in
systems installed systems, Supervising
Engineer's Certification of
Completion
Energy intensity of the BSTP energy bills, TBD - the No change Energy System will operate at
BSTP (energy influent and effluent technologies in from baseline. consumption/to full capacity within the
consumption/total flows, equipment place are about tal water projected life term of
water treated per horsepower and model 40 years old for treated per approximately 25 years.
year) information the BSTP, in year reduce by
particular, the at least 20%
Outcome 2: Climate
aerobic digesters
resilient low carbon
in the plant are
operations achieved
energy intensive.
at BSTP
Also, there is no
preventative
maintenance
programme and
basic decision
support tools are

--- Table 1 on Page 96 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | BSTP, and the lift |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | station do not |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | have automated |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | valve. Further, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | there is also need |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | for more |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | computers and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | training for |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | technical staff to |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | better interface |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | with SCADA |  |  |  | 
Output 1.4:
Decentralized
treatment systems or
cluster treatment
systems installed | # of decentralized
treatment plants
operational |  | site visit/observation, |  | No decentralized
wastewater
treatment plants
currently
managed by
BWA. | No decentralized |  | 2 decentralized
wastewater
treatment
plants
implemented in
2 communities | 2 decentralized
wastewater
treatment
plants
implemented in
2 communities | GOB authorities remain
committed to the
upgrades and co-
financing materialize, as
committed. Continued
stakeholder buy-in
 |  |  | photographs, interviews |  |  | wastewater |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | with neighbouring |  |  | treatment plants |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | communities, reports of |  |  | currently |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | contractors hired to build |  |  | managed by |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | the decentralized |  |  | BWA. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | systems, Supervising |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Engineer's Certification of |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Completion |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Outcome 2: Climate
resilient low carbon
operations achieved
at BSTP | Energy intensity of the
BSTP (energy
consumption/total
water treated per
year) | BSTP energy bills,
influent and effluent
flows, equipment
horsepower and model
information | BSTP energy bills, |  |  | TBD - the |  | No change
from baseline. | Energy
consumption/to
tal water
treated per
year reduce by
at least 20% | System will operate at
full capacity within the
projected life term of
approximately 25 years.
 |  |  | influent and effluent |  |  | technologies in |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | flows, equipment |  |  | place are about |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | horsepower and model |  |  | 40 years old for |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | information |  |  | the BSTP, in |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | particular, the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | aerobic digesters |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | in the plant are |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | energy intensive. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Also, there is no |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | preventative |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | maintenance |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | programme and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | basic decision |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | support tools are |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 96 ---
# of decentralized
reatment plants
operational

--- Table 3 on Page 96 ---
2 decentralized
wastewater
treatment
plants
implemented in
2 communities

--- Table 4 on Page 96 ---
2 decentralized
wastewater
treatment
plants
implemented in
2 communities

--- Table 5 on Page 96 ---
GOB authorities remain
committed to the
upgrades and co-
financing materialize, as
committed. Continued
stakeholder buy-in

--- Table 6 on Page 96 ---
Output 1.4:
Decentralized
treatment systems or
cluster treatment
systems installed

--- Table 7 on Page 96 ---
Energy intensity of the
BSTP (energy
consumption/total
water treated per
year)

--- Table 8 on Page 96 ---
No change
from baseline.

--- Table 9 on Page 96 ---
Energy
consumption/to
tal water
treated per
year reduce by
at least 20%

--- Table 10 on Page 96 ---
System will operate at
full capacity within the
projected life term of
approximately 25 years.

--- Table 11 on Page 96 ---
Outcome 2: Climate
resilient low carbon
operations achieved
at BSTP

=== PAGE 97 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91
E
either inoperable
or not in place.
# of MV of PV BSTP electricity bill, 0.18 MW of solar 0.18 MW Additional 1.0 Technical expertise
installed License to operate the PV panels in place at MW of solar exists to install the PV
system from the Division BSTP panels panels,
of Energy, GOB Electrical installed = 1.18
Engineering Department MW of solar
(GEED) certificate of power installed
Output 2.1: Energy
compliance, site at BSTP
efficiency and
visits/observation
renewable energy
# of EE technologies site visits/observation, BSTP does not No change Sludge Technical expertise
technologies are
implemented Supervising Engineer's undertake sludge from baseline. dewatering exists to design and
implemented
(disaggregate by type Certification of dewatering. The Upgrades system install EE technologies
- sludge dewatering, Completion SCADA is should be installed
automated controls) operational but advancing.
there are limited
control
capabilities.
% of persons trained BWA HR information 0 20% of persons 80% of Funding is identified by
are directly involved system, work sheets/work trained are persons BWA to remedy the
(utilizing knowledge assignments, Post and directly trained are issues detected early by
from training) in the Pre workshop evaluation involved directly the CMMS and risk
Outcome 3: Enhanced implementation, (utilizing involved management framework
capacity and capability maintenance, knowledge (utilizing as well as other systems
to support a operations and from training) in knowledge implemented such as the
preventative management of the the from training) sewer monitoring
maintenance (PM) and BSTP implementation in the programme. These
climate resiliency , maintenance, implementation systems function
programme operations and , maintenance, effectively. BWA staff
management of operations and understand how to use
the BSTP management the systems
of the BSTP implemented and follow-
up accordingly
Output 3.1: Improved # of customized Final course BWA completed Customised 12 customised Skilled trainers are
capabilities of trainings materials/training the following courses courses available to lead course
wastewater technical developed/adopted package training courses developed/ado developed/ado design and execution

--- Table 1 on Page 97 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | either inoperable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | or not in place. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 2.1: Energy
efficiency and
renewable energy
technologies are
implemented |  |  | # of MV of PV
installed |  |  |  | BSTP electricity bill, |  | 0.18 MW of solar
panels in place at
BSTP | 0.18 MW of solar |  | 0.18 MW |  |  | Additional 1.0
MW of solar
panels
installed = 1.18
MW of solar
power installed
at BSTP |  |  | Technical expertise
exists to install the PV
panels, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | License to operate the PV |  |  | panels in place at |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | system from the Division |  |  | BSTP |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | of Energy, GOB Electrical |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Engineering Department |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (GEED) certificate of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | compliance, site |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | visits/observation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | # of EE technologies
implemented
(disaggregate by type
- sludge dewatering,
automated controls) |  |  | site visits/observation,
Supervising Engineer's
Certification of
Completion | site visits/observation, |  |  | BSTP does not |  | No change
from baseline.
Upgrades
should be
advancing. |  |  | Sludge
dewatering
system
installed |  |  | Technical expertise
exists to design and
install EE technologies |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Supervising Engineer's |  |  | undertake sludge |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Certification of |  |  | dewatering. The |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Completion |  |  | SCADA is |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | operational but |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | there are limited |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | control |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capabilities. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Outcome 3: Enhanced
capacity and capability
to support a
preventative
maintenance (PM) and
climate resiliency
programme |  |  | % of persons trained
are directly involved
(utilizing knowledge
from training) in the
implementation,
maintenance,
operations and
management of the
BSTP |  |  | BWA HR information
system, work sheets/work
assignments, Post and
Pre workshop evaluation |  |  | 0 | 0 |  | 20% of persons
trained are
directly
involved
(utilizing
knowledge
from training) in
the
implementation
, maintenance,
operations and
management of
the BSTP |  |  | 80% of
persons
trained are
directly
involved
(utilizing
knowledge
from training)
in the
implementation
, maintenance,
operations and
management
of the BSTP |  |  |  | Funding is identified by | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | BWA to remedy the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | issues detected early by | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the CMMS and risk | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | management framework | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | as well as other systems | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implemented such as the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | sewer monitoring | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | programme. These | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | systems function | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | effectively. BWA staff | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | understand how to use | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the systems | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implemented and follow- | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | up accordingly | 
 | Output 3.1: Improved |  | t | # of customized |  |  | Final course |  |  | BWA completed |  |  | Customised |  |  | 12 customised |  |  | Skilled trainers are | 
 | capabilities of |  |  | rainings |  |  | materials/training |  |  | the following |  |  | courses |  |  | courses |  |  | available to lead course | 
 | wastewater technical |  |  | developed/adopted |  |  | package |  |  | training courses |  |  | developed/ado |  |  | developed/ado |  |  | design and execution | 

--- Table 2 on Page 97 ---
# of MV of PV
nstalled

--- Table 3 on Page 97 ---
Additional 1.0
MW of solar
panels
installed = 1.18
MW of solar
power installed
at BSTP

--- Table 4 on Page 97 ---
Technical expertise
exists to install the PV
panels,

--- Table 5 on Page 97 ---
Output 2.1: Energy
efficiency and
renewable energy
technologies are
implemented

--- Table 6 on Page 97 ---
# of EE technologies
mplemented
disaggregate by type
sludge dewatering,
automated controls)

--- Table 7 on Page 97 ---
No change
from baseline.
Upgrades
should be
advancing.

--- Table 8 on Page 97 ---
Sludge
dewatering
system
installed

--- Table 9 on Page 97 ---
Technical expertise
exists to design and
install EE technologies

--- Table 10 on Page 97 ---
% of persons trained
are directly involved
utilizing knowledge
rom training) in the
mplementation,
maintenance,
operations and
management of the
BSTP

--- Table 11 on Page 97 ---
BWA HR information
system, work sheets/work
assignments, Post and
Pre workshop evaluation

--- Table 12 on Page 97 ---
20% of persons
trained are
directly
involved
(utilizing
knowledge
from training) in
the
implementation
, maintenance,
operations and
management of
the BSTP

--- Table 13 on Page 97 ---
80% of
persons
trained are
directly
involved
(utilizing
knowledge
from training)
in the
implementation
, maintenance,
operations and
management
of the BSTP

--- Table 14 on Page 97 ---
Outcome 3: Enhanced
capacity and capability
to support a
preventative
maintenance (PM) and
climate resiliency
programme

=== PAGE 98 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92
E
personnel to operate, during 2021: pted for: pted covering
maintain and monitor UWI/BWA SCADA system topics such as:
and implement climate Gender UWI/BWA SCADA
change adaptation Sensitivity Gender system
planning strategies for Training - 500 Sensitivity UWI/BWA
wastewater staff members Training Gender
management Occupational program and Sensitivity
Health and climate change Training
Safety adapted and program
Certification delivered for (including
Training - 25 BWA SGBV
people operations. prevention)
Occupational Climate change and climate
Health and nexus with change
Safety short biosecurity and adapted and
course online wastewater delivered for
available for all PV refresher BWA
staff (749) training course operations.
Media Training offerings from Climate
for staff to CVQ & NVQ change nexus
present (Caribbean and with
effectively - TBC National biosecurity and
by HR Vocational wastewater
Heavy equipment Qualifications) PV refresher
operator/Defensiv Industrial waste training course
e driver training - inspector offerings from
TBC by HR CCTV CVQ & NVQ
Diploma in equipment (Caribbean
Procurement and and National
Supply (CIPS) - 1 Vocational
staff member Qualifications)
enrolled Industrial
Diploma in waste
Insurance - 1 inspector
staff member CCTV
from legal and equipment

--- Table 1 on Page 98 ---
personnel to operate,
maintain and monitor
and implement climate
change adaptation
planning strategies for
wastewater
management |  |  |  | during 2021: |  | pted for:
SCADA system
UWI/BWA
Gender
Sensitivity
Training
program and
climate change
adapted and
delivered for
BWA
operations.
Climate change
nexus with
biosecurity and
wastewater
PV refresher
training course
offerings from
CVQ & NVQ
(Caribbean and
National
Vocational
Qualifications)
Industrial waste
inspector
CCTV
equipment |  | pted covering |  | 
 |  |  |  | UWI/BWA |  |  |  | topics such as: |  | 
 |  |  |  | Gender |  |  |  | SCADA |  | 
 |  |  |  | Sensitivity |  |  |  | system |  | 
 |  |  |  | Training - 500 |  |  |  | UWI/BWA |  | 
 |  |  |  | staff members |  |  |  | Gender |  | 
 |  |  |  | Occupational |  |  |  | Sensitivity |  | 
 |  |  |  | Health and |  |  |  | Training |  | 
 |  |  |  | Safety |  |  |  | program |  | 
 |  |  |  | Certification |  |  |  | (including |  | 
 |  |  |  | Training - 25 |  |  |  | SGBV |  | 
 |  |  |  | people |  |  |  | prevention) |  | 
 |  |  |  | Occupational |  |  |  | and climate |  | 
 |  |  |  | Health and |  |  |  | change |  | 
 |  |  |  | Safety short |  |  |  | adapted and |  | 
 |  |  |  | course online |  |  |  | delivered for |  | 
 |  |  |  | available for all |  |  |  | BWA |  | 
 |  |  |  | staff (749) |  |  |  | operations. |  | 
 |  |  |  | Media Training |  |  |  | Climate |  | 
 |  |  |  | for staff to |  |  |  | change nexus |  | 
 |  |  |  | present |  |  |  | with |  | 
 |  |  |  | effectively - TBC |  |  |  | biosecurity and |  | 
 |  |  |  | by HR |  |  |  | wastewater |  | 
 |  |  |  | Heavy equipment |  |  |  | PV refresher |  | 
 |  |  |  | operator/Defensiv |  |  |  | training course |  | 
 |  |  |  | e driver training - |  |  |  | offerings from |  | 
 |  |  |  | TBC by HR |  |  |  | CVQ & NVQ |  | 
 |  |  |  | Diploma in |  |  |  | (Caribbean |  | 
 |  |  |  | Procurement and |  |  |  | and National |  | 
 |  |  |  | Supply (CIPS) - 1 |  |  |  | Vocational |  | 
 |  |  |  | staff member |  |  |  | Qualifications) |  | 
 |  |  |  | enrolled |  |  |  | Industrial |  | 
 |  |  |  | Diploma in |  |  |  | waste |  | 
 |  |  |  | Insurance - 1 |  |  |  | inspector |  | 
 |  |  |  | staff member |  |  |  | CCTV |  | 
 |  |  |  | from legal and |  |  |  | equipment |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 98 ---
personnel to operate,
maintain and monitor
and implement climate
change adaptation
planning strategies for
wastewater
management

--- Table 3 on Page 98 ---
pted for:
SCADA system
UWI/BWA
Gender
Sensitivity
Training
program and
climate change
adapted and
delivered for
BWA
operations.
Climate change
nexus with
biosecurity and
wastewater
PV refresher
training course
offerings from
CVQ & NVQ
(Caribbean and
National
Vocational
Qualifications)
Industrial waste
inspector
CCTV
equipment

=== PAGE 99 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93
E
compliance dept. Operator
Annual Fraud training
Conference program based
participation via on upgraded
IDB systems
Non-revenue Laboratory
water training via testing,
IDB analysis and
Supervisory management
management Management
training of the
Executive decentralized
Development wastewater
course treatment
Personal plants
Development CAS and RO
core sills course technologies
Customer SOPs and
services operational
Working at manual
elevated heights - updated as
12 persons well as the risk
MSC in Water management
and framework
Environmental developed to
Management - 1 meet the
person needs of the
upgraded
system
CMMS
Sewer
monitoring and
instrumentatio
n
General
wastewater

--- Table 1 on Page 99 ---
 |  |  | compliance dept.
Annual Fraud
Conference
participation via
IDB
Non-revenue
water training via
IDB
Supervisory
management
training
Executive
Development
course
Personal
Development
core sills course
Customer
services
Working at
elevated heights -
12 persons
MSC in Water
and
Environmental
Management - 1
person |  |  | Operator |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | training |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | program based |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | on upgraded |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | systems |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Laboratory |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | testing, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | analysis and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | management |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Management |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | of the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | decentralized |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | treatment |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | plants |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | CAS and RO |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | technologies |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | SOPs and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | operational |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | manual |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | updated as |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | well as the risk |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | management |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | framework |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | developed to |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | meet the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | needs of the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | upgraded |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | system |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | CMMS |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Sewer |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | monitoring and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | instrumentatio |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | n |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | General |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 99 ---
compliance dept.
Annual Fraud
Conference
participation via
IDB
Non-revenue
water training via
IDB
Supervisory
management
training
Executive
Development
course
Personal
Development
core sills course
Customer
services
Working at
elevated heights -
12 persons
MSC in Water
and
Environmental
Management - 1
person

=== PAGE 100 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94
E
course (safety,
no exam)
# of persons trained registration forms for BWA Staff The target for The target for Willingness and
(disaggregated by trainings, certificates of members the following the following availability of BWA staff
sex) completion completed the training is to training is to to participate in training
following training have 50/50 have 50/50 opportunities. Assumes
courses during distribution of distribution of a total of 400 individuals
2021: males and males and trained (no double
UWI/BWA females where females: counting)
Gender possible:
Sensitivity SCADA - 20 There are equal number
Training - 500 SCADA – 20 operators of men and women
staff members operators/techn Gender working the areas of
Occupational icians Sensitivity - specialized training,
Health and 300 staff therefore achieving
Safety Gender members parity in training targets.
Certification Sensitivity – Climate
Training - 25 200 staff change nexus
people members (new with
Occupational staff and staff biosecurity and
Health and lost by attrition) wastewater -
Safety short 300 staff
course online members
PV course – 25
available for all members from PV training
staff (749) electrical course - 25
MSC in Water
section
members
and Industrial
Environmental waste
Industrial waste
Management - 1 inspector - 3
inspector - 3
person (ongoing) operators
operators
CCTV
No staff member equipment - 6
CCTV
has been trained operators
equipment - 6
in any of the Operator
operators
following - training - 8
SCADA, operators

--- Table 1 on Page 100 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | course (safety, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | no exam) |  | 
 | # of persons trained
(disaggregated by
sex) | registration forms for
trainings, certificates of
completion |  | BWA Staff |  | The target for
the following
training is to
have 50/50
distribution of
males and
females where
possible:
SCADA – 20
operators/techn
icians
Gender
Sensitivity –
200 staff
members (new
staff and staff
lost by attrition)
PV course – 25
members from
electrical
section
Industrial waste
inspector - 3
operators
CCTV
equipment - 6
operators |  | The target for |  | Willingness and
availability of BWA staff
to participate in training
opportunities. Assumes
a total of 400 individuals
trained (no double
counting)
There are equal number
of men and women
working the areas of
specialized training,
therefore achieving
parity in training targets.
 |  |  |  | members |  |  |  | the following |  | 
 |  |  |  | completed the |  |  |  | training is to |  | 
 |  |  |  | following training |  |  |  | have 50/50 |  | 
 |  |  |  | courses during |  |  |  | distribution of |  | 
 |  |  |  | 2021: |  |  |  | males and |  | 
 |  |  |  | UWI/BWA |  |  |  | females: |  | 
 |  |  |  | Gender |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Sensitivity |  |  |  | SCADA - 20 |  | 
 |  |  |  | Training - 500 |  |  |  | operators |  | 
 |  |  |  | staff members |  |  |  | Gender |  | 
 |  |  |  | Occupational |  |  |  | Sensitivity - |  | 
 |  |  |  | Health and |  |  |  | 300 staff |  | 
 |  |  |  | Safety |  |  |  | members |  | 
 |  |  |  | Certification |  |  |  | Climate |  | 
 |  |  |  | Training - 25 |  |  |  | change nexus |  | 
 |  |  |  | people |  |  |  | with |  | 
 |  |  |  | Occupational |  |  |  | biosecurity and |  | 
 |  |  |  | Health and |  |  |  | wastewater - |  | 
 |  |  |  | Safety short |  |  |  | 300 staff |  | 
 |  |  |  | course online |  |  |  | members |  | 
 |  |  |  | available for all |  |  |  | PV training |  | 
 |  |  |  | staff (749) |  |  |  | course - 25 |  | 
 |  |  |  | MSC in Water |  |  |  | members |  | 
 |  |  |  | and |  |  |  | Industrial |  | 
 |  |  |  | Environmental |  |  |  | waste |  | 
 |  |  |  | Management - 1 |  |  |  | inspector - 3 |  | 
 |  |  |  | person (ongoing) |  |  |  | operators |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | CCTV |  | 
 |  |  |  | No staff member |  |  |  | equipment - 6 |  | 
 |  |  |  | has been trained |  |  |  | operators |  | 
 |  |  |  | in any of the |  |  |  | Operator |  | 
 |  |  |  | following - |  |  |  | training - 8 |  | 
 |  |  |  | SCADA, |  |  |  | operators |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 100 ---
# of persons trained
disaggregated by
sex)

--- Table 3 on Page 100 ---
registration forms for
trainings, certificates of
completion

--- Table 4 on Page 100 ---
The target for
the following
training is to
have 50/50
distribution of
males and
females where
possible:

SCADA – 20
operators/techn
icians

Gender
Sensitivity –
200 staff
members (new
staff and staff
lost by attrition)

PV course – 25
members from
electrical
section

Industrial waste
inspector - 3
operators

CCTV
equipment - 6
operators

--- Table 5 on Page 100 ---
Willingness and
availability of BWA staff
to participate in training
opportunities. Assumes
a total of 400 individuals
trained (no double
counting)

There are equal number
of men and women
working the areas of
specialized training,
therefore achieving
parity in training targets.

=== PAGE 101 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95
E
Climate change Lab technician
nexus with training – 3
biosecurity and technicians
wastewater, PV Decentralized
training, industrial wastewater
waste inspector, treatment
CCTV facilities - 50
equipment, staff
operator training, CAS and RO
lab technician technologies -
training, 50 staff
decentralized SOPs,
wastewater operational
treatment manual and
facilities, CAS risk
and RO management
technologies, framework - 70
SOPs, operators
operational CMMS - 70
manual and risk staff members
management Sewer
framework, monitoring and
CMMS, Sewer instrumentatio
monitoring and n - 25
instrumentation. wastewater
operators
General
wastewater
course (safety,
no exam) - 45
persons
Assumes a
total of 400
individuals
trained (no

--- Table 1 on Page 101 ---
 |  |  | Climate change
nexus with
biosecurity and
wastewater, PV
training, industrial
waste inspector,
CCTV
equipment,
operator training,
lab technician
training,
decentralized
wastewater
treatment
facilities, CAS
and RO
technologies,
SOPs,
operational
manual and risk
management
framework,
CMMS, Sewer
monitoring and
instrumentation. |  |  | Lab technician |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | training – 3 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | technicians |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Decentralized |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | treatment |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | facilities - 50 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | staff |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | CAS and RO |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | technologies - |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 50 staff |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | SOPs, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | operational |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | manual and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | risk |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | management |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | framework - 70 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | operators |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | CMMS - 70 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | staff members |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Sewer |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | monitoring and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | instrumentatio |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | n - 25 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | operators |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | General |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | course (safety, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | no exam) - 45 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | persons |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Assumes a |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | total of 400 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | individuals |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | trained (no |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 101 ---
Climate change
nexus with
biosecurity and
wastewater, PV
training, industrial
waste inspector,
CCTV
equipment,
operator training,
lab technician
training,
decentralized
wastewater
treatment
facilities, CAS
and RO
technologies,
SOPs,
operational
manual and risk
management
framework,
CMMS, Sewer
monitoring and
instrumentation.

=== PAGE 102 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96
E
double
counting)(50%
males and
50% females)
# of documents Final risk framework, 0 manuals 1 updated set 1 updated set Expertise available to
updated/developed SOPs. O&M manual and updated. The of SOPs of SOPs support the updating of
(disaggregate by type project document O&M manual 1 updated O&M 1 updated documents.
- SOPs, operational currently being manual O&M manual Stakeholders are
manual, risk utilized was 1 risk 1 risk available and actively
management published in 1982 management management participate.
framework) when the BSTP framework framework
was
commissioned.
Risk
management
framework not
adopted by BWA
The SOPs are
also dated.
Output 3.2: A strategic # of plans completed Final strategic plan 0 plans exist 1 strategic plan 1 strategic plan Expertise available to
plan is developed to for the replication of completed completed undertake the study
guide the replication of the brackish water RO
water treatment treatment plant along
facilities along the west the west coast
coast corridor
# of private MOUs/agreements, As of 2018, there No change 20 private Businesses and
Outcome 4: An businesses (by interviews with private were sixty-eight from baseline. businesses individuals are interested
enabling environment is ownership businesses and (68) private and individuals in wastewater systems
created for wastewater Male/Female) and individuals. wastewater adapting/utilizi and its benefits and
technologies and use of individuals (by sex) treatment plants ng wastewater leverage the
reclaimed water and adapting wastewater recorded for technologies mechanisms available
promote ownership and technologies for Barbados. for enhanced (incentives and RAFF)
leadership in the enhanced treatment treatment and provide co-financing,
private sector and/or use of and/or use of if needed
wastewater wastewater

--- Table 1 on Page 102 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | double |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | counting)(50% |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | males and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 50% females) |  | 
 |  |  | # of documents
updated/developed
(disaggregate by type
- SOPs, operational
manual, risk
management
framework) |  |  | Final risk framework,
SOPs. O&M manual and
project document |  | 0 manuals |  | 1 updated set
of SOPs
1 updated O&M
manual
1 risk
management
framework | 1 updated set
of SOPs
1 updated
O&M manual
1 risk
management
framework | 1 updated set |  | Expertise available to
support the updating of
documents.
Stakeholders are
available and actively
participate.
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | updated. The |  |  |  | of SOPs |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | O&M manual |  |  |  | 1 updated |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | currently being |  |  |  | O&M manual |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | utilized was |  |  |  | 1 risk |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | published in 1982 |  |  |  | management |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | when the BSTP |  |  |  | framework |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | was |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | commissioned. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Risk |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | management |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | framework not |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | adopted by BWA |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | The SOPs are |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | also dated. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 3.2: A strategic |  | f
t
t
t | # of plans completed |  | Final strategic plan | 0 plans exist | 0 plans exist |  | 1 strategic plan
completed | 1 strategic plan
completed |  |  | Expertise available to
undertake the study
 | plan is developed to |  |  | or the replication of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | guide the replication of |  |  | he brackish water RO |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | water treatment |  |  | reatment plant along |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | facilities along the west |  |  | he west coast |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | coast |  |  | corridor |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Outcome 4: An
enabling environment is
created for wastewater
technologies and use of
reclaimed water and
promote ownership and
leadership in the
private sector |  |  | i
t | # of private |  | MOUs/agreements,
interviews with private
businesses and
individuals. | As of 2018, there
were sixty-eight
(68) private
wastewater
treatment plants
recorded for
Barbados. |  |  | No change
from baseline. |  | 20 private |  | Businesses and
individuals are interested
in wastewater systems
and its benefits and
leverage the
mechanisms available
(incentives and RAFF)
and provide co-financing,
if needed
 |  |  |  | businesses (by |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | businesses |  | 
 |  |  |  | ownership |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and individuals |  | 
 |  |  |  | Male/Female) and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | adapting/utilizi |  | 
 |  |  |  | ndividuals (by sex) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ng wastewater |  | 
 |  |  |  | adapting wastewater |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | technologies |  | 
 |  |  |  | echnologies for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | for enhanced |  | 
 |  |  |  | enhanced treatment |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | treatment |  | 
 |  |  |  | and/or use of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and/or use of |  | 
 |  |  |  | wastewater |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 102 ---
# of documents
updated/developed
disaggregate by type
SOPs, operational
manual, risk
management
ramework)

--- Table 3 on Page 102 ---
Final risk framework,
SOPs. O&M manual and
project document

--- Table 4 on Page 102 ---
1 updated set
of SOPs
1 updated O&M
manual
1 risk
management
framework

--- Table 5 on Page 102 ---
Expertise available to
support the updating of
documents.
Stakeholders are
available and actively
participate.

--- Table 6 on Page 102 ---
1 strategic plan
completed

--- Table 7 on Page 102 ---
1 strategic plan
completed

--- Table 8 on Page 102 ---
Expertise available to
undertake the study

--- Table 9 on Page 102 ---
MOUs/agreements,
interviews with private
businesses and
individuals.

--- Table 10 on Page 102 ---
As of 2018, there
were sixty-eight
(68) private
wastewater
treatment plants
recorded for
Barbados.

--- Table 11 on Page 102 ---
No change
from baseline.

--- Table 12 on Page 102 ---
Businesses and
individuals are interested
in wastewater systems
and its benefits and
leverage the
mechanisms available
(incentives and RAFF)
and provide co-financing,
if needed

--- Table 13 on Page 102 ---
Outcome 4: An
enabling environment is
created for wastewater
technologies and use of
reclaimed water and
promote ownership and
leadership in the
private sector

=== PAGE 103 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97
E
Level of effectiveness Interviews with training TBC - KAP Training Statistically Trainees find the training
of the re-education beneficiaries, training survey planned material significant relevant and apply the
and public education evaluation reports for activity 4.3.1 developed and differences in knowledge gained.
programme to establish available. KAP from the
baselines and baseline KAP
training needs survey.
Number of persons 1000 persons
aware about Post workshop Limited heighten 10,000
wastewater reuse and evaluations Awareness and awareness persons
technologies. public outreach after training heighten
and public awareness
outreach and public
outreach
# of roadmaps/action Final master plan, There is a long 1 Legislative 1 Legislative Expertise available to
plans, with legislative review report list of policy and review review undertake review.
recommended and knowledge products legislation completed; completed; National technical
Output 4.1: actions, completed relevant to knowledge knowledge authorities provide timely
Governance and (Disaggregate by wastewater products products input and
planning roadmaps type: legislative management in (video, booklet, (video, booklet, recommendations in the
enhanced to enable review, master plan) Barbados. The infographic) infographic) review process. There is
use of reclaimed water most recent developed developed buy-in to implement the
in a controlled and include the 1 water and 1 water and recommendations of the
regulated manner Planning and sanitation sanitation legislative review
Development Act, master plan master plan
Water Reuse Bill completed completed
and Regulations.
Output 4.2: # of stakeholder consultant reports, final No incentive 1 private sector 1 private Stakeholders are
Mechanisms engagement tools - strategy, action programme in engagement sector receptive to the
developed/expanded to tools/mechanisms plan, incentive place for strategy engagement engagement strategies
encourage the adoption developed. programme, interviews wastewater completed, strategy and are interested in
of wastewater (Disaggregate by with relevant Ministry, reuse, no private RAFF completed, wastewater reuse.
treatment and reuse type: engagement Department or Agency sector documentation RAFF
applications by private strategy/action plan, (MDA), RAFF engagement reflects documentation
individuals and incentive programme, documentation, strategy in place wastewater reflects
businesses. RAFF) MOUs/Agreement with and the RAFF is reuse, report wastewater

--- Table 1 on Page 103 ---
 |  |  | Level of effectiveness
of the re-education
and public education
programme
Number of persons
aware about
wastewater reuse and
technologies. |  |  | Interviews with training
beneficiaries, training
evaluation reports
Post workshop
evaluations |  |  | TBC - KAP
survey planned
for activity 4.3.1
to establish
baselines and
training needs
Limited
Awareness and
public outreach |  |  | Training
material
developed and
available.
1000 persons
heighten
awareness
after training
and public
outreach |  |  |  | Statistically |  | Trainees find the training
relevant and apply the
knowledge gained.
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | significant |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | differences in |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | KAP from the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | baseline KAP |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | survey. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 10,000 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | persons |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | heighten |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | awareness |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and public |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | outreach |  | 
Output 4.1:
Governance and
planning roadmaps
enhanced to enable
use of reclaimed water
in a controlled and
regulated manner |  |  | # of roadmaps/action
plans, with
recommended
actions, completed
(Disaggregate by
type: legislative
review, master plan) |  |  | Final master plan,
legislative review report
and knowledge products |  |  |  | There is a long |  | 1 Legislative
review
completed;
knowledge
products
(video, booklet,
infographic)
developed
1 water and
sanitation
master plan
completed |  |  | 1 Legislative
review
completed;
knowledge
products
(video, booklet,
infographic)
developed
1 water and
sanitation
master plan
completed | 1 Legislative |  | Expertise available to
undertake review.
National technical
authorities provide timely
input and
recommendations in the
review process. There is
buy-in to implement the
recommendations of the
legislative review
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | list of policy and |  |  |  |  |  | review |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | legislation |  |  |  |  |  | completed; |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | relevant to |  |  |  |  |  | knowledge |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater |  |  |  |  |  | products |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | management in |  |  |  |  |  | (video, booklet, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Barbados. The |  |  |  |  |  | infographic) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | most recent |  |  |  |  |  | developed |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | include the |  |  |  |  |  | 1 water and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Planning and |  |  |  |  |  | sanitation |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Development Act, |  |  |  |  |  | master plan |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Water Reuse Bill |  |  |  |  |  | completed |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and Regulations. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 4.2: |  | t
(
t
i | # of stakeholder |  |  | consultant reports, final |  |  | No incentive |  |  | 1 private sector |  |  | 1 private |  | Stakeholders are
receptive to the
engagement strategies
and are interested in
wastewater reuse.
 | Mechanisms |  |  | engagement |  |  | tools - strategy, action |  |  | programme in |  |  | engagement |  |  | sector |  | 
 | developed/expanded to |  |  | ools/mechanisms |  |  | plan, incentive |  |  | place for |  |  | strategy |  |  | engagement |  | 
 | encourage the adoption |  |  | developed. |  |  | programme, interviews |  |  | wastewater |  |  | completed, |  |  | strategy |  | 
 | of wastewater |  |  | Disaggregate by |  |  | with relevant Ministry, |  |  | reuse, no private |  |  | RAFF |  |  | completed, |  | 
 | treatment and reuse |  |  | ype: engagement |  |  | Department or Agency |  |  | sector |  |  | documentation |  |  | RAFF |  | 
 | applications by private |  |  | strategy/action plan, |  |  | (MDA), RAFF |  |  | engagement |  |  | reflects |  |  | documentation |  | 
 | individuals and |  |  | ncentive programme, |  |  | documentation, |  |  | strategy in place |  |  | wastewater |  |  | reflects |  | 
 | businesses. |  |  | RAFF) |  |  | MOUs/Agreement with |  |  | and the RAFF is |  |  | reuse, report |  |  | wastewater |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 103 ---
Level of effectiveness
of the re-education
and public education
programme



Number of persons
aware about
wastewater reuse and
echnologies.

--- Table 3 on Page 103 ---
Interviews with training
beneficiaries, training
evaluation reports





Post workshop
evaluations

--- Table 4 on Page 103 ---
TBC - KAP
survey planned
for activity 4.3.1
to establish
baselines and
training needs


Limited
Awareness and
public outreach

--- Table 5 on Page 103 ---
Training
material
developed and
available.



1000 persons
heighten
awareness
after training
and public
outreach

--- Table 6 on Page 103 ---
Trainees find the training
relevant and apply the
knowledge gained.

--- Table 7 on Page 103 ---
# of roadmaps/action
plans, with
ecommended
actions, completed
Disaggregate by
ype: legislative
eview, master plan)

--- Table 8 on Page 103 ---
Final master plan,
legislative review report
and knowledge products

--- Table 9 on Page 103 ---
1 Legislative
review
completed;
knowledge
products
(video, booklet,
infographic)
developed
1 water and
sanitation
master plan
completed

--- Table 10 on Page 103 ---
Expertise available to
undertake review.
National technical
authorities provide timely
input and
recommendations in the
review process. There is
buy-in to implement the
recommendations of the
legislative review

--- Table 11 on Page 103 ---
Output 4.1:
Governance and
planning roadmaps
enhanced to enable
use of reclaimed water
in a controlled and
regulated manner

--- Table 12 on Page 103 ---
Stakeholders are
receptive to the
engagement strategies
and are interested in
wastewater reuse.

=== PAGE 104 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98
E
private sector, marketing not on reuse, report
and educational materials operationalized recommendatio on
on the RAFF as yet (to be ns for incentive recommendati
done by WSRN programme ons for
project) completed incentive
programme
completed
# of persons social media analytics, BWA hosts the 6 schools (mix 6 schools per MIBPA and BWA will be
benefitting from website analytics, following types of of primary and year for 5 involved in the
education and training registration forms, photos PEA related secondary) per years = 30 communication strategy.
activities activities: year for 2 years schools x 25 Communication about
(Disaggregated by Water = 12 schools x students per this Project, in suitable
sex) Wednesdays - 5 25 students per school = 750 formats and inclusive of
minutes on TV school= 300 students (50% all stakeholders, will be
talking about students(50% males and ongoing throughout the
water related males and 50% 50% females) life of the Project. There
issues females). is the willingness of
General Town 6 community people to attend and
Hall meetings 4-8 community consultations share feedback at the
Output 4.3: Gender
Community consultations per year for 5 consultation activities
Sensitive Public
Outreach - open (Town halls, years = 30 planned.
Education and
discussions/conv outreach, walk communities
Awareness Campaign
ersations through etc) over 5 years =
Implemented.
between per year = 8-16 2250
individuals and communities community
Senior Staff at over 2 years x persons (50%
BWA in Churches 75 persons per males and
Community Walk community = 50% females)
Through - open 600-1200 (assuming
discussions/conv community attendance of
ersations persons(50% 75 persons per
between males and 50% consultation)
individuals and females)
Senior Staff at
14 sessions
BWA 3 sessions (workshops,
BWA also has (workshops, meetings,

--- Table 1 on Page 104 ---
 |  | private sector, marketing
and educational materials
on the RAFF | not
operationalized
as yet (to be
done by WSRN
project) | on
recommendatio
ns for incentive
programme
completed |  |  |  | reuse, report |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | on |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | recommendati |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ons for |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | incentive |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | programme |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | completed |  | 
Output 4.3: Gender
Sensitive Public
Education and
Awareness Campaign
Implemented. | # of persons
benefitting from
education and training
activities
(Disaggregated by
sex) | social media analytics,
website analytics,
registration forms, photos | BWA hosts the
following types of
PEA related
activities:
Water
Wednesdays - 5
minutes on TV
talking about
water related
issues
General Town
Hall meetings
Community
Outreach - open
discussions/conv
ersations
between
individuals and
Senior Staff at
BWA in Churches
Community Walk
Through - open
discussions/conv
ersations
between
individuals and
Senior Staff at
BWA
BWA also has |  | 6 schools (mix |  |  | 6 schools per |  | MIBPA and BWA will be
involved in the
communication strategy.
Communication about
this Project, in suitable
formats and inclusive of
all stakeholders, will be
ongoing throughout the
life of the Project. There
is the willingness of
people to attend and
share feedback at the
consultation activities
planned.
 |  |  |  |  | of primary and |  |  | year for 5 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | secondary) per |  |  | years = 30 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | year for 2 years |  |  | schools x 25 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | = 12 schools x |  |  | students per |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 25 students per |  |  | school = 750 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | school= 300 |  |  | students (50% |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | students(50% |  |  | males and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | males and 50% |  |  | 50% females) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | females). |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 6 community |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 4-8 community |  |  | consultations |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | consultations |  |  | per year for 5 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (Town halls, |  |  | years = 30 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | outreach, walk |  |  | communities |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | through etc) |  |  | over 5 years = |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | per year = 8-16 |  |  | 2250 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | communities |  |  | community |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | over 2 years x |  |  | persons (50% |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 75 persons per |  |  | males and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | community = |  |  | 50% females) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 600-1200 |  |  | (assuming |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | community |  |  | attendance of |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | persons(50% |  |  | 75 persons per |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | males and 50% |  |  | consultation) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | females) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 14 sessions |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 3 sessions |  |  | (workshops, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (workshops, |  |  | meetings, |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 104 ---
private sector, marketing
and educational materials
on the RAFF

--- Table 3 on Page 104 ---
not
operationalized
as yet (to be
done by WSRN
project)

--- Table 4 on Page 104 ---
on
recommendatio
ns for incentive
programme
completed

--- Table 5 on Page 104 ---
# of persons
benefitting from
education and training
activities
Disaggregated by
sex)

--- Table 6 on Page 104 ---
social media analytics,
website analytics,
registration forms, photos

--- Table 7 on Page 104 ---
BWA hosts the
following types of
PEA related
activities:
Water
Wednesdays - 5
minutes on TV
talking about
water related
issues
General Town
Hall meetings
Community
Outreach - open
discussions/conv
ersations
between
individuals and
Senior Staff at
BWA in Churches
Community Walk
Through - open
discussions/conv
ersations
between
individuals and
Senior Staff at
BWA

--- Table 8 on Page 104 ---
MIBPA and BWA will be
involved in the
communication strategy.
Communication about
this Project, in suitable
formats and inclusive of
all stakeholders, will be
ongoing throughout the
life of the Project. There
is the willingness of
people to attend and
share feedback at the
consultation activities
planned.

--- Table 9 on Page 104 ---
Output 4.3: Gender
Sensitive Public
Education and
Awareness Campaign
Implemented.


=== PAGE 105 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99
E
Instagram and meetings, training etc)
Facebook that training etc) each targeting
provides of each targeting 20 farmers
updates. 15 farmers convened =
convened = 45 280 farmers.
farmers (60% This will
males and 40% include
females) targeted
training for the
3 sessions 155 farmers
(workshops, (60% males
meetings, and 40%
training etc) females) along
each targeting the 9km
15 private pipeline
sector = 45 benefiting from
private reclaimed
businesses water for
primarily
agriculture
(and possible
other reuse
purposes)
8 sessions
(workshops,
meetings,
training etc)
each targeting
15 private
sector = 120
private
businesses
# of project updates website analytics, project 0 At least 150 At least 300 Updates are timely,
available on the webpage updates updates relevant and accessible
review/observation, BWA comprising the comprising the to a wide cross section

--- Table 1 on Page 105 ---
 |  |  |  |  | Instagram and
Facebook that
provides of
updates. | meetings,
training etc)
each targeting
15 farmers
convened = 45
farmers (60%
males and 40%
females)
3 sessions
(workshops,
meetings,
training etc)
each targeting
15 private
sector = 45
private
businesses |  |  |  | training etc) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | each targeting |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 20 farmers |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | convened = |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 280 farmers. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | This will |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | include |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | targeted |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | training for the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 155 farmers |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (60% males |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and 40% |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | females) along |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the 9km |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | pipeline |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | benefiting from |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reclaimed |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | water for |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | primarily |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | agriculture |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (and possible |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | other reuse |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | purposes) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 8 sessions |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (workshops, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | meetings, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | training etc) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | each targeting |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 15 private |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | sector = 120 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | private |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | businesses |  |  |  | 
 | # of project updates
available on the |  | website analytics, project |  | 0 |  | At least 150 |  |  | At least 300 |  |  | Updates are timely, | 
 |  |  | webpage |  |  |  | updates |  |  | updates |  |  | relevant and accessible | 
 |  |  | review/observation, BWA |  |  |  | comprising the |  |  | comprising the |  |  | to a wide cross section | 

--- Table 2 on Page 105 ---
Instagram and
Facebook that
provides of
updates.

--- Table 3 on Page 105 ---
meetings,
training etc)
each targeting
15 farmers
convened = 45
farmers (60%
males and 40%
females)

3 sessions
(workshops,
meetings,
training etc)
each targeting
15 private
sector = 45
private
businesses

--- Table 4 on Page 105 ---
# of project updates
available on the

=== PAGE 106 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100
E
dedicated 3R-CReWS progress reports to following following of stakeholders - private
project webpage CCCCC formats: formats: sector, individuals,
Videos/docume Videos/docum tourists, national
ntary, press entary, press agencies, civil society
releases of releases of
outputs of town outputs of town
hall meetings hall meetings
within within
communities, communities,
case studies, case studies,
digital flyers, digital flyers,
posters), 20 posters), 40
water water
Wednesdays (8 Wednesdays
per year), 10 (8 per year),
newsletters (4 20 newsletters
per year) (4 per year)
# of project updates social media account hits, 0 At least 1500 At least 5000 Followers find the
available on the views, likes - YouTube, combined posts combined information useful and
dedicated social Instagram, Twitter and on the social posts on the return frequently for
media accounts Facebook media accounts social media updates
accounts
(expected to
reach over
90,000
persons)
Project/programme co-benefit indicators
More water available for % of the total ground BWA consumption data, BSTP upgrades
the agriculture sector water resources flow meters measuring 16% of total 10% of total completed and
extracted and used reclaimed water extractions is extractions is distribution system in
No change
for agricultural produced, BWA reports, used for used for place.
from baseline
site visit and agriculture agriculture
observations.On farm purpuses, purpuses.
survey/meter readings

--- Table 1 on Page 106 ---
 | dedicated 3R-CReWS
project webpage | progress reports to
CCCCC |  |  |  |  | following |  |  | following |  | of stakeholders - private
sector, individuals,
tourists, national
agencies, civil society
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | formats: |  |  | formats: |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Videos/docume |  |  | Videos/docum |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | ntary, press |  |  | entary, press |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | releases of |  |  | releases of |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | outputs of town |  |  | outputs of town |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | hall meetings |  |  | hall meetings |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | within |  |  | within |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | communities, |  |  | communities, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | case studies, |  |  | case studies, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | digital flyers, |  |  | digital flyers, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | posters), 20 |  |  | posters), 40 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | water |  |  | water |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Wednesdays (8 |  |  | Wednesdays |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | per year), 10 |  |  | (8 per year), |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | newsletters (4 |  |  | 20 newsletters |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | per year) |  |  | (4 per year) |  | 
 | # of project updates
available on the
dedicated social
media accounts | social media account hits,
views, likes - YouTube,
Instagram, Twitter and
Facebook |  |  | 0 | At least 1500
combined posts
on the social
media accounts | At least 1500 |  |  | At least 5000 |  | Followers find the
information useful and
return frequently for
updates
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | combined posts |  |  | combined |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | on the social |  |  | posts on the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | media accounts |  |  | social media |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | accounts |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (expected to |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reach over |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 90,000 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | persons) |  | 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
More water available for
the agriculture sector | % of the total ground
water resources
extracted and used
for agricultural |  | BWA consumption data, |  | 16% of total
extractions is
used for
agriculture
purpuses, | No change
from baseline |  |  | 10% of total
extractions is
used for
agriculture
purpuses. |  |  | BSTP upgrades
completed and
distribution system in
place.
 |  |  | flow meters measuring |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | reclaimed water |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | produced, BWA reports, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | site visit and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | observations.On farm |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | survey/meter readings |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 106 ---
dedicated 3R-CReWS
project webpage

--- Table 3 on Page 106 ---
progress reports to
CCCCC

--- Table 4 on Page 106 ---
of stakeholders - private
sector, individuals,
tourists, national
agencies, civil society

--- Table 5 on Page 106 ---
# of project updates
available on the
dedicated social
media accounts

--- Table 6 on Page 106 ---
social media account hits,
views, likes - YouTube,
Instagram, Twitter and
Facebook

--- Table 7 on Page 106 ---
Followers find the
information useful and
return frequently for
updates

--- Table 8 on Page 106 ---
More water available for
he agriculture sector

--- Table 9 on Page 106 ---
% of the total ground
water resources
extracted and used
for agricultural

--- Table 10 on Page 106 ---
BSTP upgrades
completed and
distribution system in
place.

--- Table 11 on Page 106 ---
16% of total
extractions is
used for
agriculture
purpuses,

--- Table 12 on Page 106 ---
10% of total
extractions is
used for
agriculture
purpuses.

--- Table 13 on Page 106 ---
No change
from baseline

=== PAGE 107 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101
E
purposes.
purposes69.
An estimated BSTP upgrades
Less than 10%
2.25 million m3 completed and
BWA Reports and flow of treated
per year of distribution system in
Improved water quality Amount of wastewater meters data, Research, wastewater
treated No change place.
in the marine discharged into project documents, site discharged
wastewater from baseline
environment marine environment visit, survey of plant discharged into
discharged into
employees. marine
marine
environment.
environment.
Level of H2S BSTP fully upgraded and
emissions Survey in surrounding operational.
communities and plant
Improved air quality in Number odour employees,
the proximity of the complaints from Environmental Protection TBD70 TBD TBD
plant communities Department (EPD)
surrounding of the reports, Ministry of Health
BSTP and lift stations reports.
received per year
8.6 males to 1 No change 5 males to 1 BWA increases female
Number of persons female working at expected female working staff by 3 females
(by sex), , involved in
the BSTP at the BSTP holding current males
Increased participation
the production
BWA Human Resource
s taff of 26 constant.
reclaimed water
of women in the Department, Ministry of
production and use of Agriculture Database, Women have and or gain
Number of persons 62 female
reclaimed water Project reports, surveys. No change access to agriculture
(by sex) involved in 0 farmers
lands and financing and
the use of reclaimed expected utilising of
training needed to
water
reclaimed
participate in the
water
69 Approximately 57 Mm3/y is extracted from groundwater resources for domestic potable water distribution and an estimated 11 Mm3/y is extracted for
agricultural irrigation (See Feasibility Study).
70 H2S levels to be baseline at the beginning of the project. Similarly, the mid-term and final targets will be determined at the beginning at the project relative
to the baselined. The BWA recently made some adjustments to the plant’s operations as such it would be best to baseline the complaints using January to
December 2022.

--- Table 1 on Page 107 ---
 |  | purposes. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | purposes69. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Improved water quality
in the marine
environment | Amount of wastewater
discharged into
marine environment |  |  | BWA Reports and flow
meters data, Research,
project documents, site
visit, survey of plant
employees. |  | An estimated |  | No change
from baseline | Less than 10%
of treated
wastewater
discharged
discharged into
marine
environment. |  |  | BSTP upgrades
completed and
distribution system in
place.
 |  |  |  |  |  | 2.25 million m3 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | per year of |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | treated |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | wastewater |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | discharged into |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | marine |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | environment. |  |  |  |  |  | 
Improved air quality in
the proximity of the
plant | r | Level of H2S |  | Survey in surrounding
communities and plant
employees,
Environmental Protection
Department (EPD)
reports, Ministry of Health
reports. | TBD70 |  |  | TBD | TBD |  |  | BSTP fully upgraded and
operational.
 |  | emissions |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Number odour |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | complaints from |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | communities |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | surrounding of the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | BSTP and lift stations |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | eceived per year |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Increased participation
of women in the
production and use of
reclaimed water | Number of persons
(by sex), , involved in
the production
reclaimed water
Number of persons
(by sex) involved in
the use of reclaimed
water |  |  | BWA Human Resource
Department, Ministry of
Agriculture Database,
Project reports, surveys. | 8.6 males to 1
female working at
the BSTP
0 |  |  | No change
expected
No change
expected |  | 5 males to 1 |  | BWA increases female
staff by 3 females
holding current males
staff of 26 constant.
Women have and or gain
access to agriculture
lands and financing and
training needed to
participate in the
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | female working |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | at the BSTP |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 62 female |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | farmers |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | utilising of |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reclaimed |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | water |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 107 ---
BSTP upgrades
completed and
distribution system in
place.

--- Table 3 on Page 107 ---
Less than 10%
of treated
wastewater
discharged
discharged into
marine
environment.

--- Table 4 on Page 107 ---
BWA Reports and flow
meters data, Research,
project documents, site
visit, survey of plant
employees.

--- Table 5 on Page 107 ---
mproved water quality
n the marine
environment

--- Table 6 on Page 107 ---
Amount of wastewater
discharged into
marine environment

--- Table 7 on Page 107 ---
No change
from baseline

--- Table 8 on Page 107 ---
BSTP fully upgraded and
operational.


--- Table 9 on Page 107 ---
Survey in surrounding
communities and plant
employees,
Environmental Protection
Department (EPD)
reports, Ministry of Health
reports.

--- Table 10 on Page 107 ---
mproved air quality in
he proximity of the
plant

--- Table 11 on Page 107 ---
8.6 males to 1
female working at
the BSTP




0

--- Table 12 on Page 107 ---
No change
expected




No change
expected

--- Table 13 on Page 107 ---
BWA increases female
staff by 3 females
holding current males
staff of 26 constant.

Women have and or gain
access to agriculture
lands and financing and
training needed to
participate in the

--- Table 14 on Page 107 ---
(by sex), , involved in
the production
reclaimed water

Number of persons
(by sex) involved in
the use of reclaimed
water

--- Table 15 on Page 107 ---
of women in the
production and use of
eclaimed water

--- Table 16 on Page 107 ---
Department, Ministry of
Agriculture Database,
Project reports, surveys.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102
E
production and use of
reclaimed water.
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable.
Add rows as needed.
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number
sub-activities as shown below to associate to the related activity.
Activities Description Sub-activities Deliverables
Activity 1.1.1: Design, procure and The CAS represents the simplest 1.1.1.1. Contract for detailed 1.1.1.1 - 1 engineering design report
convert/upgrade the existing process configuration to operate and engineering design 1.1.1.2 - 1 tender package detailed
conventional activated sludge (CAS) the least expensive to implement 1.1.1.2. Prepare tender package drawings, specifications and bidding
biological treatment process at the (similar in operation to the existing including the detailed drawings and documents
Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant BSTP Contact Stabilization CAS specifications and bidding documents 1.1.1.3 - 1 report on public
to tertiary filtration and disinfection for process) and will achieve a high 1.1.1.3. Public consultations consultations
achieving national reclaimed water- tertiary water quality suitable for reuse 1.1.1.4. Procure, Construct & Install 1.1.1.4 - 1 CAS 4-stage Bardenpho
quality standards. applications. As no expansion of the Earthwork and Foundation, Mech. installed at the BSTP location
sewer or additional is contemplated Equipment, Tanks & Infra., Piping and 1.1.1.5 - 1 Supervising Engineer's
that would need to increase the Aeration, Electrical and Certification of Completion
treatment capacity beyond the current Instrumentation
CAS process capabilities, the existing 1.1.1.5 Commissioning &
contact stabilization could be Reinstatement
upgraded by reconfiguring the existing
aerobic, contact stabilization, sludge
digestion and clarifiers into a pre-
anoxic/aerobic configuration to
achieve complete nitrification and high
efficiency denitrification to meet the
maximum total nitrogen concentration
requirement of 5 mg-N/L, along with
the addition of two new clarifiers,
tertiary filtration and disinfection.
Recirculation pumps, mixers and
disinfection will also need to be added
to achieve a water quality suitable for
water reuse applications.
The first step of a CAS system is the

--- Table 1 on Page 108 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | production and use of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reclaimed water. | 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable.
Add rows as needed.
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number
sub-activities as shown below to associate to the related activity. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities |  | Description |  |  | Sub-activities |  |  | Deliverables |  |  | 
Activity 1.1.1: Design, procure and
convert/upgrade the existing
conventional activated sludge (CAS)
biological treatment process at the
Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant
to tertiary filtration and disinfection for
achieving national reclaimed water-
quality standards. |  | The CAS represents the simplest
process configuration to operate and
the least expensive to implement
(similar in operation to the existing
BSTP Contact Stabilization CAS
process) and will achieve a high
tertiary water quality suitable for reuse
applications. As no expansion of the
sewer or additional is contemplated
that would need to increase the
treatment capacity beyond the current
CAS process capabilities, the existing
contact stabilization could be
upgraded by reconfiguring the existing
aerobic, contact stabilization, sludge
digestion and clarifiers into a pre-
anoxic/aerobic configuration to
achieve complete nitrification and high
efficiency denitrification to meet the
maximum total nitrogen concentration
requirement of 5 mg-N/L, along with
the addition of two new clarifiers,
tertiary filtration and disinfection.
Recirculation pumps, mixers and
disinfection will also need to be added
to achieve a water quality suitable for
water reuse applications.
The first step of a CAS system is the |  |  | 1.1.1.1. Contract for detailed
engineering design
1.1.1.2. Prepare tender package
including the detailed drawings and
specifications and bidding documents
1.1.1.3. Public consultations
1.1.1.4. Procure, Construct & Install
Earthwork and Foundation, Mech.
Equipment, Tanks & Infra., Piping and
Aeration, Electrical and
Instrumentation
1.1.1.5 Commissioning &
Reinstatement |  |  | 1.1.1.1 - 1 engineering design report
1.1.1.2 - 1 tender package detailed
drawings, specifications and bidding
documents
1.1.1.3 - 1 report on public
consultations
1.1.1.4 - 1 CAS 4-stage Bardenpho
installed at the BSTP location
1.1.1.5 - 1 Supervising Engineer's
Certification of Completion |  |  | 

=== PAGE 109 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103
E
aeration tank, where the wastewater is
mixed with air to activate micro-
organisms. The aeration basin is
followed by a secondary clarifier or
settling tank. During this step, micro-
organisms with their adsorbed organic
material settle. Water from the clarifier
is transported to installations for
disinfection and final discharge or to
other tertiary treatment units for
further purification.
Activity 1.2.1: Install reverse osmosis The reverse osmosis is a water 1.2.1.1. Prepare tender package 1.2.1.1 - 1 tender package with
(RO) membrane filtration systems to separation technology where including the detailed drawings and detailed drawings, specifications and
reduce the total dissolved solids dissolved contaminants in water are specifications and bidding documents bidding documents
concentration of the reclaimed water physically removed by passing under 1.2.1.2. Contract for detailed 1.2.1.2 - 1 engineering design report
produced at BSTP pressure through a semipermeable, engineering design and installation 1.2.1.3 - 1 RO plant installed and
thin film membrane. The process is 1.2.1.3. Construction of Earthwork and operationalized
similar to the way your body’s cells Foundation and installation of RO 1.2.1.4 - 1 Supervising Engineer's
absorb water. Reverse osmosis will plant including, Piping, Electrical and Certification of Completion
remove up to 98% of dissolved Instrumentation
contaminants such as: minerals, salts, 1.2.1.4 Commissioning of 7,200 m3/d
metals and organic matter that may be capacity RO System
present in a water supply. Pores in the
reverse osmosis membrane are so
small that only water molecules pass
through. The contaminants are
rejected and discarded as wastewater.
RO treatments will be required to
remove total dissolved solids (TDS) to
meet TDS <450 mg/L
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline Length of pipeline is 9 kms that will go 1.2.2.1. Contract for detailed 1.2.2.1 - 1 engineering design report
and 6 aquifer recharge wells going from BSTP to Waterford (Botanical engineering design for pipeline and and management plan
from the BSTP for irrigation and Gardens) with take-off at Hothersal aquifer recharge wells including 1.2.2.2 - 1 tender package detailed
aquifer recharge roundabout to Friendship plantation surveying geotechnical investigation, drawings, specifications and bidding
the turn south along ABC H’way And traffic management plan and documents
Then Turn North Along Road easement 1.2.2.3 - 1 public consultation report
up to Lears (Roberts Manufacturing) – 1.2.2.2. Prepare tender package 1.2.2.4 - 9km pipeline installed and
irrigation can be done for lands on including the detailed drawings and operationalized

--- Table 1 on Page 109 ---
 | aeration tank, where the wastewater is
mixed with air to activate micro-
organisms. The aeration basin is
followed by a secondary clarifier or
settling tank. During this step, micro-
organisms with their adsorbed organic
material settle. Water from the clarifier
is transported to installations for
disinfection and final discharge or to
other tertiary treatment units for
further purification. |  | 
Activity 1.2.1: Install reverse osmosis
(RO) membrane filtration systems to
reduce the total dissolved solids
concentration of the reclaimed water
produced at BSTP | The reverse osmosis is a water
separation technology where
dissolved contaminants in water are
physically removed by passing under
pressure through a semipermeable,
thin film membrane. The process is
similar to the way your body’s cells
absorb water. Reverse osmosis will
remove up to 98% of dissolved
contaminants such as: minerals, salts,
metals and organic matter that may be
present in a water supply. Pores in the
reverse osmosis membrane are so
small that only water molecules pass
through. The contaminants are
rejected and discarded as wastewater.
RO treatments will be required to
remove total dissolved solids (TDS) to
meet TDS <450 mg/L | 1.2.1.1. Prepare tender package
including the detailed drawings and
specifications and bidding documents
1.2.1.2. Contract for detailed
engineering design and installation
1.2.1.3. Construction of Earthwork and
Foundation and installation of RO
plant including, Piping, Electrical and
Instrumentation
1.2.1.4 Commissioning of 7,200 m3/d
capacity RO System | 1.2.1.1 - 1 tender package with
detailed drawings, specifications and
bidding documents
1.2.1.2 - 1 engineering design report
1.2.1.3 - 1 RO plant installed and
operationalized
1.2.1.4 - 1 Supervising Engineer's
Certification of Completion
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline
and 6 aquifer recharge wells going
from the BSTP for irrigation and
aquifer recharge | Length of pipeline is 9 kms that will go
from BSTP to Waterford (Botanical
Gardens) with take-off at Hothersal
roundabout to Friendship plantation
the turn south along ABC H’way And
Then Turn North Along Road
up to Lears (Roberts Manufacturing) –
irrigation can be done for lands on | 1.2.2.1. Contract for detailed
engineering design for pipeline and
aquifer recharge wells including
surveying geotechnical investigation,
traffic management plan and
easement
1.2.2.2. Prepare tender package
including the detailed drawings and | 1.2.2.1 - 1 engineering design report
and management plan
1.2.2.2 - 1 tender package detailed
drawings, specifications and bidding
documents
1.2.2.3 - 1 public consultation report
1.2.2.4 - 9km pipeline installed and
operationalized

=== PAGE 110 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104
E
east and west of that road. specifications and bidding documents 1.2.2.5 - 6 aquifer recharge wells
Also take in Neil’s Plantation, Salters, 1.2.2.3. Gender Sensitve Public installed and operationalized
Constant and Valley Plantation. consultations 1.2.2.6 - 1 Supervising Engineer's
Assume 6 aquifer recharge wells will 1.2.2.4. Procure, Construct & Install Certification of Completion
be included in this option Earthwork and Foundation, Piping and
Instrumentation
1.2.2.5. Construct & install aquifer
recharge wells
1.2.2.6 Commissioning
Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer Monitoring includes the installation of 1.3.1.1. Prepare tendering package 1.3.1.1 - 1 engineering design reports
monitoring programme that will flow measurement and rain gauging for detailed design, equipment with equipment specifications
include the installation of flow systems at the BSTP, within specification and bidding requirements 1.3.1.2 - 1 tender package detailed
measurement and rain-gauging manholes, and visual (qualitative) 1.3.1.2. Select vendor and procure drawings, specifications and bidding
equipment at the BSTP to identify and observations during wet and dry equipment documents
address sources of inflow and weather. Installation of sensors with 1.3.1.3. Install equipment and test 1.3.1.3 - Sewer monitoring equipment
infiltration to the sewer. Mechanisms alarms that detect when the water installed and operationalized
that identify and reduce or mitigate levels are at or above a critical height
vulnerabilities in the wastewater in the area of the manholes to act as
collection systems will also be an early detection system that will
investigated. help the BWA/drainage division to
respond to potential flooding early will
also be undertaken. BWA will
implement real-time evaluation of
climate-related risks by establishing a
routine data analysis program based
on inputs provided from the flow
meters and rain-gauging stations to be
able to take mitigation/response
actions in a timely manner
Activity 1.3.2: Establish on-site An on-site laboratory will be 1.3.2.1. Contract for engineering 1.3.2.1 - 1 laboratory design report
laboratory facilities and personnel at established at the BSTP to analyse design and equipment specifications that
the BSTP to generate influent and influent and wastewater treatment 1.3.2.2. Prepare tender package meet the needs of the upgraded
effluent water quality data to inform effluent quality for BSTP and the Zone including the detailed drawings and system - location, layout, equipment,
operations control strategies that An area cluster wastewater treatment specifications and bidding documents reagents, protocols, staffing etc.
optimize operations and reduce plants, when they have been 1.3.2.3. Select vendor, retrofit and 1.3.2.2 - 1 tender package detailed
established. There will also be routine equip laboratory at BSTP for drawings, specifications and bidding

--- Table 1 on Page 110 ---
 | east and west of that road.
Also take in Neil’s Plantation, Salters,
Constant and Valley Plantation.
Assume 6 aquifer recharge wells will
be included in this option | specifications and bidding documents
1.2.2.3. Gender Sensitve Public
consultations
1.2.2.4. Procure, Construct & Install
Earthwork and Foundation, Piping and
Instrumentation
1.2.2.5. Construct & install aquifer
recharge wells
1.2.2.6 Commissioning | 1.2.2.5 - 6 aquifer recharge wells
installed and operationalized
1.2.2.6 - 1 Supervising Engineer's
Certification of Completion
Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer
monitoring programme that will
include the installation of flow
measurement and rain-gauging
equipment at the BSTP to identify and
address sources of inflow and
infiltration to the sewer. Mechanisms
that identify and reduce or mitigate
vulnerabilities in the wastewater
collection systems will also be
investigated. | Monitoring includes the installation of
flow measurement and rain gauging
systems at the BSTP, within
manholes, and visual (qualitative)
observations during wet and dry
weather. Installation of sensors with
alarms that detect when the water
levels are at or above a critical height
in the area of the manholes to act as
an early detection system that will
help the BWA/drainage division to
respond to potential flooding early will
also be undertaken. BWA will
implement real-time evaluation of
climate-related risks by establishing a
routine data analysis program based
on inputs provided from the flow
meters and rain-gauging stations to be
able to take mitigation/response
actions in a timely manner | 1.3.1.1. Prepare tendering package
for detailed design, equipment
specification and bidding requirements
1.3.1.2. Select vendor and procure
equipment
1.3.1.3. Install equipment and test | 1.3.1.1 - 1 engineering design reports
with equipment specifications
1.3.1.2 - 1 tender package detailed
drawings, specifications and bidding
documents
1.3.1.3 - Sewer monitoring equipment
installed and operationalized
Activity 1.3.2: Establish on-site
laboratory facilities and personnel at
the BSTP to generate influent and
effluent water quality data to inform
operations control strategies that
optimize operations and reduce | An on-site laboratory will be
established at the BSTP to analyse
influent and wastewater treatment
effluent quality for BSTP and the Zone
An area cluster wastewater treatment
plants, when they have been
established. There will also be routine | 1.3.2.1. Contract for engineering
design
1.3.2.2. Prepare tender package
including the detailed drawings and
specifications and bidding documents
1.3.2.3. Select vendor, retrofit and
equip laboratory at BSTP for | 1.3.2.1 - 1 laboratory design report
and equipment specifications that
meet the needs of the upgraded
system - location, layout, equipment,
reagents, protocols, staffing etc.
1.3.2.2 - 1 tender package detailed
drawings, specifications and bidding

=== PAGE 111 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105
E
energy consumption and GHG (monthly) testing of groundwater wells analysing influent and effluent quality documents
emissions. that have been identified for aquifer 1.3.2.4. Recruit laboratory technicians 1.3.2.3 - 1 on-site laboratory
recharge (among others managed by 1.3.2.5 Commissioning established and analysing influent
BWA). and effluent quality
1.3.2.4 - 2 laboratory technicians in
place and managing the on-site
laboratory
1.3.2.5 - 1 Supervising Engineer's
Certification of Completion
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Develop a computer model-based 1.3.3.1. Contract for system design 1.3.3.1 - 1 CMMS design report and
Computerized Real-time Management simulation and control program to and equipment specification equipment specifications
System (CMMS) at the BSTP to enable operations staff to track and 1.3.3.2. Prepare tender package with 1.3.3.2 - 1 tender package detailed
inform decision making and climate interpret operations data and detailed drawings, specifications and drawings, specifications and bidding
resilient building determine appropriate process bidding documents documents
changes. BWA currently uses SCADA 1.3.3.3. Procure, install and configure 1.3.3.3 - a) 1 SCADA reporting
that requires some additional a reporting software program, sensors software installed, b) 8 DO sensors
equipment to enhance its capacity to for the tanks to monitor dissolved and brackets installed and working, c)
function as an automated CMMS. oxygen content and sludge, brackets 2 sludge sensors installed and
for mounting sensors and displays for working, d) 3 displays installed and
sensors installed. working
1.3.3.4. Establish a scheduled 1.3.3.4 - 1 triggering system manual
triggering system to ensure that when developed
PM is due on a piece of equipment the 1.3.3.5 - 1 annual CMMS
Supervisor assigned to the equipment performance report with
is alerted so they may assign the work recommendations completed
to a staff member, or other team
member
1.3.3.5. Track the performance for a
minimum of one year to confirm and
verify calibration under seasonal
operating conditions and to ensure
that PM tasks are being completed
Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small The decentralized wastewater 1.4.1.1. Contract for engineering 1.4.1.1 - 1 engineering design report
(cluster) decentralized wastewater systems will address the collection, design for collection, treatment, and 1.4.1.2 - 1 tender package detailed
collection and treatment systems in treatment and disposal of the sewage disposal of sewage in the areas. This drawings, specifications and bidding
Zone A locations to produce reuse in each area. The designs will should include: Drone and documents
quality water for domestic/commercial consider the reuse of treated effluent topographic survey of the areas, 1.4.1.3 - 1 report on public
non-potable water applications. generated within the service area and social survey for the areas to consultations
the safe disposal or use of excess determine extent of existing sanitary 1.4.1.4 - 2 small decentralized

--- Table 1 on Page 111 ---
energy consumption and GHG
emissions. | (monthly) testing of groundwater wells
that have been identified for aquifer
recharge (among others managed by
BWA). | analysing influent and effluent quality
1.3.2.4. Recruit laboratory technicians
1.3.2.5 Commissioning | documents
1.3.2.3 - 1 on-site laboratory
established and analysing influent
and effluent quality
1.3.2.4 - 2 laboratory technicians in
place and managing the on-site
laboratory
1.3.2.5 - 1 Supervising Engineer's
Certification of Completion
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a
Computerized Real-time Management
System (CMMS) at the BSTP to
inform decision making and climate
resilient building | Develop a computer model-based
simulation and control program to
enable operations staff to track and
interpret operations data and
determine appropriate process
changes. BWA currently uses SCADA
that requires some additional
equipment to enhance its capacity to
function as an automated CMMS. | 1.3.3.1. Contract for system design
and equipment specification
1.3.3.2. Prepare tender package with
detailed drawings, specifications and
bidding documents
1.3.3.3. Procure, install and configure
a reporting software program, sensors
for the tanks to monitor dissolved
oxygen content and sludge, brackets
for mounting sensors and displays for
sensors installed.
1.3.3.4. Establish a scheduled
triggering system to ensure that when
PM is due on a piece of equipment the
Supervisor assigned to the equipment
is alerted so they may assign the work
to a staff member, or other team
member
1.3.3.5. Track the performance for a
minimum of one year to confirm and
verify calibration under seasonal
operating conditions and to ensure
that PM tasks are being completed | 1.3.3.1 - 1 CMMS design report and
equipment specifications
1.3.3.2 - 1 tender package detailed
drawings, specifications and bidding
documents
1.3.3.3 - a) 1 SCADA reporting
software installed, b) 8 DO sensors
and brackets installed and working, c)
2 sludge sensors installed and
working, d) 3 displays installed and
working
1.3.3.4 - 1 triggering system manual
developed
1.3.3.5 - 1 annual CMMS
performance report with
recommendations completed
Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small
(cluster) decentralized wastewater
collection and treatment systems in
Zone A locations to produce reuse
quality water for domestic/commercial
non-potable water applications. | The decentralized wastewater
systems will address the collection,
treatment and disposal of the sewage
in each area. The designs will
consider the reuse of treated effluent
generated within the service area and
the safe disposal or use of excess | 1.4.1.1. Contract for engineering
design for collection, treatment, and
disposal of sewage in the areas. This
should include: Drone and
topographic survey of the areas,
social survey for the areas to
determine extent of existing sanitary | 1.4.1.1 - 1 engineering design report
1.4.1.2 - 1 tender package detailed
drawings, specifications and bidding
documents
1.4.1.3 - 1 report on public
consultations
1.4.1.4 - 2 small decentralized

=== PAGE 112 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106
E
treated effluent, if applicable. The facilities, pit latrines, existing methods wastewater collection and treatment
design will continuously and reliably of wastewater disposal, Horizontal systems installed and operationalized
meet effluent and biosolids alignment of roads (for access and 1.4.1.5 -1 Supervising Engineer's
requirements that are in full maintenance), Design of drainage and Certification of Completion
compliance with GOB Environmental other infrastructure and Effluent reuse
Protection Department Regulations or disposal systems
1.4.1.2. Tender package including the
detailed drawings and specifications
and bidding documents
1.4.1.3. Public consultations
1.4.1.4. Procure, Construct & Install
Earthwork and Foundation, Mech.
Equipment, Tanks & Infra., Piping and
Aeration, Electrical and
Instrumentation
1.4.1.5 Commissioning
Activity 2.1.1: Install a grid-tied To reduce the amount of emissions 2.1.1.1. Contract for engineering 2.1.1.1 - 1 engineering design report
Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy generated from energy consumption design and specifications for the PV 2.1.1.2 - 1 application to Division of
Systems to offset increased power the PV system, with battery storage, system Energy, BLPC, GED and Town and
consumption associated with the will be ground-mounted in close 2.1.1.2. Application to Division of Country Planning completed
centralized treatment plant process proximity to the BTSTP WWTP. The Energy, BLPC, GED and Town and 4) 1 tender package detailed
upgrades using Category 3 hurricane installation of the PV systems will Country Planning for PV system drawings, specifications and bidding
resistant solar panels require civil and electrical work. (including ESIA, if deemed necessary) documents
Approvals are required from the 2.1.1.3. Preparation of tender 5) 1 MW of PV equipment installed
Government Electrical Engineering document for the installation of the 6) 1 Certificate and License of 1MW
Department (GEED), Barbados Light grid-tied PV of PV
and Power (BL&P), and the Division of 2.1.1.4. Select vendor and install
Energy. MESBE (Ministry of Energy, 2.1.1.5. Undertake certification and
Small Business and Entrepreneurship) licensing process for the
would have an interest in reviewing commissioning of the PV system
proposed renewable energy design
options, such as solar.
Activity 2.1.2: Implement automated The power for aeration is normally the 2.1.2.1. Undertake engineering 2.1.2.1 -1 engineering assessment
controls and energy efficiency largest energy consumption within the assessment of control systems to report
measured within the upgraded plant, typically consuming 40% or minimize power consumption 2.1.2.2 -1 tender package detailed
centralized treatment processes to more of the total energy demand, 2.1.2.2. Prepare tender package drawings, specifications and bidding
reduce the overall energy footprint even a small improvement in including the detailed drawings and documents
and reduce GHG emissions. dissolved oxygen control can result in specifications and bidding documents

--- Table 1 on Page 112 ---
 |  |  | treated effluent, if applicable. The
design will continuously and reliably
meet effluent and biosolids
requirements that are in full
compliance with GOB Environmental
Protection Department Regulations |  |  | facilities, pit latrines, existing methods
of wastewater disposal, Horizontal
alignment of roads (for access and
maintenance), Design of drainage and
other infrastructure and Effluent reuse
or disposal systems
1.4.1.2. Tender package including the
detailed drawings and specifications
and bidding documents
1.4.1.3. Public consultations
1.4.1.4. Procure, Construct & Install
Earthwork and Foundation, Mech.
Equipment, Tanks & Infra., Piping and
Aeration, Electrical and
Instrumentation
1.4.1.5 Commissioning |  |  | wastewater collection and treatment
systems installed and operationalized
1.4.1.5 -1 Supervising Engineer's
Certification of Completion |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 2.1.1: Install a grid-tied
Photovoltaic (PV) Renewable Energy
Systems to offset increased power
consumption associated with the
centralized treatment plant process
upgrades using Category 3 hurricane
resistant solar panels |  |  | To reduce the amount of emissions
generated from energy consumption
the PV system, with battery storage,
will be ground-mounted in close
proximity to the BTSTP WWTP. The
installation of the PV systems will
require civil and electrical work.
Approvals are required from the
Government Electrical Engineering
Department (GEED), Barbados Light
and Power (BL&P), and the Division of
Energy. MESBE (Ministry of Energy,
Small Business and Entrepreneurship)
would have an interest in reviewing
proposed renewable energy design
options, such as solar. |  |  | 2.1.1.1. Contract for engineering
design and specifications for the PV
system
2.1.1.2. Application to Division of
Energy, BLPC, GED and Town and
Country Planning for PV system
(including ESIA, if deemed necessary)
2.1.1.3. Preparation of tender
document for the installation of the
grid-tied PV
2.1.1.4. Select vendor and install
2.1.1.5. Undertake certification and
licensing process for the
commissioning of the PV system |  |  | 2.1.1.1 - 1 engineering design report
2.1.1.2 - 1 application to Division of
Energy, BLPC, GED and Town and
Country Planning completed
4) 1 tender package detailed
drawings, specifications and bidding
documents
5) 1 MW of PV equipment installed
6) 1 Certificate and License of 1MW
of PV |  | 
Activity 2.1.2: Implement automated
controls and energy efficiency
measured within the upgraded
centralized treatment processes to
reduce the overall energy footprint
and reduce GHG emissions. |  |  | The power for aeration is normally the
largest energy consumption within the
plant, typically consuming 40% or
more of the total energy demand,
even a small improvement in
dissolved oxygen control can result in |  |  | 2.1.2.1. Undertake engineering
assessment of control systems to
minimize power consumption
2.1.2.2. Prepare tender package
including the detailed drawings and
specifications and bidding documents |  |  | 2.1.2.1 -1 engineering assessment
report
2.1.2.2 -1 tender package detailed
drawings, specifications and bidding
documents |  | 

=== PAGE 113 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107
E
significant energy efficiency 2.1.2.3. Select mechanical-electrical 2.1.2.3 - EE equipment installed and
improvements. Hence, the installation contractor and install variable operating
of variable speed blower controls will frequency drives (VFDs), EE pumps,
allow BWA to minimize energy input at blowers and other EE equipment
the BSTP
Activity 2.1.3: Install sludge The wet sludge contains about 2% 2.1.3.1. Engineering design and 2.1.3.1 - 1 engineering design report
dewatering equipment to improve solids according to the O&M Manual, specifications including assessment of 2.1.3.2 - 1 tender package detailed
energy efficiency and reduce the (1982). If the sludge can be quantity of biosolids drawings, specifications and bidding
overall GHG and CO2 emissions dewatered to have 15% to 20% solids 2.1.3.1. Prepare tender package documents
associated with the biosolids. content, which is very typical with including the detailed drawings and 2.1.3.3 - Goods received report
modern sludge dewatering specifications and bidding document 2.1.3.4 - 1 sludge dewatering system
technology, the volume of the sludge 2.1.3.3. Select vendor to provide WAS installed and operationalized
needing to be trucked out and Pump, centrifuge package, solids
disposed of would be reduced to only dewatering, holding tank and chemical
roughly 15% to 10% of the current equipment
volume. 2.1.3.4. Construct and Install sludge
dewatering technology including
piping and electrical E&C
Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide Before launching the CMMS, all staff 3.1.1.1. Conduct an assessment to 3.1.1.1 - 1 Assessment report
specialized and customized training to must be educated and trained on the develop and implement customised 3.1.1.2 -Training materials for the
support the operations and system. Training will also be extended courses various courses/workshops
maintenance of wastewater collection to other Ministries, Departments and 3.1.1.2. Prepare training materials developed
and treatment facilities including Agencies, as appropriate. The 3.1.1.3 (a). Pre-workshop evaluation 3.1.1.3 (a) - pre workshop evaluation
photovoltaic equipment following training topics have been 3.1.1.3 (b) Convene training reports,
deemed a priority given the scope of sessions/workshops and prepare 3.1.1.3 (b) - 12 Training reports with
this project and being cognizant of reports for the following areas - registration forms and training
BWA's training needs: SCADA, Gender Sensitivity, PV evaluations completed
SCADA, Gender Sensitivity, PV installations, Sewer monitoring 3.1.1.3 (c) - post workshop evaluation
installations, Sewer monitoring instrumentation installed (flow meters, reports
instrumentation installed (flow meters, rain gauges), SOPs and operational
rain gauges), SOPs and operational manual updated, CAS and RO
manual updated, CAS and RO upgrades, CMMS, decentralized
upgrades, CMMS, decentralized treatment system maintenance, lab
treatment system maintenance, lab technician training, industrial waste
technician training, industrial waste inspector training, CCTV equipment,
inspector training, CCTV equipment,

--- Table 1 on Page 113 ---
 |  |  | significant energy efficiency
improvements. Hence, the installation
of variable speed blower controls will
allow BWA to minimize energy input at
the BSTP |  |  | 2.1.2.3. Select mechanical-electrical
contractor and install variable
frequency drives (VFDs), EE pumps,
blowers and other EE equipment |  |  | 2.1.2.3 - EE equipment installed and
operating |  | 
Activity 2.1.3: Install sludge
dewatering equipment to improve
energy efficiency and reduce the
overall GHG and CO2 emissions
associated with the biosolids. |  |  | The wet sludge contains about 2%
solids according to the O&M Manual,
(1982). If the sludge can be
dewatered to have 15% to 20% solids
content, which is very typical with
modern sludge dewatering
technology, the volume of the sludge
needing to be trucked out and
disposed of would be reduced to only
roughly 15% to 10% of the current
volume. |  |  | 2.1.3.1. Engineering design and
specifications including assessment of
quantity of biosolids
2.1.3.1. Prepare tender package
including the detailed drawings and
specifications and bidding document
2.1.3.3. Select vendor to provide WAS
Pump, centrifuge package, solids
dewatering, holding tank and chemical
equipment
2.1.3.4. Construct and Install sludge
dewatering technology including
piping and electrical E&C |  |  | 2.1.3.1 - 1 engineering design report
2.1.3.2 - 1 tender package detailed
drawings, specifications and bidding
documents
2.1.3.3 - Goods received report
2.1.3.4 - 1 sludge dewatering system
installed and operationalized |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide
specialized and customized training to
support the operations and
maintenance of wastewater collection
and treatment facilities including
photovoltaic equipment |  |  | Before launching the CMMS, all staff
must be educated and trained on the
system. Training will also be extended
to other Ministries, Departments and
Agencies, as appropriate. The
following training topics have been
deemed a priority given the scope of
this project and being cognizant of
BWA's training needs:
SCADA, Gender Sensitivity, PV
installations, Sewer monitoring
instrumentation installed (flow meters,
rain gauges), SOPs and operational
manual updated, CAS and RO
upgrades, CMMS, decentralized
treatment system maintenance, lab
technician training, industrial waste
inspector training, CCTV equipment, |  |  | 3.1.1.1. Conduct an assessment to
develop and implement customised
courses
3.1.1.2. Prepare training materials
3.1.1.3 (a). Pre-workshop evaluation
3.1.1.3 (b) Convene training
sessions/workshops and prepare
reports for the following areas -
SCADA, Gender Sensitivity, PV
installations, Sewer monitoring
instrumentation installed (flow meters,
rain gauges), SOPs and operational
manual updated, CAS and RO
upgrades, CMMS, decentralized
treatment system maintenance, lab
technician training, industrial waste
inspector training, CCTV equipment, |  |  | 3.1.1.1 - 1 Assessment report
3.1.1.2 -Training materials for the
various courses/workshops
developed
3.1.1.3 (a) - pre workshop evaluation
reports,
3.1.1.3 (b) - 12 Training reports with
registration forms and training
evaluations completed
3.1.1.3 (c) - post workshop evaluation
reports |  | 

=== PAGE 114 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108
E
and operator training. These are and operator training
approximately 12 training topics which 3.1.1.3 (c) Post workshop evaluation
might be merged pending contractors
used.
Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard Update Standard Operating 3.1.2.1. Develop baseline report to 3.1.2.1 - 1 baseline report for the
Operating Procedures (SOP) and Procedures (SOP) and Operational review or develop standard operating updating of the SOP and OM
Operational Manual that addresses Manual with operational duties and procedures and operational manuals 3.1.2.2 - 1 stakeholder consultation
the requirements of the upgrades, responsibilities that are reflective of to reflect the requirements of the report based on sessions with
preventative maintenance, operator the requirements of the upgraded upgrades stakeholders to update the SOP and
safety, and environmental monitoring, systems and technologies, and that 3.1.2.2. Convene consultations with OM
including specific risks posed by to promote an optimal preventative relevant stakeholders to review and 3.1.2.3 - 1 updated SOP and OM
climate change and gender and social maintenance programme, operator feedback on the draft SOP and 3.1.2.4 - knowledge products on SOP
inclusion considerations adaptation safety, and environmental monitoring, operational manual and OM
and preventative maintenance. including specific risks posed by to 3.1.2.3. Finalize SOP and operational 3.1.2.5 - 1 workshop report
climate change and gender and social manual
inclusion considerations adaptation 3.1.2.4. Develop knowledge products
and preventative maintenance. on the SOP and OM
3.1.2.5. Convene workshops on the
SOP and OM
Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement This risk management framework will 3.1.3.1. Develop baseline report on 3.1.3.1 - 1 baseline report
a risk management framework to be developed in consultation with all the existing risk management 3.1.3.2 - 1 consultation report of
support the sustainable management departments to identify the risk framework for BWA’s operations sessions with BWA staff to elaborate
of BWA’s operations. register, existing controls and further 3.1.3.2. Convene consultations with the risk management framework
actions needed and opportunities for BWA staff to elaborate the risk (RMF)
improvement, and train staff in its register and other key sections of the 3.1.3.3 - 1 final updated risk
operation and further development. risk management framework management framework
The latter will be implemented by 3.1.3.3. FInalize the risk management 3.1.3.4 - 1 training report
BWA during the course of the project framework 3.1.3.5 - 1 evaluation/review report on
and assessed at the end of the project 3.1.3.4. Convene training on risk the suitability of the RMF and
as a gauge of the level of management framework recommendations
sustainability built into the BWA’s 3.1.3.5. Evaluate/Review and update
operations. the risk management framework
annually to ensure it is
current/relevant to the existing
operational environment
Activity 3.2.1: Investigate and develop This will promote indirect potable 3.2.1.1. Conduct a situation and gap 3.2.1.1 - 1 situation and gap analysis
a strategic plan for the installation of reuse options for wastewater. This analysis of the wastewater disposal report
water treatment facilities along the increases the utility and beneficiaries practices and its effects on ground 3.2.1.2 - 1 report on stakeholder
west coast corridor for augmenting of treated wastewater since it can be water supply along the west coast consultations convened (for validation

--- Table 1 on Page 114 ---
 | and operator training. These are
approximately 12 training topics which
might be merged pending contractors
used. | and operator training
3.1.1.3 (c) Post workshop evaluation | 
Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard
Operating Procedures (SOP) and
Operational Manual that addresses
the requirements of the upgrades,
preventative maintenance, operator
safety, and environmental monitoring,
including specific risks posed by to
climate change and gender and social
inclusion considerations adaptation
and preventative maintenance. | Update Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) and Operational
Manual with operational duties and
responsibilities that are reflective of
the requirements of the upgraded
systems and technologies, and that
promote an optimal preventative
maintenance programme, operator
safety, and environmental monitoring,
including specific risks posed by to
climate change and gender and social
inclusion considerations adaptation
and preventative maintenance. | 3.1.2.1. Develop baseline report to
review or develop standard operating
procedures and operational manuals
to reflect the requirements of the
upgrades
3.1.2.2. Convene consultations with
relevant stakeholders to review and
feedback on the draft SOP and
operational manual
3.1.2.3. Finalize SOP and operational
manual
3.1.2.4. Develop knowledge products
on the SOP and OM
3.1.2.5. Convene workshops on the
SOP and OM | 3.1.2.1 - 1 baseline report for the
updating of the SOP and OM
3.1.2.2 - 1 stakeholder consultation
report based on sessions with
stakeholders to update the SOP and
OM
3.1.2.3 - 1 updated SOP and OM
3.1.2.4 - knowledge products on SOP
and OM
3.1.2.5 - 1 workshop report
Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement
a risk management framework to
support the sustainable management
of BWA’s operations. | This risk management framework will
be developed in consultation with all
departments to identify the risk
register, existing controls and further
actions needed and opportunities for
improvement, and train staff in its
operation and further development.
The latter will be implemented by
BWA during the course of the project
and assessed at the end of the project
as a gauge of the level of
sustainability built into the BWA’s
operations. | 3.1.3.1. Develop baseline report on
the existing risk management
framework for BWA’s operations
3.1.3.2. Convene consultations with
BWA staff to elaborate the risk
register and other key sections of the
risk management framework
3.1.3.3. FInalize the risk management
framework
3.1.3.4. Convene training on risk
management framework
3.1.3.5. Evaluate/Review and update
the risk management framework
annually to ensure it is
current/relevant to the existing
operational environment | 3.1.3.1 - 1 baseline report
3.1.3.2 - 1 consultation report of
sessions with BWA staff to elaborate
the risk management framework
(RMF)
3.1.3.3 - 1 final updated risk
management framework
3.1.3.4 - 1 training report
3.1.3.5 - 1 evaluation/review report on
the suitability of the RMF and
recommendations
Activity 3.2.1: Investigate and develop
a strategic plan for the installation of
water treatment facilities along the
west coast corridor for augmenting | This will promote indirect potable
reuse options for wastewater. This
increases the utility and beneficiaries
of treated wastewater since it can be | 3.2.1.1. Conduct a situation and gap
analysis of the wastewater disposal
practices and its effects on ground
water supply along the west coast | 3.2.1.1 - 1 situation and gap analysis
report
3.2.1.2 - 1 report on stakeholder
consultations convened (for validation

=== PAGE 115 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109
E
water supply and protecting the west treated by an existing RO plant and be corridor. and sensitization)
coast ecosystem. distributed through the existing water 3.2.1.2. Conduct stakeholder 3.2.1.3 - 1 Strategic Master Plan
network to all consumers. consultations (for validation and
sensitization)
3.2.1.3. Develop a Strategic Master
Plan to construct reverse osmosis
water treatment plants to extract and
treat brackish groundwater, extracted
from areas impacted by decentralized
onsite wastewater ground disposal
practices along the west coast
corridor, to produce drinking water.
Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative There has been legislative 4.1.1.1. Baseline assessment of 4.1.1.1 - 1 baseline report with
review to promote the Planning and advancement of the wastewater legislations and recommendations of recommendations
Development Act, Wastewater Reuse agenda in Barbados during the what is required to advance 4.1.1.2 - 1 report on interviews and
Bill and other related legislations for conceptualisation of this project. wastewater treatment and reuse in consultations with key stakeholders
enhancing wastewater effluent quality, Hence, the project will support the Barbados 4.1.1.3 - 1 road map (strategic action
treatment options and re-use advancement of wastewater related 4.1.1.2. Convened plan)
requirements and applications. The provisions through knowledge interviews/stakeholder consultations 4.1.1.4 - 1 report on workshops
review will also include management products and the 4.1.1.3. Develop road map with key (validation and sensitization)
recommendations for strengthening - elaboration of a road map with key actions to advance wastewater 4.1.1.5 - Knowledge products
private sector engagement, public- actions. treatment and reuse in Barbados developed (video, booklet,
private partnerships, building codes, 4.1.1.4. Convene workshops on infographic)
resiliency to climate change and equal validation and stakeholder
opportunities and access to males and sensitization
females. 4.1.1.5. Prepare knowledge
management products such as
videos, booklet, infographics etc., to
promote awareness of what is
required.
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and The lessons emerging from this 4.1.2.1. Undertake situational analysis 4.1.2.1 - 1 situational analysis with
sanitation master plan that includes an project can provide key input into the on the water and sanitation sector in recommendations report based on
optimal combination of decentralized, shaping of this strategy based on the Barbados, including a review of water literature review and stakeholder
cluster and centralized water combination of centralized and resources planning and governance in consultations
reclamation and reuse applications, decentralized wastewater treatment Barbados, generated by BWA, similar 4.1.2.2 - 1 report on stakeholder
with the centralized reclaimed water technologies being implemented, as studies in the Caribbean region from consultations

--- Table 1 on Page 115 ---
water supply and protecting the west
coast ecosystem. |  |  | treated by an existing RO plant and be
distributed through the existing water
network to all consumers. |  |  | corridor.
3.2.1.2. Conduct stakeholder
consultations (for validation and
sensitization)
3.2.1.3. Develop a Strategic Master
Plan to construct reverse osmosis
water treatment plants to extract and
treat brackish groundwater, extracted
from areas impacted by decentralized
onsite wastewater ground disposal
practices along the west coast
corridor, to produce drinking water. |  |  | and sensitization)
3.2.1.3 - 1 Strategic Master Plan |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative
review to promote the Planning and
Development Act, Wastewater Reuse
Bill and other related legislations for
enhancing wastewater effluent quality,
treatment options and re-use
requirements and applications. The
review will also include
recommendations for strengthening -
private sector engagement, public-
private partnerships, building codes,
resiliency to climate change and equal
opportunities and access to males and
females. |  |  | There has been legislative
advancement of the wastewater
agenda in Barbados during the
conceptualisation of this project.
Hence, the project will support the
advancement of wastewater related
provisions through knowledge
management products and the
elaboration of a road map with key
actions. |  |  | 4.1.1.1. Baseline assessment of
legislations and recommendations of
what is required to advance
wastewater treatment and reuse in
Barbados
4.1.1.2. Convened
interviews/stakeholder consultations
4.1.1.3. Develop road map with key
actions to advance wastewater
treatment and reuse in Barbados
4.1.1.4. Convene workshops on
validation and stakeholder
sensitization
4.1.1.5. Prepare knowledge
management products such as
videos, booklet, infographics etc., to
promote awareness of what is
required. |  |  | 4.1.1.1 - 1 baseline report with
recommendations
4.1.1.2 - 1 report on interviews and
consultations with key stakeholders
4.1.1.3 - 1 road map (strategic action
plan)
4.1.1.4 - 1 report on workshops
(validation and sensitization)
4.1.1.5 - Knowledge products
developed (video, booklet,
infographic) |  | 
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and
sanitation master plan that includes an
optimal combination of decentralized,
cluster and centralized water
reclamation and reuse applications,
with the centralized reclaimed water |  |  | The lessons emerging from this
project can provide key input into the
shaping of this strategy based on the
combination of centralized and
decentralized wastewater treatment
technologies being implemented, as |  |  | 4.1.2.1. Undertake situational analysis
on the water and sanitation sector in
Barbados, including a review of water
resources planning and governance in
Barbados, generated by BWA, similar
studies in the Caribbean region from |  |  | 4.1.2.1 - 1 situational analysis with
recommendations report based on
literature review and stakeholder
consultations
4.1.2.2 - 1 report on stakeholder
consultations |  | 

=== PAGE 116 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110
E
being transmitted and used for well as lessons from the use of other international institutions and 4.1.2.3 - 1 water and sanitation
agricultural irrigation or industrial use renewable energy technologies and consideration of implications and master plan
(such as lower cost of reclaimed water engaging the private sector. recommendations of the current water 4.1.2.4 - 1 validation and stakeholder
transmission). This strategy will also protection and land use policy and the sensitization report
take into consideration the social, water reuse policy.
gender-related and climate risks in the 4.1.2.2. Convene
design and prioritizing of water reuse meetings/consultations with key
strategies. stakeholders
4.1.2.3. Develop a water and
sanitation Master Plan
4.1.2.4. Convene high level meetings
to validate and promote awareness of
the findings and recommendations
and foster commitment to implement
the strategy
Activity 4.2.1 : Develop a strategy and Private sector buy-in is essential for 4.2.1.1. Undertake a baseline analysis 4.2.1.1 - 1 baseline analysis report
action plan to engage the private sustainability, scalability and of the private sector capacity and 4.2.1.2 - 1 report of stakeholder
sector in the provision and adoption of replicability; therefore, strategic needs for engaging in the provision consultation
wastewater treatment technology and approaches for engaging and and adoption of wastewater 4.2.1.3 - 1 private sector strategy and
the utilization of wastewater by- collaborating with these important technologies and use of wastewater action plan
products such as activated sludge. stakeholders during, and after this by-products. 4.2.1.4. Knowledge products
This includes conducting an project, will be identified. There is a 4.2.1.2. Convene available
assessment to identify opportunities potential role for the private sector to consultations/meetings with key 4.2.1.5. 1 report on stakeholder
for public-private partnership in the collaborate with BWA to utilize the stakeholders validation and sensitization
water and wastewater sector, dewatered sludge from the STPs and 4.2.1.3. Prepare strategy and action
especially for the expansion of the sludge the decentralized locations and plan
decentralized onsite cluster process it for energy recovery, the 4.2.1.4. Develop knowledge products
wastewater systems. The strategy will recovery of nutrients and/or the 4.2.1.5. Convene stakeholder
also promote gender equality and production of bio-solids which could validation and sensitization workshop
women empowerment be sold as a fertilizer or soil (s)
conditioner. Such a facility would also
accept other forms of waste from
other industries and that this would be
needed to be able to achieve input
volumes to make such a facility
commercially viable.

--- Table 1 on Page 116 ---
being transmitted and used for
agricultural irrigation or industrial use
(such as lower cost of reclaimed water
transmission). This strategy will also
take into consideration the social,
gender-related and climate risks in the
design and prioritizing of water reuse
strategies. | well as lessons from the use of
renewable energy technologies and
engaging the private sector. | other international institutions and
consideration of implications and
recommendations of the current water
protection and land use policy and the
water reuse policy.
4.1.2.2. Convene
meetings/consultations with key
stakeholders
4.1.2.3. Develop a water and
sanitation Master Plan
4.1.2.4. Convene high level meetings
to validate and promote awareness of
the findings and recommendations
and foster commitment to implement
the strategy | 4.1.2.3 - 1 water and sanitation
master plan
4.1.2.4 - 1 validation and stakeholder
sensitization report
Activity 4.2.1 : Develop a strategy and
action plan to engage the private
sector in the provision and adoption of
wastewater treatment technology and
the utilization of wastewater by-
products such as activated sludge.
This includes conducting an
assessment to identify opportunities
for public-private partnership in the
water and wastewater sector,
especially for the expansion of the
decentralized onsite cluster
wastewater systems. The strategy will
also promote gender equality and
women empowerment | Private sector buy-in is essential for
sustainability, scalability and
replicability; therefore, strategic
approaches for engaging and
collaborating with these important
stakeholders during, and after this
project, will be identified. There is a
potential role for the private sector to
collaborate with BWA to utilize the
dewatered sludge from the STPs and
sludge the decentralized locations and
process it for energy recovery, the
recovery of nutrients and/or the
production of bio-solids which could
be sold as a fertilizer or soil
conditioner. Such a facility would also
accept other forms of waste from
other industries and that this would be
needed to be able to achieve input
volumes to make such a facility
commercially viable. | 4.2.1.1. Undertake a baseline analysis
of the private sector capacity and
needs for engaging in the provision
and adoption of wastewater
technologies and use of wastewater
by-products.
4.2.1.2. Convene
consultations/meetings with key
stakeholders
4.2.1.3. Prepare strategy and action
plan
4.2.1.4. Develop knowledge products
4.2.1.5. Convene stakeholder
validation and sensitization workshop
(s) | 4.2.1.1 - 1 baseline analysis report
4.2.1.2 - 1 report of stakeholder
consultation
4.2.1.3 - 1 private sector strategy and
action plan
4.2.1.4. Knowledge products
available
4.2.1.5. 1 report on stakeholder
validation and sensitization

=== PAGE 117 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111
E
Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and Incentives for water conservation 4.2.2.1. Conduct a desk review of best 4.2.2.1 - 1 report on desk review
identify recommendations for a gender includes demand side management international gender-oriented practices 4.2.2.2 - 1 report on stakeholder
sensitive and socially inclusive including pricing policies to incentivize and strategies for consideration in consultations
incentive programme to encourage reuse practices. Proposed incentives producing education and promotional 4.2.2.3 - 1 framework for the gender
conservation, recycle, re-use. can include: materials and programs "best" suited sensitive and socially inclusive
-Examine willingness to pay for non- to Barbados. incentive programme
potable reuse water versus payment 4.2.2.2. Convene wide stakeholder 4.2.2.4 - 1 validation and stakeholder
for potable water as an incentive to consultations and surveys to inform sensitization report
use reuse water. This could be done the design of the incentive
as a stakeholder survey programme. This includes community
-Consider a scaled water use billing level reach.
system to encourage water 4.2.2.3. Develop the framework for the
management and conservation gender sensitive and socially inclusive
-A reward system for individuals incentive programme
coming forward to identify potential 4.2.2.4. Convene high level meetings
Non-Revenue water (e.g. hydrants to validate and promote awareness of
leaking, wet areas that shouldn’t be the findings and recommendations
wet, illegal water connections, etc.) and foster commitment to implement
-Reduced development cost charges the incentive programme
for residential and commercial
developments that establish their own
water reclamation and reuse system –
reducing impact on government
infrastructure
-Reduced potable water rates for
residential and commercial
developments that establish their own
water reclamation and reuse system –
reducing impact on government
infrastructure
-Reduced electrical power rates for
residential and commercial
developments that establish PV
systems that feed into the grid
(Europe, Canada and the US pay
substantially more for green power

--- Table 1 on Page 117 ---
Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and
identify recommendations for a gender
sensitive and socially inclusive
incentive programme to encourage
conservation, recycle, re-use. | Incentives for water conservation
includes demand side management
including pricing policies to incentivize
reuse practices. Proposed incentives
can include:
-Examine willingness to pay for non-
potable reuse water versus payment
for potable water as an incentive to
use reuse water. This could be done
as a stakeholder survey
-Consider a scaled water use billing
system to encourage water
management and conservation
-A reward system for individuals
coming forward to identify potential
Non-Revenue water (e.g. hydrants
leaking, wet areas that shouldn’t be
wet, illegal water connections, etc.)
-Reduced development cost charges
for residential and commercial
developments that establish their own
water reclamation and reuse system –
reducing impact on government
infrastructure
-Reduced potable water rates for
residential and commercial
developments that establish their own
water reclamation and reuse system –
reducing impact on government
infrastructure
-Reduced electrical power rates for
residential and commercial
developments that establish PV
systems that feed into the grid
(Europe, Canada and the US pay
substantially more for green power | 4.2.2.1. Conduct a desk review of best
international gender-oriented practices
and strategies for consideration in
producing education and promotional
materials and programs "best" suited
to Barbados.
4.2.2.2. Convene wide stakeholder
consultations and surveys to inform
the design of the incentive
programme. This includes community
level reach.
4.2.2.3. Develop the framework for the
gender sensitive and socially inclusive
incentive programme
4.2.2.4. Convene high level meetings
to validate and promote awareness of
the findings and recommendations
and foster commitment to implement
the incentive programme | 4.2.2.1 - 1 report on desk review
4.2.2.2 - 1 report on stakeholder
consultations
4.2.2.3 - 1 framework for the gender
sensitive and socially inclusive
incentive programme
4.2.2.4 - 1 validation and stakeholder
sensitization report

=== PAGE 118 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112
E
that is privately produced)
-Examine government fees related to
development costs and see if water
and energy conservation measures
can obtain credits or reduce fees as
incentive
Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving RAFF to provide financing for 4.2.3.1. Convene consultations with 4.2.3.1 - 1 report of stakeholder
Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to retrofitting, plumbing and the private and public sector to determine consultation and recommendations
provide resources for the adoption of installation of treatment systems. The scope of support to be covered by the for the operationalisation of the RAFF
decentralized onsite wastewater RAFF will also be expanded to RAFF finances. to provide resources to private
systems. provide resources for enabling end 4.2.3.2. Update of the RAFF charter individuals and businesses for the
users of reclaimed water to adapt the 4.2.3.3. Sensitization on the updated adoption of decentralized onsite
necessary technology to utilize RAFF to provide an overview of the wastewater systems.
available reclaimed water supply resources available for the adoption of 4.2.3.2 - 1 updated RAFF charter
(such as small-scale irrigation and decentralized onsite wastewater 4.2.3.3 - 1 report on RAFF
drainage systems, renewable energy systems. sensitization activities
and energy efficiency technologies 4.2.3.4. Production of marketing and 4.2.3.4 - RAFF marketing and
and water conservation technologies). educational materials on the RAFF re: educational materials developed
Energy savings accruing to the BWA availability of resources for the
associated with the PV systems in adoption of decentralized onsite
Component 2 will be used to expand wastewater systems and modalities
the RAFF, which is being for accessing resources
implemented as part of WSRN S-
Barbados.
Activity 4.3.1: Re-educate Develop program to provide 4.3.1.1. Undertake KAP survey to 4.3.1.1 - 1 KAP survey report
communities, teachers, students, educational support materials for establish baselines and training needs 4.3.1.2 - Grade-appropriate
farmers and businesses about the teachers and participate in the of schools, farmers, communities and educational materials
impact of climate change on water delivery of public education programs the private sector. 4.3.1.3 - Training programmes for
resources and their impact on water and associated events that serve to 4.3.1.2. Produce grade-appropriate communities, farmers and businesses
quality and quantity (availability as educate students. This increases the educational materials regarding 4.3.1.4 - Training session convened
well as the importance of water reuse general knowledge within the limited groundwater resources, and reports for 30 school session, 30
activities and indirect potable reuse community about water, so they can understanding of hydrogeology related community sessions, 14 sessions
(IPR)) to building climate resilience in make informed decisions, starting with to water quality protection on targeting farmers and 8 sessions
the Water Sector. the water cycle and basic facts about Barbados, and other water targeting private sectors convened
water use to protect public safety conservation aspects. Consultant to 4.3.1.5 - final evaluation report of the
before addressing water reuse. A also identify optimal modalities for

--- Table 1 on Page 118 ---
 | that is privately produced)
-Examine government fees related to
development costs and see if water
and energy conservation measures
can obtain credits or reduce fees as
incentive |  | 
Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving
Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to
provide resources for the adoption of
decentralized onsite wastewater
systems. | RAFF to provide financing for
retrofitting, plumbing and the
installation of treatment systems. The
RAFF will also be expanded to
provide resources for enabling end
users of reclaimed water to adapt the
necessary technology to utilize
available reclaimed water supply
(such as small-scale irrigation and
drainage systems, renewable energy
and energy efficiency technologies
and water conservation technologies).
Energy savings accruing to the BWA
associated with the PV systems in
Component 2 will be used to expand
the RAFF, which is being
implemented as part of WSRN S-
Barbados. | 4.2.3.1. Convene consultations with
private and public sector to determine
scope of support to be covered by the
RAFF finances.
4.2.3.2. Update of the RAFF charter
4.2.3.3. Sensitization on the updated
RAFF to provide an overview of the
resources available for the adoption of
decentralized onsite wastewater
systems.
4.2.3.4. Production of marketing and
educational materials on the RAFF re:
availability of resources for the
adoption of decentralized onsite
wastewater systems and modalities
for accessing resources | 4.2.3.1 - 1 report of stakeholder
consultation and recommendations
for the operationalisation of the RAFF
to provide resources to private
individuals and businesses for the
adoption of decentralized onsite
wastewater systems.
4.2.3.2 - 1 updated RAFF charter
4.2.3.3 - 1 report on RAFF
sensitization activities
4.2.3.4 - RAFF marketing and
educational materials developed
Activity 4.3.1: Re-educate
communities, teachers, students,
farmers and businesses about the
impact of climate change on water
resources and their impact on water
quality and quantity (availability as
well as the importance of water reuse
activities and indirect potable reuse
(IPR)) to building climate resilience in
the Water Sector. | Develop program to provide
educational support materials for
teachers and participate in the
delivery of public education programs
and associated events that serve to
educate students. This increases the
general knowledge within the
community about water, so they can
make informed decisions, starting with
the water cycle and basic facts about
water use to protect public safety
before addressing water reuse. A | 4.3.1.1. Undertake KAP survey to
establish baselines and training needs
of schools, farmers, communities and
the private sector.
4.3.1.2. Produce grade-appropriate
educational materials regarding
limited groundwater resources,
understanding of hydrogeology related
to water quality protection on
Barbados, and other water
conservation aspects. Consultant to
also identify optimal modalities for | 4.3.1.1 - 1 KAP survey report
4.3.1.2 - Grade-appropriate
educational materials
4.3.1.3 - Training programmes for
communities, farmers and businesses
4.3.1.4 - Training session convened
and reports for 30 school session, 30
community sessions, 14 sessions
targeting farmers and 8 sessions
targeting private sectors convened
4.3.1.5 - final evaluation report of the

=== PAGE 119 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113
E
change in public perception is implementation effectiveness of the training and
required to be able to facilitate IPR. 4.3.1.3. Develop training programmes lessons learned
Water reclamation and reuse is for communities, farmers and
practiced globally to address limited businesses on the nexus of climate
water resource conditions and change and water sector and options
drought. for conservation, recycle, re-use.
This also includes outreach Consultant to also identify optimal
programmes in schools, community- modalities for implementation
based organizations, and 4.3.1.4. Implement training sessions
stakeholders’ groups across customer through mediums deemed most
class as well as a Public Service suitable
Announcements and educational 4.3.1.5. Final evaluation of
materials that addresses best effectiveness of training and lessons
practices for efficient water use, learned
conservation, and reuse. Further, this
activity will develop and provide
information resources to private
individuals and businesses for the
adoption of decentralized onsite
wastewater systems. The re-
education programs will ensure to
promote equal opportunities and
access to men, women and the
LGBTQIA community.
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement Campaigns tend to be more 4.3.2.1. Develop a communication 4.3.2.1 - 1 communication strategy
a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness successful when citizens are strategy to address the public 4.3.2.2 - At least 300 updates
Campaign for community and visitors genuinely included in the decision- information needs surrounding all the comprising the following formats:
(tourists) through workshops, videos, making process. This includes public activities of the project – pipeline Videos/documentary, press releases
community town hall meetings, site opinion regarding the water utility or works, upgrades to the BSTP, of outputs of town hall meetings
tours (demonstration of the plant other agencies that promote the reuse decentralised plant installation etc. within communities, case studies,
technology and by-product reuse) and project, and early public outreach to 4.3.2.2. Implement the activities of the digital flyers, posters), 40 water
consultations. Emphasis will be placed build trust in the community, with the PEA that should include: Wednesdays (8 per year), 20
on assuring the general public about dissemination of factual information videos/documentary, town hall newsletters (4 per year)
food safety to ensure there is public beginning at the highest levels in the meetings within communities, multi- 4.3.2.3 - 1 report on the effectiveness
acceptance and trust in the agriculture community. By engaging the support media (social, newspaper, Radio and of the PEA campaign
produce from local farms using the of key stakeholders, they can be later TV), demonstration sites, case

--- Table 1 on Page 119 ---
 | change in public perception is
required to be able to facilitate IPR.
Water reclamation and reuse is
practiced globally to address limited
water resource conditions and
drought.
This also includes outreach
programmes in schools, community-
based organizations, and
stakeholders’ groups across customer
class as well as a Public Service
Announcements and educational
materials that addresses best
practices for efficient water use,
conservation, and reuse. Further, this
activity will develop and provide
information resources to private
individuals and businesses for the
adoption of decentralized onsite
wastewater systems. The re-
education programs will ensure to
promote equal opportunities and
access to men, women and the
LGBTQIA community. | implementation
4.3.1.3. Develop training programmes
for communities, farmers and
businesses on the nexus of climate
change and water sector and options
for conservation, recycle, re-use.
Consultant to also identify optimal
modalities for implementation
4.3.1.4. Implement training sessions
through mediums deemed most
suitable
4.3.1.5. Final evaluation of
effectiveness of training and lessons
learned | effectiveness of the training and
lessons learned
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement
a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness
Campaign for community and visitors
(tourists) through workshops, videos,
community town hall meetings, site
tours (demonstration of the plant
technology and by-product reuse) and
consultations. Emphasis will be placed
on assuring the general public about
food safety to ensure there is public
acceptance and trust in the agriculture
produce from local farms using the | Campaigns tend to be more
successful when citizens are
genuinely included in the decision-
making process. This includes public
opinion regarding the water utility or
other agencies that promote the reuse
project, and early public outreach to
build trust in the community, with the
dissemination of factual information
beginning at the highest levels in the
community. By engaging the support
of key stakeholders, they can be later | 4.3.2.1. Develop a communication
strategy to address the public
information needs surrounding all the
activities of the project – pipeline
works, upgrades to the BSTP,
decentralised plant installation etc.
4.3.2.2. Implement the activities of the
PEA that should include:
videos/documentary, town hall
meetings within communities, multi-
media (social, newspaper, Radio and
TV), demonstration sites, case | 4.3.2.1 - 1 communication strategy
4.3.2.2 - At least 300 updates
comprising the following formats:
Videos/documentary, press releases
of outputs of town hall meetings
within communities, case studies,
digital flyers, posters), 40 water
Wednesdays (8 per year), 20
newsletters (4 per year)
4.3.2.3 - 1 report on the effectiveness
of the PEA campaign

=== PAGE 120 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114
E
treated wastewater as well as the called upon to provide endorsements studies, educational materials (flyers,
improved resilience of the water of water reuse. posters)
sector and the direct and indirect 4.3.2.3. Final evaluation of
benefits on ecosystem services and Develop and implement educational effectiveness of the PEA programme
ecotourism. Share lessons learnt to materials that gain public acceptance and lessons learned
spur greater public and of climate-related risks and water
entrepreneurial involvement. conservation measures. Include
broader awareness campaign to
address issues to manhole covers as
a result of human interference. Create
demonstration sites at the end user
location sites to showcase the benefits
of reusing treated wastewater for
irrigation.
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Develop a project dedicated website 4.3.3.1. Develop a knowledge 4.3.3.1 - 1 knowledge management
Project Page and social media to serve as an education, awareness management strategy (KMS) that will strategy
accounts, which is dedicated to and transparency tool that provides utilize the web page. 4.3.3.2. - 1 project web page
transparent measures of reporting, news/updates on the implementation 4.3.3.2. Develop project web page. 4.3.3.3. - 1 KMS and 5000 posts on
knowledge products, identify/host a of the project activities (iii) publishes 4.3.3.3. Implement KMS including social media - YouTube, Twitter,
link to the Redress Mechanism and education and awareness products custom materials for the project Instagram and Facebook accounts
provide update to all stakeholders on and (iv) serves as a redress website and update social media combined
the project activities. mechanism among others accounts to extend the reach of the
PEA materials. This includes
This page will include, to the best YouTube, Twitter, Instagram and
extent possible, functions such as Facebook accounts.
audio, sub-titles and/or sign language
to encourage social inclusion from
disabled population. The project’s
webpage will also ensure to report
project results disaggregated by
gender, where possible.
There will be a Knowledge
Management Strategy that identifies
that goal/vision for knowledge
management the project, provides a

--- Table 1 on Page 120 ---
treated wastewater as well as the
improved resilience of the water
sector and the direct and indirect
benefits on ecosystem services and
ecotourism. Share lessons learnt to
spur greater public and
entrepreneurial involvement. | called upon to provide endorsements
of water reuse.
Develop and implement educational
materials that gain public acceptance
of climate-related risks and water
conservation measures. Include
broader awareness campaign to
address issues to manhole covers as
a result of human interference. Create
demonstration sites at the end user
location sites to showcase the benefits
of reusing treated wastewater for
irrigation. | studies, educational materials (flyers,
posters)
4.3.2.3. Final evaluation of
effectiveness of the PEA programme
and lessons learned | 
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS
Project Page and social media
accounts, which is dedicated to
transparent measures of reporting,
knowledge products, identify/host a
link to the Redress Mechanism and
provide update to all stakeholders on
the project activities. | Develop a project dedicated website
to serve as an education, awareness
and transparency tool that provides
news/updates on the implementation
of the project activities (iii) publishes
education and awareness products
and (iv) serves as a redress
mechanism among others
This page will include, to the best
extent possible, functions such as
audio, sub-titles and/or sign language
to encourage social inclusion from
disabled population. The project’s
webpage will also ensure to report
project results disaggregated by
gender, where possible.
There will be a Knowledge
Management Strategy that identifies
that goal/vision for knowledge
management the project, provides a | 4.3.3.1. Develop a knowledge
management strategy (KMS) that will
utilize the web page.
4.3.3.2. Develop project web page.
4.3.3.3. Implement KMS including
custom materials for the project
website and update social media
accounts to extend the reach of the
PEA materials. This includes
YouTube, Twitter, Instagram and
Facebook accounts. | 4.3.3.1 - 1 knowledge management
strategy
4.3.3.2. - 1 project web page
4.3.3.3. - 1 KMS and 5000 posts on
social media - YouTube, Twitter,
Instagram and Facebook accounts
combined

=== PAGE 121 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 115
E
roadmap that highlights the approach
that will be taken to implement this
strategy, identifies key persons for
implementing KMS, identifies and
describes how the different project
components will be addressed under
the KMS, and required resources
(time, budget and expertise) for
executing each activity
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Project M&E Arrangements
Indicators underpin an M&E system’s practical applicability as they serve to help practitioners know when outcomes or results have or have not
been achieved and inform adjustments to current interventions and decision making toward future interventions. The performance indicators for the
3R-CReWs comprise a mix of GCF core and supplementary indicators as well as project specific indicators. The M&E plan identifies the data source,
data collection tools, frequency, and budget requirements for monitoring all the indicators of the project. The detailed logframe for the project contains
the baselines and targets associated with the indicators. Collectively these tools (M&E Plan and Logframe) will provide the guidance required to
monitor and periodically evaluate the performance of the project and identify key lessons. There will also be a dedicated project officer assigned
with the M&E responsibilities given that this project spans a wide cross section of direct beneficiaries and stakeholders including communities,
farmers, government agencies and businesses. Hence, consultations and follow-up with them on the quality of products or services developed and
lessons will be extensive.
Two types of evaluations will be undertaken during the lifetime of the 3R-CReWS project – a formative and summative evaluation. Notable is that a
key requirement of the GCF is that an assessment of the level of achievement of the paradigm shift potential be undertaken during these stages of
the project using a three-point scale scorecard template (to be developed by the Secretariat).
Formative evaluation is generally undertaken during a project’s implementation for trying to understand why a program works or doesn’t, and what
other factors (internal and external) are at work during a project’s life to improve the project’s design and chance of successfully achieving the
desired outcomes. The formative evaluation will complement the final summative evaluation. The summative evaluation of 3R-CReWS will use a
balance of both quantitative and qualitative methods to get a better understanding of what the project has achieved, and how or why. There will also
be emphasis on unintended consequences, the evaluation drivers of accountability and will be more outcome-focused than process focused.
CCCCC-GCF Reporting Arrangement

--- Table 1 on Page 121 ---
 |  | roadmap that highlights the approach
that will be taken to implement this
strategy, identifies key persons for
implementing KMS, identifies and
describes how the different project
components will be addressed under
the KMS, and required resources
(time, budget and expertise) for
executing each activity |  |  | 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  | 
 | Project M&E Arrangements |  |  |  | 
 | Indicators underpin an M&E system’s practical applicability as they serve to help practitioners know when outcomes or results have or have not |  |  |  | 
 | been achieved and inform adjustments to current interventions and decision making toward future interventions. The performance indicators for the |  |  |  | 
 | 3R-CReWs comprise a mix of GCF core and supplementary indicators as well as project specific indicators. The M&E plan identifies the data source, |  |  |  | 
 | data collection tools, frequency, and budget requirements for monitoring all the indicators of the project. The detailed logframe for the project contains |  |  |  | 
 | the baselines and targets associated with the indicators. Collectively these tools (M&E Plan and Logframe) will provide the guidance required to |  |  |  | 
 | monitor and periodically evaluate the performance of the project and identify key lessons. There will also be a dedicated project officer assigned |  |  |  | 
 | with the M&E responsibilities given that this project spans a wide cross section of direct beneficiaries and stakeholders including communities, |  |  |  | 
 | farmers, government agencies and businesses. Hence, consultations and follow-up with them on the quality of products or services developed and |  |  |  | 
 | lessons will be extensive. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Two types of evaluations will be undertaken during the lifetime of the 3R-CReWS project – a formative and summative evaluation. Notable is that a |  |  |  | 
 | key requirement of the GCF is that an assessment of the level of achievement of the paradigm shift potential be undertaken during these stages of |  |  |  | 
 | the project using a three-point scale scorecard template (to be developed by the Secretariat). |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Formative evaluation is generally undertaken during a project’s implementation for trying to understand why a program works or doesn’t, and what |  |  |  | 
 | other factors (internal and external) are at work during a project’s life to improve the project’s design and chance of successfully achieving the |  |  |  | 
 | desired outcomes. The formative evaluation will complement the final summative evaluation. The summative evaluation of 3R-CReWS will use a |  |  |  | 
 | balance of both quantitative and qualitative methods to get a better understanding of what the project has achieved, and how or why. There will also |  |  |  | 
 | be emphasis on unintended consequences, the evaluation drivers of accountability and will be more outcome-focused than process focused. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | CCCCC-GCF Reporting Arrangement |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 122 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 116
E
CCCCC reporting to the GCF fund will be guided by GCF Monitoring and Accountability Framework for Accredited Entities, its Accreditation Master
Agreement and terms to be agreed in the funding agreement. Aligned with GCF’s Monitoring and Accountability Framework for Accredited Entities,
CCCCC will undertake continuous monitoring of the project through site visits and quarterly reports, which will feed into semi-annual performance
reports and an annual performance report.
The Annual Performance Reports (APRs) will include the financial management reports and progress report on all activities. It will identify potential
risk to project activities and remedial action(s). These reports will also evaluate the activities against the targets set out in the logical framework,
which are in accordance with the GCF investment framework criteria. CCCCC monitoring and reporting will consider feedback from direct
beneficiaries: communities, farmers, businesses, and government agencies. This approach allows for a bi-directional flow of information that is not
only important for monitoring their satisfaction with the products and allowing them to continually feedback on design elements but also to ensure
that buy-in and ownership for relevant products and services are being built at the national level for sustainability, replicability, and scalability
purposes.
At the mid-term of the project the formative evaluation report will be submitted to the GCF for review. There will also be a final report at the end of
the period of implementation, which will provide a holistic view of the achievements of the project, impact, effectiveness, and efficiency (financial
and economic), financial records, stakeholder feedback and lessons learnt. This report will also be accompanied by the final project financial audit
to be completed by an independent and accredited auditor. All records on this project will be kept in accordance with Clause 15.01(c) of the CCCCC’s
Accreditation Master Agreement. The CCCCC will submit in English the final project report, including the final evaluation report, to the GCF within
6 months of the completion of the project.
BWA-CCCCC Reporting Arrangements
To ensure the project continue to be both viable and sustainable, detailed timely reporting, monitoring and evaluation will be carried out. The BWA,
through the project implementation unit, will provide CCCCC with (i) quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with CCCCC project
management and performance reporting system; (ii) consolidated annual reports including (a) progress achieved by output as measured through
the indicator's performance targets, (b) key implementation issues, solutions and lessons; (c) status of implementation of the ESMP (d) updated
procurement plan and (e) updated implementation plan for next 12 months; and (iii) a project completion report within 6 months of physical completion
of the Project. Financial audits of all accounts will also be conducted on a yearly basis. Within 3 months of physical completion of the Project the
BWA will submit a project completion report to Government of Barbados and CCCCC.
The Figure 15 below shows the key M&E elements, processes and relationships at play. The middle of the figure shows that there are 2 monitoring
and evaluation processes happening; monitoring will be done continuously, and evaluation is slated for the mid and end-of term. Importantly, the
tools and processes will be similar, except for the frequency of occurrence. At the top is the demand side, that is, the key persons or institutions that
are demanding transparency and accountability. As can be seen from the Figure, the demand side provides the impetus for the need for M&E (yellow

--- Table 1 on Page 122 ---
 | CCCCC reporting to the GCF fund will be guided by GCF Monitoring and Accountability Framework for Accredited Entities, its Accreditation Master | 
 | Agreement and terms to be agreed in the funding agreement. Aligned with GCF’s Monitoring and Accountability Framework for Accredited Entities, | 
 | CCCCC will undertake continuous monitoring of the project through site visits and quarterly reports, which will feed into semi-annual performance | 
 | reports and an annual performance report. | 
 |  | 
 | The Annual Performance Reports (APRs) will include the financial management reports and progress report on all activities. It will identify potential | 
 | risk to project activities and remedial action(s). These reports will also evaluate the activities against the targets set out in the logical framework, | 
 | which are in accordance with the GCF investment framework criteria. CCCCC monitoring and reporting will consider feedback from direct | 
 | beneficiaries: communities, farmers, businesses, and government agencies. This approach allows for a bi-directional flow of information that is not | 
 | only important for monitoring their satisfaction with the products and allowing them to continually feedback on design elements but also to ensure | 
 | that buy-in and ownership for relevant products and services are being built at the national level for sustainability, replicability, and scalability | 
 | purposes. | 
 |  | 
 | At the mid-term of the project the formative evaluation report will be submitted to the GCF for review. There will also be a final report at the end of | 
 | the period of implementation, which will provide a holistic view of the achievements of the project, impact, effectiveness, and efficiency (financial | 
 | and economic), financial records, stakeholder feedback and lessons learnt. This report will also be accompanied by the final project financial audit | 
 | to be completed by an independent and accredited auditor. All records on this project will be kept in accordance with Clause 15.01(c) of the CCCCC’s | 
 | Accreditation Master Agreement. The CCCCC will submit in English the final project report, including the final evaluation report, to the GCF within | 
 | 6 months of the completion of the project. | 
 |  | 
 | BWA-CCCCC Reporting Arrangements | 
 | To ensure the project continue to be both viable and sustainable, detailed timely reporting, monitoring and evaluation will be carried out. The BWA, | 
 | through the project implementation unit, will provide CCCCC with (i) quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with CCCCC project | 
 | management and performance reporting system; (ii) consolidated annual reports including (a) progress achieved by output as measured through | 
 | the indicator's performance targets, (b) key implementation issues, solutions and lessons; (c) status of implementation of the ESMP (d) updated | 
 | procurement plan and (e) updated implementation plan for next 12 months; and (iii) a project completion report within 6 months of physical completion | 
 | of the Project. Financial audits of all accounts will also be conducted on a yearly basis. Within 3 months of physical completion of the Project the | 
 | BWA will submit a project completion report to Government of Barbados and CCCCC. | 
 |  | 
 | The Figure 15 below shows the key M&E elements, processes and relationships at play. The middle of the figure shows that there are 2 monitoring | 
 | and evaluation processes happening; monitoring will be done continuously, and evaluation is slated for the mid and end-of term. Importantly, the | 
 | tools and processes will be similar, except for the frequency of occurrence. At the top is the demand side, that is, the key persons or institutions that | 
 | are demanding transparency and accountability. As can be seen from the Figure, the demand side provides the impetus for the need for M&E (yellow | 

=== PAGE 123 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 117
E
arrows) and are the primary recipients of the M&E information (blue arrows). At the lower end if the supply side, that is persons with information and
leadership for the M&E processes.
DEMAND SIDE: GCF, Government of Barbados, Citizens of Barbados, Civil Society, AE
Monitoring: continuous process Evaluation: mid and end-of term
Tools: M&E Plan, Project Logframe, Tools: M&E Plan, Project Logframe,
surveys, questionnaires, interview guides surveys, questionnaires, interview
guides
Processes: literature reviews, site visits,
consultations, interviews undertaken Processes: literature reviews, site visits,
weekly, monthly, semi-annually, as consultations, interviews undertaken at
appropriate the mid and end-of-term
SUPPLY SIDE: Project Implementation Unit, AE, BWA, Beneficiaries, key national
agencies.
Figure 15: Interactions of key M&E elements, processes and relationships

--- Table 1 on Page 123 ---
 | arrows) and are the primary recipients of the M&E information (blue arrows). At the lower end if the supply side, that is persons with information and | 
 | leadership for the M&E processes. | 
 |  | 
 | DEMAND SIDE: GCF, Government of Barbados, Citizens of Barbados, Civil Society, AE
Monitoring: continuous process Evaluation: mid and end-of term
Tools: M&E Plan, Project Logframe, Tools: M&E Plan, Project Logframe,
surveys, questionnaires, interview guides surveys, questionnaires, interview
guides
Processes: literature reviews, site visits,
consultations, interviews undertaken Processes: literature reviews, site visits,
weekly, monthly, semi-annually, as consultations, interviews undertaken at
appropriate the mid and end-of-term
SUPPLY SIDE: Project Implementation Unit, AE, BWA, Beneficiaries, key national
agencies. | 
 | Figure 15: Interactions of key M&E elements, processes and relationships | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 124 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 118
F
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
As part of output 3.1 (activity 3.1.3), a comprehensive technical and operational risk assessment, including
climate change risks, will be undertaken as a central element of the paradigm shift and sustainability of the
investments. A risk monitoring and management system will be established in BWA as a permanent
management capacity. An overview of this output can be found in the relevant sections of this document (e.g.,
B.2, B.6 and E), with details provided in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2) in particular includes a detailed list of
technical and operational risks of the wastewater treatment operation. In this section a brief summary of the
technical and operational risks will be provided, with an emphasis on risks associated with project management
and implementation.
Selected Risk Factor 1
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Low
Description
Wastewater treatment is a crucial public service that needs to be available at all times. The introduction of new
infrastructural facilities for the treatment of wastewater carries risks associated with interruptions during
construction, starting up the new procedures and staff experience.
Mitigation Measure(s)
BWA staff are very familiar with the current facilities at the WTPs that will see facility upgrades. They will be
engaged in the planning of the installation works from the beginning and be fully consulted and engaged during
the implementation of the works. The suppliers of the new facilities will be required to install and start operation
of all facilities, fine-tune installations over an initial operating period, as well as training of BWA staff.
Infrastructure works will be undertaken during the season when there is relatively little flow going through the
system (e.g. outside of the main tourist season and when rains are typically low). The built-in capacity of the
system will be utilized to buffer flows during any planned disruptions (such as disconnecting and reconnecting
pipes between sub-systems), such that the system overall remains functional. Considering that the planned
investments are for new modules to be added to the existing facilities, such planned disruptions are expected
to be few. In the event that unexpected disruptions do occur, possibly due to external events, ocean outfall of
raw sewage may be required as a solution of last resort, but it is not expected that this will be necessary.
Further details on the facilities to be installed and their integration with existing facilities can be found in Annex
2.
Selected Risk Factor 2
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Low
Description
Climate change forecasts indicate a reduction of rainfall of about 9% by 2050 compared to current rainfall. The
incidence of severe storms with high rainfall events, however, is expected to increase. Such storms have the
potential to overwhelm the wastewater treatment, as a result of surface run-off of rain entering the sewerage
system.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The sewerage system in Barbados is designed to only convey wastewater but storm water enters the sewerage
system during episodes of high rainfall nonetheless. Two main sources of stormwater entry have been
identified: (1) manhole covers of the sewerage system are lifted by local neighbours to alleviate surface

--- Table 1 on Page 124 ---
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  | 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  | 
As part of output 3.1 (activity 3.1.3), a comprehensive technical and operational risk assessment, including
climate change risks, will be undertaken as a central element of the paradigm shift and sustainability of the
investments. A risk monitoring and management system will be established in BWA as a permanent
management capacity. An overview of this output can be found in the relevant sections of this document (e.g.,
B.2, B.6 and E), with details provided in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2) in particular includes a detailed list of
technical and operational risks of the wastewater treatment operation. In this section a brief summary of the
technical and operational risks will be provided, with an emphasis on risks associated with project management
and implementation. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 1 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Low
Description |  | 
Wastewater treatment is a crucial public service that needs to be available at all times. The introduction of new
infrastructural facilities for the treatment of wastewater carries risks associated with interruptions during
construction, starting up the new procedures and staff experience. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
BWA staff are very familiar with the current facilities at the WTPs that will see facility upgrades. They will be
engaged in the planning of the installation works from the beginning and be fully consulted and engaged during
the implementation of the works. The suppliers of the new facilities will be required to install and start operation
of all facilities, fine-tune installations over an initial operating period, as well as training of BWA staff.
Infrastructure works will be undertaken during the season when there is relatively little flow going through the
system (e.g. outside of the main tourist season and when rains are typically low). The built-in capacity of the
system will be utilized to buffer flows during any planned disruptions (such as disconnecting and reconnecting
pipes between sub-systems), such that the system overall remains functional. Considering that the planned
investments are for new modules to be added to the existing facilities, such planned disruptions are expected
to be few. In the event that unexpected disruptions do occur, possibly due to external events, ocean outfall of
raw sewage may be required as a solution of last resort, but it is not expected that this will be necessary.
Further details on the facilities to be installed and their integration with existing facilities can be found in Annex
2. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Low
Description |  | 
Climate change forecasts indicate a reduction of rainfall of about 9% by 2050 compared to current rainfall. The
incidence of severe storms with high rainfall events, however, is expected to increase. Such storms have the
potential to overwhelm the wastewater treatment, as a result of surface run-off of rain entering the sewerage
system. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The sewerage system in Barbados is designed to only convey wastewater but storm water enters the sewerage
system during episodes of high rainfall nonetheless. Two main sources of stormwater entry have been
identified: (1) manhole covers of the sewerage system are lifted by local neighbours to alleviate surface |  | 

=== PAGE 125 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 119
F
flooding; and (2) contrary to the building code, several larger residential buildings have connected downspouts
to the sewerage connection.
The project includes activities under output 1.3 to (1) identify areas where excessively large inflows generate
from and to notify non-compliant building owners of their violation of the building code with an instruction to
remediate the situation; and (2) to remove or restrict operating access to the manhole covers.
If ocean outfall of raw sewage occurs, the impacts are mitigated due to the fact that the concentration of waste
is strongly reduced by the large volume of stormwater in the effluent.
Selected Risk Factor 3
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Geologically speaking, Barbados is a limestone dome, largely formed from coral reefs over millennia. As a
result, the subsoil is relatively porous due to significant karstification. Infiltration of tertiary treated effluent from
the WTPs may reach the aquifer rapidly through crevasses and caves, rather than permeate slowly through
the soil, which could lead to contamination of the aquifer.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Barbados has a world-class geological survey, with special emphasis on the porosity of the limestone
formations. This is driven by the importance of the limestone formation for the water supply of Barbados –
being the only reservoir of freshwater on the island – as well as for the structural integrity of all buildings and
infrastructure (mapping of sink holes).
Figure 16: Typical karstic sub-soil in Barbados. Source: https://climatechangebarbados.com/water-
resources/
The effluent from the WTPs is regularly tested to ensure compliance with regulations, particularly in relation to
bio-safety and dissolved nutrients. The infiltration zones for the treated wastewater will be selected on the basis
of expert knowledge of the limestone formation in BWA and other relevant government agencies. Given that
the Environmental Protection Department runs regular tests on the water quality to ensure that it meets World
Health Organization standards for drinking, any contamination will be observed quickly and addressed
immediately.

--- Table 1 on Page 125 ---
flooding; and (2) contrary to the building code, several larger residential buildings have connected downspouts
to the sewerage connection.
The project includes activities under output 1.3 to (1) identify areas where excessively large inflows generate
from and to notify non-compliant building owners of their violation of the building code with an instruction to
remediate the situation; and (2) to remove or restrict operating access to the manhole covers.
If ocean outfall of raw sewage occurs, the impacts are mitigated due to the fact that the concentration of waste
is strongly reduced by the large volume of stormwater in the effluent. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 3 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Geologically speaking, Barbados is a limestone dome, largely formed from coral reefs over millennia. As a
result, the subsoil is relatively porous due to significant karstification. Infiltration of tertiary treated effluent from
the WTPs may reach the aquifer rapidly through crevasses and caves, rather than permeate slowly through
the soil, which could lead to contamination of the aquifer. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Barbados has a world-class geological survey, with special emphasis on the porosity of the limestone
formations. This is driven by the importance of the limestone formation for the water supply of Barbados –
being the only reservoir of freshwater on the island – as well as for the structural integrity of all buildings and
infrastructure (mapping of sink holes).
Figure 16: Typical karstic sub-soil in Barbados. Source: https://climatechangebarbados.com/water-
resources/
The effluent from the WTPs is regularly tested to ensure compliance with regulations, particularly in relation to
bio-safety and dissolved nutrients. The infiltration zones for the treated wastewater will be selected on the basis
of expert knowledge of the limestone formation in BWA and other relevant government agencies. Given that
the Environmental Protection Department runs regular tests on the water quality to ensure that it meets World
Health Organization standards for drinking, any contamination will be observed quickly and addressed
immediately. |  | 

=== PAGE 126 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 120
F
Selected Risk Factor 4
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium Low
Description
In general, Barbados has a well-developed regulatory system, for natural environments, built-up areas,
economic activities (such as tourism), infrastructure, and others. Compliance and enforcements, however,
are not always effective.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Regulatory gaps will be addressed through the project and BWA will be supplied with monitoring tools to
support enforcement of regulations.
Behavioural change, such as on water use and misuse of the sewerage system, in the general population
and government staff will take time to materialize. The project has several activities focused on sensitization
and awareness-raising. In combination with a growing awareness of the impacts of climate change on
Barbados in the general population, it is expected that the irrational use of water and the sewerage
infrastructure will reduce over time.
Selected Risk Factor 5
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium Low
Description
Inadequate incorporation of gender, and environmental and social safeguard (ESS) considerations into the
implementation of the proposed activities as well as its management.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project has been assessed according to the GCF's environmental and social protection standards and
associated risks and mitigation measures have been identified (sections G.1 and G.2 and relevant annexes).
A Gender Action Plan has been developed (annex 8) and will be implemented to ensure that gender equality
is incorporated into all interventions. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has also been
designed based on a detailed analysis of the proposed activities. The ESMP will provide a framework for
ensuring that project activities do not have a negative impact on the environment, women, or disadvantaged
groups.
Selected Risk Factor 6
Category Probability Impact
Prohibited practices Low Medium
Description
Procurement process may be compromised by application of sanctioned entities to tenders.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Procurement of goods and services for the project will be undertaken by CCCCC. CCCCC has in place a
procurement system that complies with international standards. In particular, CCCCC will not contract any
party who is on the United Nation sanctions list.
Barbados is a participant in FATF and its regional body CFATF.

--- Table 1 on Page 126 ---
 | Selected Risk Factor 4 |  |  | 
 | Category | Probability | Impact | 
 | Governance | Medium | Low | 
 | Description |  |  | 
 | In general, Barbados has a well-developed regulatory system, for natural environments, built-up areas,
economic activities (such as tourism), infrastructure, and others. Compliance and enforcements, however,
are not always effective. |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
 | Regulatory gaps will be addressed through the project and BWA will be supplied with monitoring tools to
support enforcement of regulations.
Behavioural change, such as on water use and misuse of the sewerage system, in the general population
and government staff will take time to materialize. The project has several activities focused on sensitization
and awareness-raising. In combination with a growing awareness of the impacts of climate change on
Barbados in the general population, it is expected that the irrational use of water and the sewerage
infrastructure will reduce over time. |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 5 |  |  | 
 | Category | Probability | Impact | 
 | Governance | Medium | Low | 
 | Description |  |  | 
 | Inadequate incorporation of gender, and environmental and social safeguard (ESS) considerations into the
implementation of the proposed activities as well as its management. |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
 | The project has been assessed according to the GCF's environmental and social protection standards and
associated risks and mitigation measures have been identified (sections G.1 and G.2 and relevant annexes).
A Gender Action Plan has been developed (annex 8) and will be implemented to ensure that gender equality
is incorporated into all interventions. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has also been
designed based on a detailed analysis of the proposed activities. The ESMP will provide a framework for
ensuring that project activities do not have a negative impact on the environment, women, or disadvantaged
groups. |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 6 |  |  | 
 | Category | Probability | Impact | 
 | Prohibited practices | Low | Medium | 
 | Description |  |  | 
 | Procurement process may be compromised by application of sanctioned entities to tenders. |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
 | Procurement of goods and services for the project will be undertaken by CCCCC. CCCCC has in place a
procurement system that complies with international standards. In particular, CCCCC will not contract any
party who is on the United Nation sanctions list.
Barbados is a participant in FATF and its regional body CFATF. |  |  | 

=== PAGE 127 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 121
F
There are no United Nations Security Council (UNSC) sanction regimes currently under implementation for
Barbados. In addition, no individual, entity or other group listed on the UNSC sanctions list, including the
consolidated list, will be involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty,
implementer or beneficiary.
Selected Risk Factor 7
Category Probability Impact
Forex Low Medium
Description
Currency fluctuations may impact the budget of the project.
Mitigation Measure(s)
All international services will be procured in USD, hence there are no forex risks. The Barbadian Dollar is
pegged to the USD at a rate of 1USD = 2BBD and has been stable for at least 10 years – domestically
procured services are therefore also free of currency exchange risk.
Procurement of goods for the facility upgrades at the WTPs, however, will be internationally tendered and
may be subject to price fluctuations when specified in a currency other than USD. The tender documents
will require bidders to quote the goods in USD as well as local currency, if relevant, such that factoring of
currency fluctuations are visible to both parties.

--- Table 1 on Page 127 ---
 | There are no United Nations Security Council (UNSC) sanction regimes currently under implementation for
Barbados. In addition, no individual, entity or other group listed on the UNSC sanctions list, including the
consolidated list, will be involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty,
implementer or beneficiary. |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 7 |  |  | 
 | Category | Probability | Impact | 
 | Forex | Low | Medium | 
 | Description |  |  | 
 | Currency fluctuations may impact the budget of the project. |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
 | All international services will be procured in USD, hence there are no forex risks. The Barbadian Dollar is
pegged to the USD at a rate of 1USD = 2BBD and has been stable for at least 10 years – domestically
procured services are therefore also free of currency exchange risk.
Procurement of goods for the facility upgrades at the WTPs, however, will be internationally tendered and
may be subject to price fluctuations when specified in a currency other than USD. The tender documents
will require bidders to quote the goods in USD as well as local currency, if relevant, such that factoring of
currency fluctuations are visible to both parties. |  |  | 

=== PAGE 128 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 122
G
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
Initial screening of the project activities indicates that the project has an ESS category B rating. This is
because while construction is taking place, it is as an expansion of existing facilities and without generating
significant levels of waste or other environmental impacts. No land acquisition or displacement of peoples or
assets is foreseen. Nevertheless, and in compliance with government regulations, a full ESIA and an
associated ESMP have been developed as part of this funding proposal. The ESIA and ESMP are annexed
to this document as annexes 6A (ESIA, 2 volumes) and 6B (ESMP). The ESMP follows the Environmental
and Social Safeguards Policy and Performance Standards (2015) of CCCCC.
The ESIA reports on the area that comprises the project intervention areas, as well as their surroundings,
specifically defined according to each environmental issue’s characteristics. Direct and indirect influence
areas were defined for most of the project components. The general direct influence areas include the area
for the implementation of the water reclamation facilities and other areas attached to the construction works
(such as construction sites and temporary support structures). Indirect influence areas correspond to a buffer
around the different direct influence areas where effects from the construction activities or during the
exploration phase may be felt.
Most of the project’s impacts will arise during the construction phase, due to construction activities: land
clearance, demolition, trenching and excavation, operation of heavy machinery, truck traffic, among others.
These are likely to cause temporary to short-term negative impacts such as soil erosion, pollution (noise,
dust, and possible spillages) and disturbance of the local people’s everyday life. Mitigation is usually possible
for most of these impacts, meaning that most of them should be of low significance after adequate action
and management. No high significance negative impact was identified; the two “moderate” negative impacts
are alteration / destruction of terrestrial habitats and traffic disruption and congestion. The alteration /
destruction of terrestrial habitats occurs when habitats like forested rangeland areas (in the area with the
aquifer recharge wells and service areas) are affected. Traffic disruption and congestion will occur due to
circulation of heavy-duty vehicles transporting materials to and from the working sites as well as heavy
machinery circulation, in addition to works occurring next to roads (pipe laying). Chapter 3 in the ESMP
contains mitigation measures for these two moderate impacts, as well as for a host of other risks and impacts.
The operational phase will bring the major expected positive impacts, with the most relevant ones being in
different domains, such as: improved resilience to climate change effects; reduction of polluting pressures
potentially affecting groundwater quality; increase quantity and quality of groundwater resources in the St.
Thomas – St. Michael aquifer; reduction of sewage pollution in the Constitution River; improvement of water
quality in Carlisle Bay; improvement of air quality and reduced GHG emissions; energy recovery from waste;
enhancement of the ecological quality of the marine environment; project according with urban and territorial
planning; employment opportunities; improved conditions for the agricultural sector and increased water
availability for domestic purposes; increased attraction of tourists; improved public health; education of the
general public and awareness.
Avoiding negative impacts during the operational phase requires diligent and efficient facility management,
including maintenance and timely replacement of critical components prior to failure. BWA developed and
applies operation and maintenance (O&M) plans, which will be amended to include the facilities implemented
under the project. Elements to be covered in the O&M plans include monitoring of groundwater; BSTP
influent and effluent; marine water; odour; coral reef health. All these monitoring programmes will result in
periodic reports delivered to the competent government agencies (and CZMA in the case of the coral reef
monitoring), including the ESIA authority.
Overall, the ESIA does not identify any significant negative environmental and social impacts from the
implementation of the project, specifically due to the upgrade of the Bridgetown STP, the implementation of
the aquifer recharge facility, the reclaimed water pipeline and the two onsite decentralized treatment plants
and associated wastewater collection areas. Some negative impacts of low and moderate significance have
been identified in the construction and operation phases, but these can be adequately mitigated by the

--- Table 1 on Page 128 ---
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
Initial screening of the project activities indicates that the project has an ESS category B rating. This is
because while construction is taking place, it is as an expansion of existing facilities and without generating
significant levels of waste or other environmental impacts. No land acquisition or displacement of peoples or
assets is foreseen. Nevertheless, and in compliance with government regulations, a full ESIA and an
associated ESMP have been developed as part of this funding proposal. The ESIA and ESMP are annexed
to this document as annexes 6A (ESIA, 2 volumes) and 6B (ESMP). The ESMP follows the Environmental
and Social Safeguards Policy and Performance Standards (2015) of CCCCC.
The ESIA reports on the area that comprises the project intervention areas, as well as their surroundings,
specifically defined according to each environmental issue’s characteristics. Direct and indirect influence
areas were defined for most of the project components. The general direct influence areas include the area
for the implementation of the water reclamation facilities and other areas attached to the construction works
(such as construction sites and temporary support structures). Indirect influence areas correspond to a buffer
around the different direct influence areas where effects from the construction activities or during the
exploration phase may be felt.
Most of the project’s impacts will arise during the construction phase, due to construction activities: land
clearance, demolition, trenching and excavation, operation of heavy machinery, truck traffic, among others.
These are likely to cause temporary to short-term negative impacts such as soil erosion, pollution (noise,
dust, and possible spillages) and disturbance of the local people’s everyday life. Mitigation is usually possible
for most of these impacts, meaning that most of them should be of low significance after adequate action
and management. No high significance negative impact was identified; the two “moderate” negative impacts
are alteration / destruction of terrestrial habitats and traffic disruption and congestion. The alteration /
destruction of terrestrial habitats occurs when habitats like forested rangeland areas (in the area with the
aquifer recharge wells and service areas) are affected. Traffic disruption and congestion will occur due to
circulation of heavy-duty vehicles transporting materials to and from the working sites as well as heavy
machinery circulation, in addition to works occurring next to roads (pipe laying). Chapter 3 in the ESMP
contains mitigation measures for these two moderate impacts, as well as for a host of other risks and impacts.
The operational phase will bring the major expected positive impacts, with the most relevant ones being in
different domains, such as: improved resilience to climate change effects; reduction of polluting pressures
potentially affecting groundwater quality; increase quantity and quality of groundwater resources in the St.
Thomas – St. Michael aquifer; reduction of sewage pollution in the Constitution River; improvement of water
quality in Carlisle Bay; improvement of air quality and reduced GHG emissions; energy recovery from waste;
enhancement of the ecological quality of the marine environment; project according with urban and territorial
planning; employment opportunities; improved conditions for the agricultural sector and increased water
availability for domestic purposes; increased attraction of tourists; improved public health; education of the
general public and awareness.
Avoiding negative impacts during the operational phase requires diligent and efficient facility management,
including maintenance and timely replacement of critical components prior to failure. BWA developed and
applies operation and maintenance (O&M) plans, which will be amended to include the facilities implemented
under the project. Elements to be covered in the O&M plans include monitoring of groundwater; BSTP
influent and effluent; marine water; odour; coral reef health. All these monitoring programmes will result in
periodic reports delivered to the competent government agencies (and CZMA in the case of the coral reef
monitoring), including the ESIA authority.
Overall, the ESIA does not identify any significant negative environmental and social impacts from the
implementation of the project, specifically due to the upgrade of the Bridgetown STP, the implementation of
the aquifer recharge facility, the reclaimed water pipeline and the two onsite decentralized treatment plants
and associated wastewater collection areas. Some negative impacts of low and moderate significance have
been identified in the construction and operation phases, but these can be adequately mitigated by the

=== PAGE 129 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 123
G
suggested measures, alongside a rigorous implementation of the ESMP. On the other hand, the project will
generate multiple important positive impacts, affecting different spheres such as climate change resilience,
ecology and socioeconomics, actively contributing to a general development of the region, and more
specifically to an improved water supply management and a safer and more reliable water provision.
Concretely, the project will improve resilience to climate change effects on water scarcity through the
increase of quantity and quality of groundwater resources in the St. Thomas – St. Michael aquifer and by
improving conditions for the agricultural sector. In fact, adopting systems that enhance the wastewater
systems enables the country to access water resources that otherwise would not have been put into
productive use. This helps to alleviate some of the water scarcity issues affecting Barbados, which are
exacerbated by climate change. These actions will also complement ongoing activities aimed at building
climate resilience in the water sector of Barbados. Indeed, some positive impacts from this project are
cumulative with those arising the upgrade of the South Coast STP also foreseen in the near future. The
project will enhance the ecological quality of the marine environment and the water quality of the Carlisle
Bay. At the same time, it will help to improve air quality and reduce GHG emissions through enhanced
resources management, specifically through the production of renewable energy (through solar energy and
biogas).
Executing Entity capacity to implement the ESMP
BWA, as the promoter of the project and the governmental institution responsible for water supply and
wastewater treatment in Barbados, as well as being an executing entity of the project, has a central role in
the implementation of the ESMP and ensuring that all the enhancement and mitigation measures, and
monitoring activities are communicated to and carried out by trained BWA staff or other competent
authorities. The management of public concerns and external information requests also falls under the
responsibility of BWA. Additionally, the BWA will be responsible for the approval of changes to the ESMP,
as well as the approval and adoption of additional mitigation measures that were not foreseen during the
ESIA and ESMP stages but that may be deemed necessary as the project progresses.
BWA shares some responsibilities with the Planning and Development Department and the Environmental
Protection Department, the central government entities that coordinate and advise on all environmental
issues, including ESIA procedures and requirements. Shared responsibilities include ensuring that the
findings and recommendations of the ESIA are integrated in the overall project design, costing, cost-benefit
analyses, project management and implementation arrangements. This will be accomplished by the revision
of submitted documentation as well as periodical site visits and issuance of recommendations.
CCCCC, in its capacity as accredited entity to the GCF, will ensure that the implementation of the ESMP
complies with GCF policies and guidelines.
Reporting on the implementation of the ESMP will be undertaken jointly by BWA and CCCCC, in compliance
with GCF policies. Further details are provided in Annex 11. Chapter 8 in the ESMP (Annex 6B) provides
more details on the institutional arrangements related to safeguards monitoring and reporting.
Stakeholder consultations and grievance redress
Grievance redress is a critical component of this project for both the CCCCC and the GCF and it is intended
that stakeholders will have a plethora of options to express grievances. It is known that projects having
strong grievance redress mechanism are usually less exposed reputational risk, less disruptions and more
importantly it increases in buy-in and ownerships for projects. Not only is a GRM important for those affected
by the project, even if it was unintended, but more importantly it provides a genuine opportunity to for the AE
and IE to hear the complaints as it relates to the nature and extent of grievances. It clearly articulates the
process through which anyone being affected by the project can submit a grievance and is confident that it

=== PAGE 130 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 124
G
will be addressed in a systematic, fair, transparent and timely manner. Furthermore, it will seek to ensure
that the complainant identity is protect, in so far as to prevent any change of victimization. Operationalization
of the grievance or complaints mechanism will be layered in this regard. There will be three levels offered by
the AE. The first level is at the EA level the second by the AE and the third by the funder. In the community
communication strategy information will be shared on what are grievance and the avenues available to the
communities for their voices their concerns.
The CCCCC in is ESP&SP outlines considerations for grievance redress. The centre allows for all
complaints, concerns, queries, and clarifications regarding projects/programmes supported by the Centre
can also be filed with the Centre using the following address: complaints@caribbeanclimate.bz; or via the
following website link https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/contact-us/complaints/. Project will be monitored
during implementation and will proactively check on the risk that were identified at the project development
stages as it related to activity that were likely to cause interruptions to the communities. The centre goes
even further by allowing complainants to lodge their grievance in another format they are comfortable.
This proposed project has been developed through extensive consultations will all stakeholders involved.
Consultations have taken place with, inter alia:
• Government agencies that are mandated in fields where water management is relevant, including
infrastructure development, agriculture, environmental protection, and environmental health.
• Private sector entities that use and/or discharge large quantities of water.
• University of the West Indies, gender related issues
• Climate change experts from the Government and related agencies, such as the Caribbean Institute
for Meteorology and Hydrology.
• Farmers, on their willingness to use reclaimed wastewater for irrigation of crops.
• General population, on their willingness to consume agricultural produce grown with reclaimed
wastewater.
A full account of stakeholder consultations and a stakeholder management and engagement plan for the
implementation of the project is included in Annex 7.
Barbados has an Office of the Ombudsman, established by an Act of Parliament in 2009. All government
agencies, including the BWA, are subject to investigations by the Ombudsman in response to complaints
from members of the public after having received a written complaint. This is the principal grievance redress
mechanism of Barbados, and all activities of the project are covered under this arrangement. Additionally,
the project will establish an internal grievance redress mechanism, managed by the PSC, as a first-level
mechanism to address complaints and concerns from all stakeholders.
Disclosure of the applicable safeguards reports will follow the requirements of the GCF Information
Disclosure Policy and Environmental and Social Policy.
Indigenous Peoples
Barbados has no Indigenous Peoples communities and the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy therefore does
not apply.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Gender Assessment, Findings and Recommendations
A gender assessment and action plan were completed in a participatory manner. Focused discussions with
Key informants, including from the BWA was undertaken. The assessment examined the gender equality

--- Table 1 on Page 130 ---
will be addressed in a systematic, fair, transparent and timely manner. Furthermore, it will seek to ensure
that the complainant identity is protect, in so far as to prevent any change of victimization. Operationalization
of the grievance or complaints mechanism will be layered in this regard. There will be three levels offered by
the AE. The first level is at the EA level the second by the AE and the third by the funder. In the community
communication strategy information will be shared on what are grievance and the avenues available to the
communities for their voices their concerns.
The CCCCC in is ESP&SP outlines considerations for grievance redress. The centre allows for all
complaints, concerns, queries, and clarifications regarding projects/programmes supported by the Centre
can also be filed with the Centre using the following address: complaints@caribbeanclimate.bz; or via the
following website link https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/contact-us/complaints/. Project will be monitored
during implementation and will proactively check on the risk that were identified at the project development
stages as it related to activity that were likely to cause interruptions to the communities. The centre goes
even further by allowing complainants to lodge their grievance in another format they are comfortable.
This proposed project has been developed through extensive consultations will all stakeholders involved.
Consultations have taken place with, inter alia:
• Government agencies that are mandated in fields where water management is relevant, including
infrastructure development, agriculture, environmental protection, and environmental health.
• Private sector entities that use and/or discharge large quantities of water.
• University of the West Indies, gender related issues
• Climate change experts from the Government and related agencies, such as the Caribbean Institute
for Meteorology and Hydrology.
• Farmers, on their willingness to use reclaimed wastewater for irrigation of crops.
• General population, on their willingness to consume agricultural produce grown with reclaimed
wastewater.
A full account of stakeholder consultations and a stakeholder management and engagement plan for the
implementation of the project is included in Annex 7.
Barbados has an Office of the Ombudsman, established by an Act of Parliament in 2009. All government
agencies, including the BWA, are subject to investigations by the Ombudsman in response to complaints
from members of the public after having received a written complaint. This is the principal grievance redress
mechanism of Barbados, and all activities of the project are covered under this arrangement. Additionally,
the project will establish an internal grievance redress mechanism, managed by the PSC, as a first-level
mechanism to address complaints and concerns from all stakeholders.
Disclosure of the applicable safeguards reports will follow the requirements of the GCF Information
Disclosure Policy and Environmental and Social Policy.
Indigenous Peoples
Barbados has no Indigenous Peoples communities and the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy therefore does
not apply.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Gender Assessment, Findings and Recommendations
A gender assessment and action plan were completed in a participatory manner. Focused discussions with
Key informants, including from the BWA was undertaken. The assessment examined the gender equality

=== PAGE 131 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 125
G
challenges facing Barbados and the BWA as an institution. The Gender Analysis Process Model used to
conduct the gender equality assessment comprised of four main parts, namely Gender Screening, Gender-
Related Data Collection, Gender Impact Assessment and Mainstreaming Gender in the Project Cycle in
conformity with the GCF standards and the CCCCC Gender Policy. Key findings emerging from the four
phases are that:
1. Barbados has made significant human development gains, the results have not always translated to
improvement in gender equality. revealed that at the national level, there is a 60% gender gap among
parliamentarians, a 14% gender gap among, and a 60% gender gap among the Cabinet Ministers.
Import to note is that Barbados has a female prime minister.
2. There still remains gender segregation of roles, except in technical professions and among
legislators/managers, where there are still marginally more men than women. However, A Gender
Analysis of Labour Force Data and Policy Frameworks in Six Caribbean Countries” stated that
Barbados has been recognized as one of the Caribbean countries leading the way on closing the
gender gap in the workplace.
3. The BWA has more men involved in the technical aspects of the Wastewater Division management
role, while women serve in more administrative capacities.
4. There are many issues where both men and women share similar views on wastewater collection
and treatment among the stakeholders in Barbados. However, men seemingly more concerned with
paying for wastewater improvement.
5. Men and Women in Barbados are concerned that climate change will affect the quantity of drinking
water. In a perception survey conducted on , 85% of women and 58% of men rated as very
concerned. This is reflective of the statistical data showing that in general, women engage in more
water related tasks within the household, such as cooking, cleaning, and washing, and therefore tend
to report greater amounts of water usage (Suchorski, 2009). Expansion of decentralized sewage
treatment systems will have increased benefit for women as a result.
6. Some of the legal instruments governing the wastewater sector are outdated because they have
been in force for over forty years and as such, they are likely to limit the ability of the BWA to upgrade
its systems and operations and do not necessarily reflect the needs of the wastewater sector and the
Project at this time. The project will provide the avenue to update the legislation, including gender
responsive considerations.
7. It is necessary for the BWA Board of Directors to adopt appropriate policies for maintaining Project
standards to ensure gender issues are considered and to guide the decisions made and actions
taken by Project personnel to ensure gender issues are considered in the implementation process.
Therefore, Stakeholder Engagement processes carried out by the BWA needs to be gender
responsive to adeqautely respond to the needs of male and female headed households.
8. Members of the BWA Board, and BWA staff, require continued training and awareness of gender
sensitivity especially so that they can recognize privileges and discrimination around gender.
The key recommendations emerging are the need to:
1. Encourage the GOB to create an enabling legal environment that amends the BWA legislation with
a gender and vulnerability lens;
2. Establish a gender-balanced PSC;;
3. Appoint a Project Manager who is skilled in gender sensitivity issues;
4. Appoint a Social and gender Specialist to ensure that project actions are gender responsive;
5. Approve guidelines for the preparation of annual project operational plans and budgets;
6. Approve mechanisms for quality assurance in the procurement of products/services;
7. Adopt gender-related policies to guide decisions and actions associated with project activities like
staffing, administration, and activity monitoring, evaluation, and reporting;
8. Collect, store, retrieve, and analyse gender disaggregated empirical data for use in making critical
decisions;

=== PAGE 132 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 126
G
9. Set up a project office with office facilities to cater for gender differences of the staff;
10. Conduct training for the project staff to build their gender sensitivity capacity; and
11. Establish a mechanism to ensure gender sensitivity in all stakeholder engagement processes.
Gender Mainstreaming Action Plan
The intended impact of the gender mainstreaming action plan is to (i) increase the participation of women
and LGBTQIA persons in decision making and raise the awareness of men, women and vulnerable
communities on gender issues to minimize discrimination against vulnerable groups including LBTQIA; and
(ii) improve the quality of life for vulnerable residents, especially women, and children of Barbados in the
areas of health, agriculture, and employment.
The following outputs and activities have been included in the project to advance these gender
mainstreaming goals:
• Output 1.4: Decentralized treatment plants or cluster treatment facilities installed
• Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater collection and treatment
demonstration systems in Zone A locations to produce reuse quality water for domestic/commercial
non-potable water applications. This activity will ensure that consultative processes capture the views
of both male and female headed households in a manner that informs the roll out and connection of
services to these two communities. Mixed methods of engagement will be employed, including
focused conversations with women’s groups and female farmers. Additionally, in the implementation
of this activity the project will ensure that communities are protected from sexual and gender-
based violence and gender-based discrimination. The Project will therefore set up mechanisms
to capture community concerns in a gender sensitive manner and that will prohibit exploitative,
abusive and harassing conduct by workers of the BWA, contractors and subcontractors.
• Output 3.1: Improved capabilities of water technical personnel to operate, maintain and monitor and
implement climate change adaptation planning strategies for wastewater management
o Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide specialized and customized training to support the
operations and maintenance of wastewater collection and treatment facilities including
photovoltaic equipment. This activity will include gender sensitivity and climate change
training for BWA employees and private sector
o Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Operational Manual that
addresses the requirements of the upgrades, preventative maintenance, operator safety, and
environmental monitoring, including risks posed by climate change and gender and social
inclusion considerations.
• Output 4.1: Governance and planning roadmaps enhanced to enable use of reclaimed water in a
controlled and regulated manner.
o Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative review to promote the Planning and Development Act,
Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related legislations for enhancing wastewater effluent
quality, treatment options and re-use requirements and applications. The review will also
include recommendations for strengthening - private sector engagement, public-private
partnerships, building codes, resiliency to climate change and equal opportunities and
access to males and females.
o Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation master plan that includes an optimal
combination of decentralized, cluster and centralized water reclamation and reuse
applications, with the centralized reclaimed water being transmitted and used for agricultural
irrigation and/or industrial use (such as lower cost of reclaimed water transmission). This
strategy will also take into consideration the social, gender-related and climate risks in the
design and prioritization of water reuse strategies.

=== PAGE 133 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 127
G
• Output 4.2: Mechanisms developed/expanded to encourage the adoption of wastewater treatment
and reuse applications by private individuals and businesses.
o Activity 4.2.1: Develop a strategy and action plan to engage the private sector in the provision
and adoption of wastewater treatment technology and the utilization of wastewater by-
products such as activated sludge. This includes conducting an assessment to identify
opportunities for public-private partnership in the water and wastewater sector, especially for
the expansion of the decentralized onsite cluster wastewater systems. The strategy will also
promote gender equality and women empowerment
o Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and identify recommendations for a gender sensitive and
socially inclusive incentive programme to encourage conservation, recycle, re-use.
o Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to provide resources
for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater systems. The management of the
expanded RAFF will ensure to promote gender equality and social inclusion as a
requirement
• Output 4.3: Gender Sensitive Public Education and Awareness Campaign Implemented.
o Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness Campaign
for community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos, community town hall
meetings, site tours (demonstration of the plant technology and by-product reuse) and
consultations. Consultations will include, but will not be limited to representative groups of
vulnerable communities, including with the Association of Women in Agriculture.
o Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Project Web Page and social media accounts, which is
dedicated to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge products, identify/host a link to
the Redress Mechanism and provide update to all stakeholders on the project activities. This
page will include, to the best extent possible, functions such as audio, sub-titles and/or
sign language to encourage social inclusion from disabled population. The project’s
webpage will also ensure to report project results disaggregated by gender, where
possible.
Implementation arrangements of the project that will promote gender mainstreaming
In addition to the gender sensitive results and activities flagged above, the following implementation
strategies will be utilized by the project implementation unit to further strengthen gender considerations in
the day-to-day operations of the project:
1. There will be gender sensitive stakeholder consultations throughout the lifetime of the project that
will aim to engage women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings (all Components)
2. CCCCC Procurement policies, which promote adherence to the Centre’ gender policy and action
plan
3. Monitoring of indicators will disaggregate information by sex, where possible
4. The AE’s gender specialist is available to provide technical advice and quality control for the
mainstreaming of gender in the results and activities identified above, as well as to support the
analysis of the sex disaggregated monitoring and evaluation information collected routinely to inform
planning and decision making on gender mainstreaming, including the early identification of possible
unplanned negative gender issues emerging because of the project’s activities.
5. The Project PSC will strive to ensure gender balance and will include a representative from the
Barbados Gender Bureau.
6. The Project Manager will present to the PSC a report on the Project’s Gender Action Plan annually.
7. All members of the Project Management Team will receive gender sensitivity training on an annual
basis.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

--- Table 1 on Page 133 ---
• Output 4.2: Mechanisms developed/expanded to encourage the adoption of wastewater treatment
and reuse applications by private individuals and businesses.
o Activity 4.2.1: Develop a strategy and action plan to engage the private sector in the provision
and adoption of wastewater treatment technology and the utilization of wastewater by-
products such as activated sludge. This includes conducting an assessment to identify
opportunities for public-private partnership in the water and wastewater sector, especially for
the expansion of the decentralized onsite cluster wastewater systems. The strategy will also
promote gender equality and women empowerment
o Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and identify recommendations for a gender sensitive and
socially inclusive incentive programme to encourage conservation, recycle, re-use.
o Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to provide resources
for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater systems. The management of the
expanded RAFF will ensure to promote gender equality and social inclusion as a
requirement
• Output 4.3: Gender Sensitive Public Education and Awareness Campaign Implemented.
o Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness Campaign
for community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos, community town hall
meetings, site tours (demonstration of the plant technology and by-product reuse) and
consultations. Consultations will include, but will not be limited to representative groups of
vulnerable communities, including with the Association of Women in Agriculture.
o Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Project Web Page and social media accounts, which is
dedicated to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge products, identify/host a link to
the Redress Mechanism and provide update to all stakeholders on the project activities. This
page will include, to the best extent possible, functions such as audio, sub-titles and/or
sign language to encourage social inclusion from disabled population. The project’s
webpage will also ensure to report project results disaggregated by gender, where
possible.
Implementation arrangements of the project that will promote gender mainstreaming
In addition to the gender sensitive results and activities flagged above, the following implementation
strategies will be utilized by the project implementation unit to further strengthen gender considerations in
the day-to-day operations of the project:
1. There will be gender sensitive stakeholder consultations throughout the lifetime of the project that
will aim to engage women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings (all Components)
2. CCCCC Procurement policies, which promote adherence to the Centre’ gender policy and action
plan
3. Monitoring of indicators will disaggregate information by sex, where possible
4. The AE’s gender specialist is available to provide technical advice and quality control for the
mainstreaming of gender in the results and activities identified above, as well as to support the
analysis of the sex disaggregated monitoring and evaluation information collected routinely to inform
planning and decision making on gender mainstreaming, including the early identification of possible
unplanned negative gender issues emerging because of the project’s activities.
5. The Project PSC will strive to ensure gender balance and will include a representative from the
Barbados Gender Bureau.
6. The Project Manager will present to the PSC a report on the Project’s Gender Action Plan annually.
7. All members of the Project Management Team will receive gender sensitivity training on an annual
basis.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 134 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 128
G
Financial Management and Accounting
As an accredited GCF entity, CCCCC’s Financial Management, Accounting and Procurement procedures
are aligned with the standards required by the GCF. This project will be subjected to the same financial
management and accounting standards, unless otherwise agreed with the Donor. These are detailed in the
CCCCC Financial Manual and summarized below.
It is the CCCCC’s practice to open a new foreign currency bank account for all externally funded projects.
The utilisation of an old or existing bank account for a new project is prohibited. The signatories for the new
bank account are authorised by the Executive Director of the CCCCC. Closure of the project’s bank account
takes place within 180 days of a final financial audit or the last disbursement if a financial audit is not
undertaken within those 180 days.
Project budgets are prepared and agreed during the conceptualization and form part of the final proposal
and project agreement between the CCCCC, an Executing Agency and a Donor. All project budgets are
uploaded to the accounting software to form the budget baseline required for accounting and financial
tracking and reporting, which is necessary for variance analysis and time-specific analysis. The Project
Manager/Coordinator is responsible for the provision of detailed budgets to the Financial Administrator.
The financial year for the project is dependent on the stipulations within the Project Agreement including the
official commencement date of the project; however, Project Financial Reports are generated on a periodic
basis (monthly, quarterly, and annually) or as otherwise required by the Project Manager/Coordinator or
stipulated in the Project Agreement. Financial reports include the following information to date (in both
currency and percentages):
• Commitments
• Expenditure
• Un-committed funds
• Undisbursed
• Variance
Counterpart (if applicable)
Project payments and disbursements must be executed in alignment with the approved Project Agreement
and related budget (or its most current amendment). All payments are initiated by the Project
Manager/Coordinator and request for payments are signed by the Project Manager /Coordinator and clearly
outline the following:
• The Name of the Project (as per Agreement)
• The name and code of the budget line(s) and against which the payment(s) should be made
• The amount to be paid
• Approved signed supporting documents which verify delivery or acceptance of the item to be paid
(such as invoice, approved deliverable, and signed deliverable slip)
CCCCC financial records are audited annually by an independent accounting firm, which is selected using
a competitive bidding process every 5 years. To allow for a smooth and timely audit, CCCCC provides
assistance to the independent auditors in the following areas of planning, involvement, interim procedures
as well as provide schedules, documents and information requested by the auditors in a timely manner.
Upon receipt of the completed audited financial statements and accompanying report(s), the CCCCC
reviews and responds in writing to all management letter or other internal control and compliance report
findings and recommendations made by the independent auditor. These audited financial statements and
accompanying reports are subject to review and scrutiny by members of the broad of directors who form the
Finance Committee.
Procurement
As the AE, the CCCCC will manage the funding garnered for the implementation of the project and would
be responsible for providing and contracting the goods and services associated the activities that are directly

--- Table 1 on Page 134 ---
 | Financial Management and Accounting | 
 | As an accredited GCF entity, CCCCC’s Financial Management, Accounting and Procurement procedures | 
 | are aligned with the standards required by the GCF. This project will be subjected to the same financial | 
 | management and accounting standards, unless otherwise agreed with the Donor. These are detailed in the | 
 | CCCCC Financial Manual and summarized below. | 
 | It is the CCCCC’s practice to open a new foreign currency bank account for all externally funded projects. | 
 | The utilisation of an old or existing bank account for a new project is prohibited. The signatories for the new | 
 | bank account are authorised by the Executive Director of the CCCCC. Closure of the project’s bank account | 
 | takes place within 180 days of a final financial audit or the last disbursement if a financial audit is not | 
 | undertaken within those 180 days. | 
 | Project budgets are prepared and agreed during the conceptualization and form part of the final proposal | 
 | and project agreement between the CCCCC, an Executing Agency and a Donor. All project budgets are | 
 | uploaded to the accounting software to form the budget baseline required for accounting and financial | 
 | tracking and reporting, which is necessary for variance analysis and time-specific analysis. The Project | 
 | Manager/Coordinator is responsible for the provision of detailed budgets to the Financial Administrator. | 
 | The financial year for the project is dependent on the stipulations within the Project Agreement including the | 
 | official commencement date of the project; however, Project Financial Reports are generated on a periodic | 
 | basis (monthly, quarterly, and annually) or as otherwise required by the Project Manager/Coordinator or | 
 | stipulated in the Project Agreement. Financial reports include the following information to date (in both | 
 | currency and percentages): | 
 | • Commitments | 
 | • Expenditure | 
 | • Un-committed funds | 
 | • Undisbursed | 
 | • Variance | 
 | Counterpart (if applicable) | 
 | Project payments and disbursements must be executed in alignment with the approved Project Agreement | 
 | and related budget (or its most current amendment). All payments are initiated by the Project | 
 | Manager/Coordinator and request for payments are signed by the Project Manager /Coordinator and clearly | 
 | outline the following: | 
 | • The Name of the Project (as per Agreement) | 
 | • The name and code of the budget line(s) and against which the payment(s) should be made | 
 | • The amount to be paid | 
 | • Approved signed supporting documents which verify delivery or acceptance of the item to be paid | 
 | (such as invoice, approved deliverable, and signed deliverable slip) | 
 | CCCCC financial records are audited annually by an independent accounting firm, which is selected using | 
 | a competitive bidding process every 5 years. To allow for a smooth and timely audit, CCCCC provides | 
 | assistance to the independent auditors in the following areas of planning, involvement, interim procedures | 
 | as well as provide schedules, documents and information requested by the auditors in a timely manner. | 
 | Upon receipt of the completed audited financial statements and accompanying report(s), the CCCCC | 
 | reviews and responds in writing to all management letter or other internal control and compliance report | 
 | findings and recommendations made by the independent auditor. These audited financial statements and | 
 | accompanying reports are subject to review and scrutiny by members of the broad of directors who form the | 
 | Finance Committee. | 
 |  | 
 | Procurement | 
 | As the AE, the CCCCC will manage the funding garnered for the implementation of the project and would | 
 | be responsible for providing and contracting the goods and services associated the activities that are directly | 

=== PAGE 135 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 129
G
funded by the GCF; whereas, the BWA will conduct procurement related to the cofinanced activities. The
CCCCC will periodically reporting on the progress of the project’s implementation, including the co-financed
activities, in close coordination and BWA the NDA. The procurement will be processed in accordance with
the procurement guidelines and policies of CCCCC. Information on the process and the results of
procurement activities undertaken are usually included in the APRs mid-term progress and completion
reports. Further, as a key stakeholder co-executing partner, the inputs of the BWA are critical to the
completion of any procurement package. .The Procurement Plan (See Annex 10) utilizes the following
methods of procurement:
• International Competitive Bidding
• Limited International Bidding
• Regional Competitive Bidding
• Shopping
• Direct Contract
• Community Participation
The methods selected are determined by a threshold model. These thresholds are detailed in CCCCC
procurement manual.
The Centre’s Procurement Policies and Manuals is implemented in aligned with other policies, include:
(i) Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism Policy.
(ii) Gender Policy and Action Plan
(iii) Financial & Accounting Policy Manual,
(iv) Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy and Performance Standards
(v) The CCCCC Manual for Project Formulation
(vi) The CCCCC Manual for Project Monitoring, Review, Reporting and Evaluation.
(vii) The CCCCC Standard Operating Procedures for Project Cycle Management
(viii) Employee Protection (Whistle-blower) Policy.
To support the Centre’s Procurement Principles, a Code of Conduct governs the actions of (i) all the Centre’s
staff and others in their direct or indirect involvement in the procurement and (ii) Bidders and Vendors who
must adhere to the Centre’s Code of Conduct for Bidders and Vendors and comply with all legal requirements
related Prohibited Practices (See the CCCCC Procurement Policy and Manual71).
AML/CFT
Barbados has in place a sophisticated legal, regulatory and institutional framework to ensure compliance
with Financial Action Task Force (FATF) regulations. The Anti-Terrorism Act of 2002 is the main legal
instrument in this context.72 Barbados is a participant in the FATF, as well as its regional body the Caribbean
Financial Action Task Force (CFATF).The Financial Services Commission is the lead government agency
for the implementation of AML/CFT regulations, making available guidelines for specific target groups and
sectors.73
The CCCCC is committed to full compliance with international standards, the Money Laundering and
Terrorism (Prevention) Act, Chapter 104 of Belize and any other applicable legislation in the territories of its
Members. This commitment is set forth in this Policy which defines the guiding principles for adequate
prevention and control. The CCCCC identifies, seeks out and accepts funding ONLY from established
reputable and legitimate sources, which themselves have pledged strict compliance with the standard
international legal framework governing prevention of ML and TF. The institution upholds the Rule of Law to
71 https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/ccccc-procurement-manual/
72 http://www.fsc.gov.bb/attachments/article/12/Anti-Terrorism%20Act%20Cap.158.pdf
73 https://barbadosfiu.gov.bb/Topic/aml-cft-guidelines/

--- Table 1 on Page 135 ---
 | funded by the GCF; whereas, the BWA will conduct procurement related to the cofinanced activities. The | 
 | CCCCC will periodically reporting on the progress of the project’s implementation, including the co-financed | 
 | activities, in close coordination and BWA the NDA. The procurement will be processed in accordance with | 
 | the procurement guidelines and policies of CCCCC. Information on the process and the results of | 
 | procurement activities undertaken are usually included in the APRs mid-term progress and completion | 
 | reports. Further, as a key stakeholder co-executing partner, the inputs of the BWA are critical to the | 
 | completion of any procurement package. .The Procurement Plan (See Annex 10) utilizes the following | 
 | methods of procurement: | 
 | • International Competitive Bidding | 
 | • Limited International Bidding | 
 | • Regional Competitive Bidding | 
 | • Shopping | 
 | • Direct Contract | 
 | • Community Participation | 
 | The methods selected are determined by a threshold model. These thresholds are detailed in CCCCC | 
 | procurement manual. | 
 | The Centre’s Procurement Policies and Manuals is implemented in aligned with other policies, include: | 
 | (i) Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism Policy. | 
 | (ii) Gender Policy and Action Plan | 
 | (iii) Financial & Accounting Policy Manual, | 
 | (iv) Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy and Performance Standards | 
 | (v) The CCCCC Manual for Project Formulation | 
 | (vi) The CCCCC Manual for Project Monitoring, Review, Reporting and Evaluation. | 
 | (vii) The CCCCC Standard Operating Procedures for Project Cycle Management | 
 | (viii) Employee Protection (Whistle-blower) Policy. | 
 | To support the Centre’s Procurement Principles, a Code of Conduct governs the actions of (i) all the Centre’s | 
 | staff and others in their direct or indirect involvement in the procurement and (ii) Bidders and Vendors who | 
 | must adhere to the Centre’s Code of Conduct for Bidders and Vendors and comply with all legal requirements | 
 | related Prohibited Practices (See the CCCCC Procurement Policy and Manual71). | 
 |  | 
 | AML/CFT | 
 | Barbados has in place a sophisticated legal, regulatory and institutional framework to ensure compliance | 
 | with Financial Action Task Force (FATF) regulations. The Anti-Terrorism Act of 2002 is the main legal | 
 | instrument in this context.72 Barbados is a participant in the FATF, as well as its regional body the Caribbean | 
 | Financial Action Task Force (CFATF).The Financial Services Commission is the lead government agency | 
 | for the implementation of AML/CFT regulations, making available guidelines for specific target groups and | 
 | sectors.73 | 
 |  | 
 | The CCCCC is committed to full compliance with international standards, the Money Laundering and | 
 | Terrorism (Prevention) Act, Chapter 104 of Belize and any other applicable legislation in the territories of its | 
 | Members. This commitment is set forth in this Policy which defines the guiding principles for adequate | 
 | prevention and control. The CCCCC identifies, seeks out and accepts funding ONLY from established | 
 | reputable and legitimate sources, which themselves have pledged strict compliance with the standard | 
 | international legal framework governing prevention of ML and TF. The institution upholds the Rule of Law to | 

=== PAGE 136 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 130
G
ensure that its work and that of its partners and beneficiaries is free from criminal interference and that
resources are used for the intended purpose.
The CCCCC, by its inherent construct, mandate and corresponding geographic location has to be ever
vigilant against criminal elements intent on exploiting the vulnerabilities of the Caribbean Region. Identified
susceptibilities of CARICOM Member States include: law enforcement constraints, location, free trade, cash-
culture and offshore financial industry. Recognizing these predispositions is the first step by the CCCCC in
instituting necessary systems to maintain a high degree of transparency, integrity and public confidence in
the management and functioning of the Centre to ensure it cannot be misused for ML and TR.
The CCCCC does not associate with terrorist organizations nor distribute or allocate funds to partners who
support, carryout or advocate terrorist activity. The CCCCC is committed to ensuring that the risk of its
business machinery being exploited for the purpose of money laundering and of our donor funds being
diverted to terrorist activity is abated.
The CCCCC has a mandate to serve the Member States of CARICOM in coordinating Climate Change
response. While the Centre’s focus is on Climate Change as per its mandate, it can ill afford to protect the
climate system and ignore the corrosive effect of ML and TF on the social and political institutions of the
Caribbean. To effectively contribute in the detection and prevention of ML and TF, the CCCCC is committed
to ensuring that its business apparatus is transparent, distinguishable and trustworthy. All the business
processes of the CCCCC are therefore operated upon the principle of economy, efficiency, integrity and
transparency.
In this regard, the CCCCC has instituted robust procurement and accounting procedures that ensure:
(i) A system to conduct due diligence on new clients
(ii) meticulous management and accounting of all financial transactions.
(iii) appropriate controls are in place to ensure that all funds are fully accounted for and are spent in a
manner that is consistent with the purpose and objectives of grant agreement and/or the CCCCC’s
mandate.
(iv) annual internal and external audits are performed and comprehensive financial statements are
prepared and available for review by Members and submitted to donors, as required
(v) compliance with the accountability measures required by its significant donors.
As part of its transparency framework, the CCCCC also maintains information on the purpose and objectives
of its stated activities as well as the identity of its, Board of Governors and Executive Director of its Technical
Secretariat. This information is available directly from the Technical Secretariat and is accessible to the
public on its website.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential
information.

--- Table 1 on Page 136 ---
 | ensure that its work and that of its partners and beneficiaries is free from criminal interference and that | 
 | resources are used for the intended purpose. | 
 | The CCCCC, by its inherent construct, mandate and corresponding geographic location has to be ever | 
 | vigilant against criminal elements intent on exploiting the vulnerabilities of the Caribbean Region. Identified | 
 | susceptibilities of CARICOM Member States include: law enforcement constraints, location, free trade, cash- | 
 | culture and offshore financial industry. Recognizing these predispositions is the first step by the CCCCC in | 
 | instituting necessary systems to maintain a high degree of transparency, integrity and public confidence in | 
 | the management and functioning of the Centre to ensure it cannot be misused for ML and TR. | 
 | The CCCCC does not associate with terrorist organizations nor distribute or allocate funds to partners who | 
 | support, carryout or advocate terrorist activity. The CCCCC is committed to ensuring that the risk of its | 
 | business machinery being exploited for the purpose of money laundering and of our donor funds being | 
 | diverted to terrorist activity is abated. | 
 | The CCCCC has a mandate to serve the Member States of CARICOM in coordinating Climate Change | 
 | response. While the Centre’s focus is on Climate Change as per its mandate, it can ill afford to protect the | 
 | climate system and ignore the corrosive effect of ML and TF on the social and political institutions of the | 
 | Caribbean. To effectively contribute in the detection and prevention of ML and TF, the CCCCC is committed | 
 | to ensuring that its business apparatus is transparent, distinguishable and trustworthy. All the business | 
 | processes of the CCCCC are therefore operated upon the principle of economy, efficiency, integrity and | 
 | transparency. | 
 | In this regard, the CCCCC has instituted robust procurement and accounting procedures that ensure: | 
 | (i) A system to conduct due diligence on new clients | 
 | (ii) meticulous management and accounting of all financial transactions. | 
 | (iii) appropriate controls are in place to ensure that all funds are fully accounted for and are spent in a | 
 | manner that is consistent with the purpose and objectives of grant agreement and/or the CCCCC’s | 
 | mandate. | 
 | (iv) annual internal and external audits are performed and comprehensive financial statements are | 
 | prepared and available for review by Members and submitted to donors, as required | 
 | (v) compliance with the accountability measures required by its significant donors. | 
 | As part of its transparency framework, the CCCCC also maintains information on the purpose and objectives | 
 | of its stated activities as well as the identity of its, Board of Governors and Executive Director of its Technical | 
 | Secretariat. This information is available directly from the Technical Secretariat and is accessible to the | 
 | public on its website. | 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal |  | 
 | ☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | ☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited | 
 | entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 | • full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with | 
 | an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the | 
 | accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and | 
 | • redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential | 
 | information. | 

=== PAGE 137 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 131
H
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☒ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☐ Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☒ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☐ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
☒ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☒ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☒ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☐ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)
☒ Annex Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and
22a cross cutting-projects)
Annex Adaptation Beneficiaries
22b

--- Table 1 on Page 137 ---
ANNEXES |  |  |  | 
H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☒ |  | Annex 3 | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 6 | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☐ Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) | 
☒ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☒ |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
 | H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☐ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project | 
☐ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity | 
☐ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment | 
☐ |  | Annex 21 | Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) | 
☒ |  | Annex
22a
Annex
22b | Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and
cross cutting-projects)
Adaptation Beneficiaries | 

=== PAGE 138 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 132
H
☒ Annex 23 Final RAFF Charter
☒ Annex 24 Decentralised Treatment Plant Site Information
☒ Annex 25 Risk Register and Framework for Monitoring
☒ Annex 26 CCCCC Board Resolution for Entity Work Programme
☒ Annex 27 BWA FMCA 2018
☒ Annex 28 Feasibility Study - South Coast Project
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.

--- Table 1 on Page 138 ---
☒ | Annex 23 | Final RAFF Charter
☒ | Annex 24 | Decentralised Treatment Plant Site Information
☒ | Annex 25 | Risk Register and Framework for Monitoring
☒ | Annex 26 | CCCCC Board Resolution for Entity Work Programme
☒ | Annex 27 | BWA FMCA 2018
☒ | Annex 28 | Feasibility Study - South Coast Project

=== PAGE 139 ===
The Hon. Ryan Straughn, M.P.
MINISTER IN THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE & ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC AFFAIRS & INVESTMENT
Government Headquarters,
Bay Street, St. Michael, BB11156, Barbados, W.I.
Tel.: (246) 535-5300 Fax: (246) 535-5629
Our Ref.: 5634/1 Vol. 1
18 July, 2022
Bridgetown, BARBADOS
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Caribbean Community Climate Change
Centre (CCCCC) regarding THE R’s (REDUCE, REUSE AND RECYCLE) FOR
CLIMATE RESILIENCE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS IN BARBADOS (3R-
CReWS).
Dear Sir/Madam
We refer to the project titled THE R’s (REDUCE, REUSE AND RECYCLE) FOR CLIMATE
RESILIENCE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS IN BARBADOS (3R-CReWS) in Barbados as included in
the funding proposal submitted by The Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) to us on
24 February 2022.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs &
Investment, the National Designated Authority of Barbados.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby
communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Barbados has no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal;
(b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities,
strategies and plans of Barbados;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the project as included in the
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as included in the
funding proposal has been duly followed.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Kind regards,
____________________________
Hon. Ryan Straughn M.P.
Minister
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment
BARBADOS
G O V E R N M E N T O F B A R B A D O S
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 140 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Project or programme
title
The R’s (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience
Existence of
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R-CReWS)
subproject(s) to be
identified after GCF
Board approval
No
Sector (public or
private)
Public
Accredited entity
Environmental and Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC)
social safeguards (ESS)
category
Location – specific Category B
location(s) of project or
target country or
location(s) of
programme Barbados
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on
accredited entity’s Friday, September 16, 2022
website
Language(s) of disclosure English
Explanation on language English is the official language of Barbados
ESIA Volume 1:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EYEivJMLvSJKnCIvvniOEl4BwXJIIgSFzG5de6MqrHQezQ?e=sQ
3LrH
ESIA Volume II:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EZaMO5IbNeRDtan7E3jg51QBc9TqzWbJ0vV0JFCd8mpLCQ?e
=FC0gOz
Link to disclosure
Off-shore Assessment:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EZ84el-xC0VClP-
A7CNFm6oB1H1R0C6DwJt7gUVurmgYfw?e=1Mpw2N
Annexes:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/ESwuDQzm5jhEvLz7aDaHiDYBDV5WWxOE5lqA37TyQSVSIQ?
e=gj2HHJ

--- Table 1 on Page 140 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  | 
 | Project or programme |  |  | 
 | title |  |  | 
 | Existence of |  | The R’s (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R-CReWS)
No | 
 | subproject(s) to be |  |  | 
 | identified after GCF |  |  | 
 | Board approval |  |  | 
 | Sector (public or |  |  | 
 | private) |  |  | 
Accredited entity |  |  | Public | 
 | Environmental and |  | Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) | 
 | social safeguards (ESS) |  |  | 
 | category |  |  | 
 | Location – specific |  | Category B
Barbados | 
 | location(s) of project or |  |  | 
 | target country or |  |  | 
 | location(s) of |  |  | 
 | programme |  |  | 
 | Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  |  | 
accredited entity’s
website |  |  | Friday, September 16, 2022 | 
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | English is the official language of Barbados
ESIA Volume 1:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EYEivJMLvSJKnCIvvniOEl4BwXJIIgSFzG5de6MqrHQezQ?e=sQ
3LrH
ESIA Volume II:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EZaMO5IbNeRDtan7E3jg51QBc9TqzWbJ0vV0JFCd8mpLCQ?e
=FC0gOz
Off-shore Assessment:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EZ84el-xC0VClP-
A7CNFm6oB1H1R0C6DwJt7gUVurmgYfw?e=1Mpw2N
Annexes:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b | 

--- Table 2 on Page 140 ---
English is the official language of Barbados | 
 | 
ESIA Volume 1: | 
https://cccccbze- | 
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b | 
 | YEivJMLvSJKnCIvvniOEl4BwXJIIgSFzG5de6MqrHQezQ?e=sQ
3LrH | 
 | 
ESIA Volume II: | 
https://cccccbze- | 
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b | 

--- Table 3 on Page 140 ---
=FC0gOz

Off-shore Assessment:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EZ84el-xC0VClP-
A7CNFm6oB1H1R0C6DwJt7gUVurmgYfw?e=1Mpw2N

Annexes:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b

=== PAGE 141 ===
Project Page:
https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/gcf/2022/09/13/3r-crews/
Baseline Study:
Other link(s)
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EXg06jjOqhhIn3suOUtvSCkB7OT2sBUn8BoWgzbluu71sg?e=n
UvBy0
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) for 3R-CReWS Volume 1 and 2”. Additional
Remarks
information can be found in the Baseline Study for the ESIA and
Appendix 4 Off-Shore Modeling and Assessment. These can be
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
access via the link provided above.
Date of disclosure on
accredited entity’s Friday, September 16, 2022
website
Language(s) of disclosure English
Explanation on language English is the official language of Barbados
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
Link to disclosure
z/EfJb_c2hadREtZMEwxYc5yUBZgIsrn6P8Oscmp12wugNlw?e=l
5 t9Nw
Project Page:
Other link(s)
https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/gcf/2022/09/13/3r-crews/
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B
Remarks project is contained in the “Environmental and Social
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable)
Management Plan (ESMP) for 3R-CReWS”.
Date of disclosure on
accredited entity’s N/A
website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
OAnthye or tlihnekr( sr)e levant ESS repoNr/tAs , e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement
RPoemlicayr kFsr amework (RPF), InNd/iAg enous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)
Description of
report/disclosure on
Friday, September 16, 2022
accredited entity’s
website
Language(s) of disclosure English
Explanation on language English is the official language of Barbados

--- Table 1 on Page 141 ---
Other link(s) |  |  | Project Page:
https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/gcf/2022/09/13/3r-crews/
Baseline Study:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b | 
Remarks |  |  | z/EXg06jjOqhhIn3suOUtvSCkB7OT2sBUn8BoWgzbluu71sg?e=n
UvBy0
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) for 3R-CReWS Volume 1 and 2”. Additional
information can be found in the Baseline Study for the ESIA and | 
 | Appendix 4 Off-Shore Modeling and Assessment. These can be
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | access via the link provided above. | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  |  | 
accredited entity’s
website |  |  | Friday, September 16, 2022 | 
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | English is the official language of Barbados
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b | 
 |  |  | z/EfJb_c2hadREtZMEwxYc5yUBZgIsrn6P8Oscmp12wugNlw?e=l
5 t9Nw | 
Other link(s) |  |  | Project Page:
https://www.caribbeanclimate.bz/gcf/2022/09/13/3r-crews/
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B | 
 | Remarks project is contained in the “Environmental and Social
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Management Plan (ESMP) for 3R-CReWS”. | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  |  | 
 | accredited entity’s |  | N/A | 
 | website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | OAnthye or tlihnekr( sr)e levant ESS repoNr/tAs , e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement |  |  | 
 | RPoemlicayr kFsr amework (RPF), InNd/iAg enous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Friday, September 16, 2022 | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Description of |  |  | 
 | report/disclosure on |  |  | 
accredited entity’s
website |  |  |  | 
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English | 

=== PAGE 142 ===
Stakeholder Analysis and Action Plan:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/Ea77c5IweVtCimz5s2ipuUwBcr_yDT2ax4bhvQuA7xjHew
Link to disclosure
Gender Analysis and Action Plan:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/EWC50lyMbcREizItzf8tMJcBtnhRkQpD5u5W5nAADycrSA?e=I
v Qaj9
Other link(s) N/A
The Stakeholder Analysis and Action Plan and Gender Analysis
RDeismcalorskus re in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
and Action Plan can be accessed via the links above.
Date Friday, September 16, 2022
CCCCC HQ (hard copies),
3rd Floor, David L. McKoy Business Center
Bliss Parade, P.O. Box 563
Belmopan, Belize, Central America
Barbados Water Authority (website and hard copies)
Pine Commercial Estate
The Pine, St. Michael
Barbados
Office of the Prime Minister (hard copies)
Government Headquarters
Bay Street
St. Michael
Barbados, W.I.
Ministry of Transport, Works and Water Resources (hard copies)
Pine East/West Boulevard
Place
The Pine
St. Michael
Barbados, W. I
Ministry of Environment and Natural Beautification (hard copies)
10th Floor Warrens Tower II
Warrens
St. Michael, BB12001
Barbados, W. I.
Environmental Protection Department (hard copies)
LV Harcourt Lewis Building
Dalkeith
St. Michael
Government Information Service (hard copies)
Old Town Hall, Cheapside, Barbados

--- Table 1 on Page 142 ---
Link to disclosure |  |  | Stakeholder Analysis and Action Plan:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b
z/Ea77c5IweVtCimz5s2ipuUwBcr_yDT2ax4bhvQuA7xjHew
Gender Analysis and Action Plan:
https://cccccbze-
my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/weblink_caribbeanclimate_b | 
 |  |  | z/EWC50lyMbcREizItzf8tMJcBtnhRkQpD5u5W5nAADycrSA?e=I | 
Other link(s) |  |  | v Qaj9
N/A | 
 | The Stakeholder Analysis and Action Plan and Gender Analysis
RDeismcalorskus re in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
 |  |  | and Action Plan can be accessed via the links above. | 
Date
Place |  |  | Friday, September 16, 2022
CCCCC HQ (hard copies),
3rd Floor, David L. McKoy Business Center
Bliss Parade, P.O. Box 563
Belmopan, Belize, Central America
Barbados Water Authority (website and hard copies)
Pine Commercial Estate
The Pine, St. Michael
Barbados
Office of the Prime Minister (hard copies)
Government Headquarters
Bay Street
St. Michael
Barbados, W.I.
Ministry of Transport, Works and Water Resources (hard copies)
Pine East/West Boulevard
The Pine
St. Michael
Barbados, W. I
Ministry of Environment and Natural Beautification (hard copies)
10th Floor Warrens Tower II
Warrens
St. Michael, BB12001
Barbados, W. I.
Environmental Protection Department (hard copies)
LV Harcourt Lewis Building
Dalkeith
St. Michael
Government Information Service (hard copies) | 

--- Table 2 on Page 142 ---


Stakeholder Analysis and Action Plan:
https://cccccbze-

--- Table 3 on Page 142 ---
z/Ea77c5IweVtCimz5s2ipuUwBc

Gender Analysis and Action Plan:
https://cccccbze-
my.sh

=== PAGE 143 ===
Public Library
Fairchild Street
Bridgetown
St. Michael
Barbados, W.I.
Date of Board meeting in wOhtihcher t hloec FaPti oisn sin itnecnldudeed tBor bideg ceotonwsind eSreewdage Treatment Plant,
Project Launch Event, Town Hall Meetings
Date of accredited entity’s
Monday, October 17, 2022
Board meeting
Date of GCF’s Board
Monday, October 17, 2022
Nmoteee:t Tinhgi s form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

--- Table 1 on Page 143 ---
 |  |  | Public Library
Fairchild Street
Bridgetown
St. Michael
Barbados, W.I. | 
 | Date of Board meeting in wOhtihcher t hloec FaPti oisn sin itnecnldudeed tBor bideg ceotonwsind eSreewdage Treatment Plant, |  |  | 
 |  |  | Project Launch Event, Town Hall Meetings | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of accredited entity’s |  | Monday, October 17, 2022 | 
 | Board meeting |  |  | 

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 144
Secretariat’s assessment of FP192
Proposal name: The R’s (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R-CReWS)
Accredited entity: Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC)
Country/(ies): Barbados
Project/programme size: Small
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
Strengths Points of caution
remarks:
The project design addresses the identified
financial, social, technological and regulatory
barriers for Barbados (a water-stressed Social acceptance towards wastewater and
country facing climate threats) in taking up reclaimed water as a resource could be a
wastewater treatment to diversify its water concern, so implementation of component 4
sources by moving from a linear model of would be key.
water use to a circular economy mode using
best practices and technologies.
The GCF grant contribution is the only way to
make the project viable (regardless of the
level of tariff) for a fiscally constrained
country with a debt to GDP ratio standing at
140% in 2020 and a poverty rate of 20%. In
addition, the dynamic economic and financial
model results are sensitive to the volume of
treated wastewater. The results indicated
that while the capital and operational costs
increase by 23%, from a business-as-usual
level to a growth-and-development phase,
the benefits increase by over 130%.
2.
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XIII, titled “List of proposed conditions and
recommendations”, respectively.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 Project background
3.
The impact of climate change is already evident in Barbados. Barbados is experiencing
3
“absolute water scarcity”. Approximately 310 m of water is available per person per year,

--- Table 1 on Page 144 ---
r | Strengths
emarks: |  |  | Points of caution | 
The project design addresses the identified
financial, social, technological and regulatory
barriers for Barbados (a water-stressed
country facing climate threats) in taking up
wastewater treatment to diversify its water
sources by moving from a linear model of |  |  | Social acceptance towards wastewater and
reclaimed water as a resource could be a
concern, so implementation of component 4
would be key. |  | 
water use to a circular economy mode using
best practices and technologies.
The GCF grant contribution is the only way to
make the project viable (regardless of the
level of tariff) for a fiscally constrained
country with a debt to GDP ratio standing at
140% in 2020 and a poverty rate of 20%. In
addition, the dynamic economic and financial
model results are sensitive to the volume of
treated wastewater. The results indicated
that while the capital and operational costs
increase by 23%, from a business-as-usual |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 145 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 145
placing Barbados among the most water scarce countries in the world, and this problem is likely
to become worse due to climate change. The country is facing a climate crisis:
(a)
Average temperatures are anticipated to rise by about 1.0 °C by 2041–2060 under the
SSP2-4.5 scenario, with daily minimum temperatures increasing by 1.3 °C;
(b)
The number of consecutive hot days (i.e. heatwaves) has already increased and is likely
to continue to do so; and
(c)
Annual m ean precipitation is projected to decrease by about 9%, extending the dry
season by two months and impacting rainwater run-off and groundwater recharge and
salinity.
4.
Water availability is essential to support the economy, and the climate crisis is already
impacting food security through the high cost of importation, a situation that is expected to be
increasingly aggravated. To counter this, Barbados is seeking to increase food production as an
adaptation measure. This ambition cannot be realized without making water accessible under
cu rrent and future water scarcity constraints.
5.
At present, large volumes of precious water resources are going to waste because of
disposal in the surrounding ocean after a single use. This linear model of water provision and
use must change. Investment in the collection and treatment of wastewater is necessary to
provide the basic infrastructure needed to move from a linear to a circular economy model
w here water can be reused for productive purposes.
6.
The circular economy maximizes the use of scarce resources and minimizes the
necessity to find and then dispose of additional resources. This can only happen if the basic
infrastructure is put in place to provide the foundation on which the circular economy can take
off. The proposed activities promote water security through engineering works (including
software use) and through the creation of an enabling environment. The proposed activities are
li kely to be an effective adaptive response to the risk.
7.
The goal of 3R-CReWS is to facilitate the enhancement of the health, well-being and
productivity of Barbadians by using carbon neutral and climate-resilient water and energy
management technologies and strategies that ensure water is protected, managed, recycled,
reused and conserved. This will be achieved through four outcomes and ten output-level results,
as described in more detail in section 2.2 of this assessment.
(a)
Outcomes 1 and 2 of this project are the largest, in terms of budget, as they are focused
on infrastructure works and transfer of technology:
(i)
Specifically, outcome 1 aims to achieve a climate-resilient pathway through the
upgrade of the Bridgetown sewage treatment plant (STP) to a tertiary treatment
system and the installation of decentralized wastewater treatment systems in
two Zone A locations in Barbados to harness reclaimed water, which will be used
for aquifer recharge and agricultural irrigation through the installation of a 9 km
pipeline. Climate resilience is also built into various phases of the water
reclamation process through the installation of decision support tools and
infrastructure; and
(ii)
Outcome 2, which spans the installation of renewable photovoltaic (PV) energy
systems, automated controls such as variable frequency drives, and a sludge
dewatering system, will contribute to achieving the low-emission pathway.
Currently 0.18 MW of solar power is in place at the Bridgetown STP. An
additional 0.8 MW is proposed, delivering 1MW of renewable energy;
(b)
Outcomes 3 and 4 are “soft” developmental measures that primarily aim to:

=== PAGE 146 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 146
(i)
Create an enabling environment for achieving a paradigm shift in the approaches
used for managing water resources (specifically wastewater), and thereby
enhancing water security in the face of a changing climate. Specifically, outcome
3 aims at enhancing capacities and capabilities, primarily at the Barbados Water
Authority (BWA), for managing, monitoring and operating the upgraded system;
providing customized training; updating the standard operating procedures and
the operational manual; and implementing a risk management framework;
(ii)
Outcome 4 further strengthens the enabling environment through a legislative
review, strengthening buy-in, ownership and leadership in the private sector for
the adoption of wastewater technologies and reuse options; having nation-wide
public education and awareness on the nexus between climate change and water
availability, wastewater as a resource, wastewater treatment and reuse options;
and promoting transparency and lessons emerging from this project; and
(iii)
Outcomes 1 and 4 are expected to yield co-benefits related to the social,
economic, adaptation, mitigation and environmental sectors.
8.
The project is expected to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 40 kilotonnes of
2
carbon dioxide equivalent (ktCO eq) over its 25-year lifespan, resulting from the PV installation.
It will directly benefit 136,220 residences (almost half of the total population of Barbados) by
pr ovision of accessible and reliable water.
9.
The total project cost is around USD 50 million with a request to GCF to finance USD
39.4 million (78.8 per cent) in the form of grant. The remaining cost will be covered by BWA. It
is worth noting that the total envisaged capital investment in providing infrastructure for the
Bridgetown and South Coast System is USD 183 million in the short term, rising to USD 251
million in the medium term. At a national scale, the GCF contribution amounts to 22% in the
short term, falling to 16% in the medium term. The economic and efficiency analysis and
assessment found that the grant provided by GCF is the only case where the project is profitable
reg ardless of the value of the water reuse tariff.
10.
The environmental and social safeguards category of the project is Category B, and the
accredited entity (AE) has submitted relevant documentation (environmental and social
management framework) as part of the funding proposal package. Disclosure on the AE’s
website is also completed in accordance with the Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund.
Component 1: Wastewater reclamation and reuse (total cost: USD 38.54 million; GCF cost: USD
2.2 Component-by-component analysis
29.21 million)
11.
Component 1 involves installing centralized and decentralized cluster wastewater
1
collection and treatment systems to achieve tertiary water quality for multiple non-potable
water reuse applications that will increase water availability and the water sector’s resilience to
cli mate change. The key interventions are:
(a)
Installing conventional activated sludge biologica l treatment process;
(b)
Installing a run-off membrane filtration system;
(c)
Constructing a 9 km pipeline for irrigation and aquifer recharge;
(d)
Implementing a sewer monitoring programme (involving flow measurement and rain
gauging equipment);
1
There are three levels of water treatment: primary removes heavier solids; secondary degrades the remaining
biological contents in the water; and tertiary removes pathogens and results in potable (drinkable) water.

=== PAGE 147 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 147
(e)
Establishing an on-site laboratory;
(f)
Implementing the computerized real-time management system; and
(g)
Constructing two decentralized treatment facilities in Zone A – Belle Vue and Belle
Tenantry.
availability, management and use of tertiary-level
reclaimed water to improve the water sector’s resilience to climate change
12.
This component aims to enhance
. Upgrading the
Bridgetown STP to treat wastewater to a tertiary water quality standard, including the two on-
site decentralized treatment plants, will benefit the groundwater system by reducing the
extraction of groundwater and thus reducing aquifer saltwater intrusion; increasing availability
of groundwater during dry periods; and enhancing water security considering the projected
climate change impacts on water resources for the island. In addition, it will increase water
availability for agricultural/irrigation purposes and support irrigation developments in the
Codrington-Neils-Lears-Salters-Constant-Valley, which should also lead to improved food
sec urity. It will provide benefits to 155 farmers (60% males and 40% females).
13.
Regarding paradigm shift, this component offers scalability and replicability: it should
be seen as the first phase of a larger enterprise to extend and expand the use of treated
reclaimed wastewater for irrigation purposes on lands along the west coast of Barbados and up
to the parish of St Lucy (see Feasibility Study Report). Activities 1.2.1 and 1.2.2 would make it
feasible through the installation of reverse osmosis to ensure the appropriate water quality for
irrigation purposes and groundwater injections, and the pipeline and six aquifer recharge wells
for transferring the water for agricultural development and augmenting the groundwater
sys tem.
14.
Component 1 will upgrade and install wastewater treatment technologies that are
energy efficient (mitigation benefits), but it will also implement several decision support tools
to help with managing and maintaining the upgraded STP, particularly for hydrometeorological
hazards such as rainfall, including severe storms. These decision support tools will optimize the
preventative maintenance programme of the upgraded Bridgetown STP and protect data during
hazards. The decentralized package collection and treatment systems that will be constructed in
two communities located in Zone A will address severe water shortages for approximately 225
households, and is considered to be a “good demonstration” of strengthening the adaptive
capacities of individuals and businesses to climate risks associated with water availability
(adaptation benefits). The decentralized package treatment systems will provide enhanced
collection and treatment systems that will produce reclaimed water suitable for agricultural
irrigation and that will reduce the health risks associated with intense rainfall (compared with
the current wastewater systems being used). This output will also expand the number of
beneficiaries of this project in a cost-effective manner, because these communities are not
serviced by either of the two STPs currently in operation in Barbados and the cost of
distributing reclaimed water from the Bridgetown STP into the community is high.
Furthermore, these two sites will safeguard groundwater by eliminating the potential risk from
co ntamination associated with on-site wastewater disposal.
15.
In addition, implementing the sewer monitoring programme and the water quality
monitoring system by establishing on-site laboratory facilities will inform operations control
strategies that optimize operations and reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions and
inform decision-making and climate-resilient building. Finally, the proposal addresses a number
of Sustainable Development Goals (e.g. SDGs 2, 6 and 11).
16.
The total budget of this outcome is USD 39 million, which is principally applied to the
upgrades associated with treatment plant (67 per cent). The source of the funding is GCF in the
amount of USD 29.2 million (grant) and BWA in the amount of USD 9.8 million.

=== PAGE 148 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 148
Component 2: Renewable energy and energy efficiency in wastewater treatment (total cost: USD
3.26 million; GCF cost: USD 3.26 million)
17.
Component 2 focuses on enhancing the climate resiliency and carbon-neutrality of the
Bridgetown STP wastewater treatment system through the installation of renewable PV energy;
and energy conservation and improved efficiency measures through installing grid-tied PV,
installing automated controls and installing sludge dewatering technologies. The main outputs
of this component are improved emergency power and energy efficiency, and reduction in
em ission at the Bridgetown STP.
18.
The outcome of this component is achieving climate-resilient low carbon operations at
Br idgetown STP. This will be realized by:
(a)
Installing grid-tied PV renewable energy systems to offset increased power
consumption associated with the centralized treatment plant process upgrades using
category 3 hurricane-resistant solar panels. A 1 MW grid-tied PV system will be
2
delivered to offset the energy demand of the upgraded Bridgetown STP, which will
yield 2,063 MWh of clean solar power per year, leading to an estimated GHG emission
reduction of 1,635 tCO
2
eq per year (or 40,875 tCO
2
eq over 25 years);
(b)
Implementing automated controls and energy efficiency measures (including variable
frequency drives, and energy-efficient pumps and blowers) within the upgraded
centralized treatment processes to reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce GHG
emissions; and
(c)
By installing and implementing dewatering technology, biosolids will be captured and
removed from the treatment process early, hence reducing the energy required to
process the effluent. Further, this will enable BWA to reduce the water content of
biosolids resulting in a mitigation co-benefit; namely, reduced GHG emissions associated
with the trucking and disposal of sludge at a dedicated sludge spray zone. Installing the
dewatering technology would result in savings on energy costs and sludge
transportation and labour, and environmental benefits including the reduction in GHG
emissions and oil spills.
19.
A strategic plan is provided in the funding proposal to guide the replication of water
treatment facilities along the west coast. There is future potential for augmenting the potable
water supply by installing additional run-off treatment facilities along the west coast corridor,
which would intercept and collect brackish groundwater and treat it to potable water standards
to supplement drinking water resources. This would support the project objectives enhancing
the climate resiliency of the water sector.
20.
The total budget of this outcome is USD 3.3 million, which is principally applied to the
procurement and installation of the 1 MW PV system and the sludge dewatering technology (81
Component 3: Capabilities to operate, maintain, expand and monitor wastewater and related
per cent). The outcome will be funded by GCF.
renewable energy technologies (total cost: USD 1.63 million; GCF cost: USD 1.63 million)
21.
Component 3 focuses on enhancing options for scaling up wastewater reuse and
enhancing the capabilities of technical personnel at BWA (and other ministries, department and
agencies, as applicable) to promote sustainability and the enabling environment for wastewater
management through the development of standard operating procedures and an operations
2
The additional 0.8 MW of power will be financed by the Government of the Bahamas but is not counted as part of the
co-financing for this project; albeit that Government is currently in advanced negotiations to secure financing for this
additional 0.8 MW.

=== PAGE 149 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 149
manual, flow and water quality monitoring, and institutional human capacity development. In
sh ort:
(a)
Update the standard operating procedures and the operations manual;
(b)
Develop and implement a risk management framework at BWA; and
(c)
Investigate and develop a strategic plan for the installation of run-off treatment facilities
along the west coast.
22.
This component will improve the technical capabilities of water technical personnel to
operate, maintain and monitor, and implement climate change adaptation planning strategies
for wastewater management and related renewable energy technologies. It will improve the
knowledge of the BWA staff of the links between climate change and water availability and the
im pacts of climate change on infrastructure and operational measures to mitigate these impacts.
23.
This component will deliver training to approximately 400 individuals. In addition, it
will investigate and develop a strategic plan for the installation of water treatment facilities
along the west coast corridor for augmenting water supply and protecting the west coast
ecosystem (see para. 19 above). This would support the objectives of this project of enhancing
cli mate resiliency in the water sector.
24.
The outcome of this component is to have enhanced capacity and capability to support
the preventative maintenance and climate resiliency programmes and to ensure sustainability
aft er implementing this project.
25.
The total budget of this outcome is USD 1.63 million, which is principally applied to
training and capacity-building and knowledge transfer activities. The outcome will be financed
Component 4: Capacities (regulatory, governance, awareness), buy-in and ownership within the
using 100 per cent GCF proceeds.
private and public sectors improved for climate-resilient development planning for the water
sector (total cost: USD 1.66 million; GCF cost: USD 1.40 million)
26.
Component 4 focuses on enhancing the enabling environment for wastewater
management by advancing and educating the public and private sector on the importance of
wastewater reclamation and of addressing climate change issues affecting the water sector and
en abling policy and legislation. This component will achieve that through:
(a)
Undertaking a legislative review and providing a road map;
(b)
Developing a water and sanitation master plan;
(c)
Developing private sector engagement strategies;
(d)
Undertaking a review and providing recommendations on an incentive programme to
encourage conservation, recycling and reuse;
(e)
Expanding the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) for the adoption of
wastewater treatment technologies;
(f)
Re-educating key stakeholders and implementing public education and awareness
campaign; and
(g)
Developing a project web page and social media accounts to share progress on the
project.
27.
The outputs of this component are: (1) governance and planning frameworks
updated/developed to enable wastewater reuse; (2) a funding mechanism for the adoption of
water reuse applications/systems developed; and (3) implementation of a gender-sensitive
public education and awareness campaign implemented.

=== PAGE 150 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 150
28.
The key outcome is that an enabling environment is created for wastewater
technologies and use of reclaimed water. The enabling environment refers to the legislation,
organizational structures and competency and strategies that need to be put in place. Achieving
this outcome will significantly change the culture of the water sector in Barbados, building a
level of partnership and professionalism that is needed to continually innovate and adapt to
cli mate change, which in turn promotes sustainability for this project.
29.
This component is critical for supporting the replicability and scalability of the project
by providing mechanisms to encourage the adoption of wastewater treatment and reuse
applications by private individuals and businesses. The expansion and promotion RAFF to
provide resources for adopting decentralized on-site wastewater systems are key to addressing
inclusion and/or access to financial resources so that vulnerable groups are not prevented from
participating in climate change adaptation and/or mitigation actions. BWA, through the Water
Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados (WSRN S-Barbados) project is
establishing the RAFF, which will focus on the public sector. The RAFF aims to mobilize funds
for use in water sector adaptation and mitigation initiatives, including those identified as
priorities in Barbados’ Climate Change Adaptation Water Master Plan. Establishing the RAFF
was initially funded by the BWA and the Government of Barbados; however, 3R-CReWS
presents an opportunity to expand and promote the RAFF to support private sector engagement
in the wastewater sector (e.g. adopting technologies that support the delivery and utilization of
tertiary reclaimed water). It is important to note that no GCF proceeds will be paid to or made
av ailable under the RAFF.
30.
In addition, this component includes implementing a gender-sensitive public education
and awareness campaign, which will be promoting the business case for this project, thereby
securing more buy-in and acceptance of this project’s scope and intended results. For instance,
the nexus between climate change and water availability, wastewater as a resource, wastewater
treatment and reuse options, and so on will be the basis of some of the public education and
awareness topics that will be targeting a wide cross-section of beneficiaries using various
inf ormation dissemination methods.
31.
The total budget of this outcome is USD 1.66 million. The source of the funding is GCF in
the amount of USD 1.40 million and BWA/the Government of the Bahamas in the amount of USD
Project management and monitoring and evaluation (total cost: USD 2.53 million; GCF cost: USD
0.26 million.
2.06 million)
32.
The project management, including the monitoring and evaluation cost will be solely
covered by GCF.
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria
Scale: N/A
3. 1 Impact potential
33.
As a cross-cutting project, it is expected that the project will bring both adaptation and
mi tigation benefits, although with a focus on the former (over 90 per cent).
34. 2
The project is expected to avoid emissions of 40,875 tCO eq over the 25-year lifespan of
the 1 MW PV to be installed to offset the increased power consumption associated with the
upgrades of the Bridgetown STP. Additional GHG emission reductions may be also result from
using sludge and sludge dewatering technology, and energy-efficient pumps (with the detailed
contribution of those to be determined after the detailed design is set during implementation).

=== PAGE 151 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 151
35.
On the adaptation side, the project will directly benefit 136,220 people resulting from an
increase in the availability of climate-resilient sustainable, and indirectly benefit 141,601
persons, excluding the projected increase in tourists to the region.
Scale: N/A
3. 2 Paradigm shift potential
36.
The project will address the primary barriers to public and private investments in
wastewater treatment in Barbados, including high capital cost, lack of expertise, unfamiliarity
with technologies and associated risks, and the immature regulatory environment. It will create
a paradigm shift in the approaches to managing and diversifying water resources (specifically
wastewater) and thereby the project will promote water security in the face of climate change.
It serves as a demonstration for the nation’s future wastewater projects and private sector
participation and interest in the water sector, thereby scaling up the decentralized wastewater
collection and treatment. The model can also be expanded and replicated in the Caribbean
region where water systems are becoming more vulnerable to climate threats
Scale: N/A
3. 3 Sustainable development potential
37.
In addition to achieving increased climate resilience for the water sector of Barbados
and reducing GHG emissions by deploying renewable energy, the project brings about positive
social, economic, environmental and gender co-benefits and is aligned with 8 out of the 17
Su stainable Development Goals (2, 5, 6, 7, 9 11, 13, 17).
38.
The project will deliver environmental co-benefits through reducing the amount of
wastewater that will be discharged to rivers, thereby reducing water pollution and improving
the quality of soil for agriculture and other land-use activities. In terms of economics, providing
GCF grants will ease the fiscal constraints facing the country, create jobs through the project
construction and expansion of economic activities in the water consumption industry (e.g.
tourism and agriculture). It is expected to increase private sector interest and participation in
the adoption of wastewater technologies and the use of reclaimed water and other by-products
(e.g. nutrients and fertilizers). The gender-sensitive approach taken by this project will ensure
that concerns and challenges from women, children and marginalized groups are taken into
consideration throughout the project implementation. It will also result in increased
participation of women in the production and use of reclaimed water.
Scale: N/A
3. 4 Needs of the recipient
39.
This project is designed to address the specific financial, social, institutional and
technological barriers that have hindered the Government of Barbados so that it can transform
its wastewater sector by moving away from a linear water “use to waste” model to a circular
economy model of water use. In recognition of the projected effects of climate change on water
quality and availability, coupled with the growing population and economy, the country needs
to develop wastewater management practices, implement new technologies that are climate
resilient and low carbon, and identify new sources of water to recharge the underground
aq uifers for supply augmentation.
40.
Barbados currently has a high debt to GDP ratio that stood at 144 per cent at the 2020
year end and is expected increase due to the Government’s spending on the health sector to
combat the prolonged impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This indicates a very limited fiscal
capacity to borrow from the international capital market; therefore the GCF grant is much
needed to cover the capital costs for this project and its national programme, through parallel
finance.

=== PAGE 152 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 152
41.
In addition, wastewater treatment and reuse is a relatively new concept in the country,
so Barbados lacks trained staff, both in BWA and the private sector, with expertise in designing,
managing and maintaining wastewater systems. Necessary legislation on the use of wastewater
treatment systems and reclaimed water has not yet been approved by the Cabinet. The design of
the proposal reflects these identified barriers, and the project is much needed to create the
paradigm shift in the wastewater sector and thereby build the country’s resilience to climate
change.
Scale: N/A
3. 5 Country ownership
42.
The interventions proposed under this project are aligned with the country’s nationally
determined contribution and relevant national plans, including the 2021 Physical Development
plan, the Barbados Growth and Development Strategy 2013–2020, the National Climate Policy,
the Development of Tourism in Barbados and the national adaptation plan, all of which noted
the importance of improving climate resilience to water security through diversifying the
sources of water, which this project aims to achieve through investment in wastewater
tre atments and its use for agricultural and supply augmentation.
43.
The AE, the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) is a GCF direct access
entity and as such has been recognized as the focal point for climate change issues in the
Caribbean. It has a proven track record in the planning, management and implementation of
climate change adaptation and mitigation. The AE can further benefit from GCF’s dedication in
su pporting direct access entities through its direct access strategy.
44.
The proposal design is a result of collective efforts among stakeholders, including
government agencies (e.g. the Ministry of Transport, Works and Water Resources, the Ministry
of Environment and National Beautification, the Ministry of Tourism and International
Transport, and the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Investment), private sector agencies, non-
governmental organizations and affected communities. The project will continue to engage with
the wider stakeholders at the national and community level during the implementation and
make sure their needs and concerns are addressed. The national designated authority also
provided a letter of no objection and expressed its willingness to lead efforts for continued
political buy-in and support at the highest levels of government.
Scale: N/A
3. 6 Efficiency and effectiveness
45. 2
The mitigation cost is estimated at USD 98 per tonne CO which excludes the
undetermined quantity of GHG emissions avoided owing to the use of sludge to generate energy
and energy-efficient pumps in the wastewater treatment plant. This mitigation cost is on the
high side resulting from GCF being sole financer to cover the costs of mitigation activities, the
small scale of PV installation, and the intensive capital investment into upgrading of the
au tomated controls and energy efficiency measures.
46.
The results of the financial analysis with and without GCF scenarios (50:50 grant/high-
concessional loans; 100 per cent grant) show that GCF providing in full grant is the only case
where the project is profitable regardless of the considered water reuse tariff. The current tariff
3
level for irrigation/agricultural uses stands at USD 0.6/m so the project would have to double
the figure to make it viable without the GCF grant. However, with the level of poverty increasing
from 15.1 per cent in 2010 to almost 20 per cent in 2020, an increase in tariffs would affect the
level of economic activity by irrigation farmers with other effects on the local economy and food
im ports.
47.
GCF concessionality would deliver benefits for the following beneficiaries:

=== PAGE 153 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 153
increased and assured availability of water
reduction
(a)
Farmers, thraodudgihti onal water resources for irrigation, enabling
the expansion of irrigated agriculture for new entrants, and through in the
need to use
increased employ
t
m
o
e
su
n
p
t
port irrigation;
local businesses
(b)
Communities, through opportunities, and
supporting the farming sector;
(c)
General population through increased food availability and security;
(d)
Visitors to Barbados through the maintenance and improvement of the marine
environment and ecosystems through reduce
r
c
e
o
d
n
u
t
c
a
e
m
d
i
p
n
u
at
b
io
li
n
c
;
h ealth risks;
(e)
Visitors and the general population, through
(f)
The BWA, through improved training and capacity development and increased income
generation; and
increased economic activity
(g)
The Government of Barbados through .
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies
4. 1 EPrnovjeircto onvmerevnietwal and social safeguards
48.
. The project aims to contribute to the enhancement of the health,
well-being and productivity of Barbadians by using carbon neutral and climate-resilient water
and energy management technologies and strategies that ensure water is protected, managed,
recycled, reused and conserved. It involves upgrading the Bridgetown STP and installing cluster
wastewater collection and treatment to achieve a tertiary water quality. The project will also
install PV energy, energy conservation and efficiency equipment and renewable bioenergy at
the Bridgetown STP. In addition, it will provide institutional capacity-building by developing
standards for water quality monitoring and training of personnel. Expected environmental and
social co-benefits include reduced air and water pollution, and improved access to water for
irr igatio
E
n
n
a
v
n
ir
d
o
o
n
t
m
he
e
r
n
n
t
o
a
n
l
-
a
p
n
o
d
ta
s
b
o
l
c
e
i
u
a
s
l
e
r
s
i
.
s k category
49.
. The project falls under Category B of the GCF
environmental and social categorization system. The project is essentially an environmental
mitigation project and hence its environmental risks/impacts are mostly positive with only
moderate environmental and social risks. The inherent risks of using recycled wastewater for
aquifer recharge and irrigation have been greatly reduced by the adoption of several key design
features including, principally, the upgrading of wastewater treatment to achieve tertiary
quality wastewater, and further treatments such as subjecting reclaimed water to a reverse
osmosis process and the application of additional measures to control for alkalinity and
ha rdnes
S
s
a
p
fe
ri
g
o
u
r
a
t
r
o
d
r e
in
ch
st
a
r
r
u
g
m
e.
ent
50.
. The AE has undertaken an environmental and social impact
assessment (ESIA) and has prepared an environmental and social management plan (ESMP) for
the project. Detailed site-specific environmental and social assessments and management plans
will be prepared for various aspects of the project during the engineering design phases, namely
the installation of (a) pipelines; (b) PV systems; (c) decentralized wastewater treatment plants;
(d) reverse osmosis filtration systems; and (e) upgrading of the Bridgetown STP. A condition is
i 4 n .1 c .1 lu . dedC oinm tperlmia nschee ewt iftohr tthhee AGEC Fto e dnevliirvoenr manedn dtaislc alonsde sthoecisael s staufdeigeus.a rds (ESS) standards
ESS1 (Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and
impacts)
51.
. An ESIA was conducted on the basis of the general specifications from the project

=== PAGE 154 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 154
feasibility study. In general, since the designs and locations of the facilities have not yet been
specified, the impacts and risks, and the mitigation measures identified, are still mostly generic
and not site-specific. It is recommended that the detailed site-specific assessments that will be
prepared at the design phase discuss the presence of residents and establishments near and
around the project sites, their socioeconomic status, presence of any disadvantaged or
vulnerable groups (e.g. homeless people, informal settlers, itinerant vendors) and whether and
ho w the
E
y
S
w
S2
il l
(
b
L
e
a b
im
ou
pa
r
c
a
t
n
ed
d
b
w
y
o
o
r
r
k
b
in
en
g
e
c
f
o
it
n
f
d
ro
it
m
io
t
n
h
s
e
)
project.
52.
. ESS2 is relevant in the project because
workers will likely be hired during construction by contractors, while additional workers and
staff are likely to be hired by BWA during the operation of the upgraded sewerage system.
Based on the information provided by the AE, construction activities will create approximately
100–125 temporary jobs at peak including labourers and skilled personnel. The project
management is also expected to directly hire 10 people with qualifications and training in
sp ecific fields and 20 skilled personnel at the peak of the project.
53.
The ESIA has determined the occupational health and safety risks of the project to be
moderate for the construction phase and a detailed plan is presented in the ESMP. Safety
hazards associated with construction personnel are presented in the ESMP, along with the
proposed measures to be implemented by the contractor following national and international
standards. To ensure those measures are followed effectively by all people involved, a manual
outlining them will be distributed in an appropriate format and made accessible at the
workplace. This will also include measures that will be taken if the regulations are violated.
Moreover, the contractor will appoint a person/team who will be responsible for the
implementation of the health and safety measures. Strict implementation of the country’s labour
laws will address any potential violations of labour standards in the project. It is recommended
that the AE establish a process for assessing risks related to labour in supply chains and
mi tigate
E
t
S
h
S
e
3
m
( R
ac
e
c
s
o
o
r
u
d
r
in
ce
g l
e
y
f
.
f iciency and pollution control)
54.
. The project is expected to improve
efficiency in the use of water and energy resources, and ambient air and water quality. Water
use efficiency is increased by recovering and recycling wastewater for non-potable uses, while
energy efficiency is achieved through the installation of PV panels, automated control systems,
and a biodigester using sludge and food wastes. River and marine water pollution is expected to
decrease because direct discharges of raw sewage and treated wastewater to these water
bodies are intended to be reduced. The plume dispersion simulation indicates that under
3
normal discharge scenarios, which occur 90 per cent of the time, only approximately 900m per
day of reverse osmosis discharge is released at designated sea outfalls: the release will not
pr esent any significant faecal coliform and total suspended solids plumes in the sea.
55.
The project is also expected to improve groundwater quality because the expansion of
sewerage services displaces some of the pit latrines in critical zones, while direct use of
reclaimed water for irrigation reduces the need for underground water abstraction, and aquifer
recharge of tertiary water reduces intrusion of salt water and contaminated water into the
aquifer. Moreover, emissions of odorous compounds, which had been the subject of complaints
by communities around the Bridgetown STP are expected to be reduced with the
rehabilitation/improvement and proper maintenance of the facility’s odour-control systems.
The ESMP also provides a comprehensive environmental monitoring plan, which includes the
quality of influent and effluents of the STPs, groundwater quality, surface water quality and
am bient
E
a
S
i
S
r
4
q
(
u
C
a
o
li
m
ty.
m unity health, safety and security)
56.
. Communities near the project will be
exposed to construction-related safety hazards during the construction phase, including risks of
accidents and exposure to harmful substances. During the operations phase, they may also be
exposed to risks associated with possible infrastructure failure due to natural disasters or
industrial accidents resulting in catastrophic release of untreated wastewater. The ESIA

=== PAGE 155 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 155
includes the impact of construction on the safety and mobility as well as nuisance and health of
communities. These impacts, although likely to occur, have a magnitude of low to moderate,
which can be readily brought down to negligible to low levels with standard mitigation
measures. The ESIA considered the vulnerability of the system from natural disasters and the
provision of various measures, including structural resistance to earthquakes, alternative power
supply, alternative discharge routes, and stormwater drainage. The project design includes
features such as drainage improvements, the installation of back-up generator, and emergency
dis charge of wastewater, which minimizes the risk of catastrophic failure.
57.
The ESIA determines that the overall impact of the recharge on underground water
quality will be positive, given current contamination from pit latrines coupled with excessive
water abstraction. In case of malfunction/failure of the Bridgetown STP and decentralized
sewage treatment plants, raw wastewater will be discharged via the outfall through the
computerized real-time management system which, together with the monitoring programme
envisioned and made possible under Output 1.3, is a failsafe system to prevent low quality
wastewater from leaving the plant. The tertiary wastewater intended for irrigation will undergo
reverse osmosis treatment prior to conveyance into the fields. This process will remove total
dissolved solids and thus also harmful pathogens from the wastewater. The Ministry of Health
and the Ministry of Agriculture will also carry out crop and soil monitoring to identify any
po tential adverse accumulation over the medium to long term.
58.
The BWA is currently completing the groundwater models and carries out periodic
groundwater quality monitoring. These efforts will be enhanced with the establishment of the
laboratory. A vulnerability analysis of the aquifer was done in Burnside (2009) using the
DRASTIC method, which rated the island as having high to extremely high vulnerability. The
sys tem p
E
r
S
o
S
v
5
i d
(
e
L
s
a n
m
d
o n
a
i
c
t
q
o
u
ri
i
n
s
g
it
a
io
n
n
d
a
c
n
on
d
t
i
r
n
o
v
l
o
to
lu
m
n
i
t
n
a
i
r
m
y
i z
r
e
e s
t
e
h
t
e
t l
r
e
is
m
k
e
o
n
f
t
lo
)
ng-term deterioration.
59.
. Although the ESIA indicated
that the project will exclude activities that “would require involuntary physical and economic
displacement of people”, new structures will be built on lands outside of current plant
perimeters. These include the expansion of the sewerage service in the Bridgetown STP, the two
new decentralized sewage collection and treatment plant systems, the reclaimed water
pipelines, the injection and monitoring wells, and installation of solar PV power plants, among
others. Aside from these, the project could potentially require temporary facilities and
easements during construction that may entail lease or temporary possession of private lands.
Lastly, the establishment of project facilities may impose encumbrances to private lands in
terms of permanent restrictions of access and/or changes or restriction in land use. Given that
the project area is densely populated and may contain informal settlers, the project may involve
compulsory land acquisition/land use restriction, and/or displacement of dwellers/occupants.
The term sheet includes a request for a detailed survey of the ownership status and occupancy
profiles of the lands to be used or affected by the project and a resettlement action plan in case
acq uisit
E
io
S
n
S 6
o f
(
p
B
r
i
i
o
v
d
a
i
t
v
e
e
p
r
r
s
o
i
p
ty
e r
c
t
o
ie
n
s
s
o
e
r
r v
d
a
is
t
p
io
la
n
c e
a
m
nd
e n
s
t
u
o
s
f
t a
o
i
c
n
c
a
u
b
p
l
a
e
n
m
ts
a
c
n
an
a
n
ge
o
m
t b
e
e
n
a
t
v
o
o
f
i d
li
e
v
d
in
.
g natural
resources)
60.
. The project’s impacts on terrestrial biodiversity and natural habitat will be very
minimal. The physical activities are planned for areas mainly occupied by agriculture, pasture
and cities/urban areas. The current conditions of coral reefs around the project’s designated
outfalls have been assessed by the Barbados Coral Reef Monitoring Program as “poor” to “very
poor”. The natural ecology of Carlisle Bay is expected to improve as the pollution load is
red uced
G
.
CF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS7: Indigenous peoples.
61.
The AE notes that the
standard is not applicable to the project and represents that it has conducted due diligence in
accordance with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy.

=== PAGE 156 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 156
ESS8 (Cultural heritage)
62.
. According to the ESIA, construction works for the reclaimed
water pipeline (RWP) will take place within the limit of the UNESCO World Heritage
Conservation Area’s buffer and there is a listed building located close to the projected
construction sites, about 30 metres from the planned RWP alignment. Also, near the
construction zone, one Cultural Heritage Conservation Area has been identified that contains
buildings of special architectural and historical importance. However, the ESIA does not indicate
whether and how these buildings will be affected by the construction or the operation of the
RWP. Given that the routes of the pipelines are yet to be finalized, it is recommended that the AE
undertake due diligence on locations of final sites and alignments of facilities and their possible
im pacts
S
o
t
n
a k
c
e
u
h
lt
o
u
l
r
d
a
e
l
r
h e
e
r
n
it
g
a
a
g
g
e
e
s
m
tr
e
u
n
c
t
tu
a
r
n
e
d
s i
i
n
n f
p
o
r
r
o
m
je
a
ct
t i
a
o
r
n
e a
d
s
i s
a
c
s
l
p
o
a
s
r
u
t
r
o
e
f
.
the detailed design studies.
63.
The project underwent
stakeholder consultations during the preparation of the ESIA between December 2020 and
December 2021. The consultations consisted of meetings, workshops, presentations and
informal discussions involving members of Barbadian civil society, including non-governmental
organizations and community groups, institutional representatives in the water sector and the
general public. A stakeholder engagement plan was provided with the funding proposal. It
identifies the various stakeholders, their key interests in relation to the project, methods of
information dissemination and information expected to be provided. The plan will be updated
and adjusted throughout the project implementation period. It is recommended that the AE
disclose the detailed environmental and social assessments and management plans that will be
pr epare
G
d
r
a
i
s
e v
p
a
a
n
rt
c
o
e
f
r
t
e
h
d
e
r
d
e
e
s
t
s
a
m
ile
e
d
c
d
h
e
a
s
n
ig
is
n
m
p
.
hase of the project.
64.
The ESMP outlines the mechanisms for feedback and
adjustment. As described, the mechanism provides the means for stakeholders to air questions,
complaints, and compliments/suggestions about the project, by mail, email, fax, site or by other
means of communication during construction and operation phase. However, contact details
have not been provided in the documentation. The mechanism is linked with the site
inspections, monitoring and audits to confirm proper implementation of the ESMP, as well as
effectiveness of mitigation. The grievance redress mechanism is also described in the
stakeholder engagement plan. An external communication plan with an independent grievance
red ress
I
m
m
e
p
c
l
h
e
a
m
ni
e
s
n
m
t a
w
ti
i
o
ll
n
b e
a r
d
r
e
a
s
n
ig
g
n
e
e
m
d
e
a
n
n
t
d
s .
will include actors from each of the relevant groups.
65.
The ESMP provides detailed discussions of the
institutional arrangements for the implementation of the environmental and social management
measures, including the roles and responsibilities of the various authorities and offices, and an
analysis of the capacity-building needs for the implementation of the ESMP as well as the
res pons
S
ib
e
i
x
li
u
ti
a
e
l
s
e
f
x
o
p
r
l
r
o
e
i
p
ta
o
t
r
i
t
o
in
n
g
, s
a
e
n
x
d
u
r
a
e
l
v
a
ie
b
w
u
.
s e and sexual harassment safeguarding
66.
. The revised
GCF Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 requires safeguarding
from sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) in GCF-financed activities. The 3R-
CReWS ESIA highlights section 154 of the Barbados Law on sexual offences and further states
that in cases of SEAH the AE will consult and work with the relevant government ministry,
department or non-governmental organizations to ensure that the survivors are placed in a safe
location and protected from further victimization. As required and mentioned in the term sheet,
the AE is required to undertake or incorporate due diligence on SEAH as part of the
environmental and social due diligence of the proposed project. It is recommended that the AE
should conduct first level due diligence on SEAH to ensure that the activities proposed for GCF
financing adhere to the SEAH provisions of the GCF Revised Environmental and Social Policy.
4. 2 Gender policy
67.
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan (GAP) and therefore
complies with the requirements of the Updated Gender Policy of the GCF. The gender

=== PAGE 157 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 157
assessment was prepared using primary data collected from sources such as a stakeholder
su rvey and two key informant interviews and desk review of available secondary information.
68.
Barbados has ratified a number of international conventions. Among them are the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the
Beijing Platform for Action. At the regional level the Caribbean Community has a gender
equality strategy to assist member countries with full implementation of the Beijing declaration.
Barbados has a draft national gender policy that is yet to be approved. National laws for
fostering better gender equality include the Employment Act and the Employment Sexual
Harassment Act for preventing the discrimination of women in the workplace. A national
bureau of gender affairs has been established to monitor and evaluate the government’s gender
equality policies, plans and programmes, and to integrate gender in all national development
po licies and programmes to advance equity and equality.
69.
The gender assessment provided by the AE analyses gender issues at the BWA as the
entity responsible for delivering water and wastewater services in the country. It mostly
employs men, with few women in technical positions (in line with the national gender
imbalance in science, technology, engineering and mathematics sectors) or in leadership roles,
as reflected in their lower participation in decision-making spaces.
70.
Women are more likely to be affected by lack of wastewater treatment, reuse and poor
management than men due to their gender roles as caregivers and homemakers, which means
that they are dominant water users and have more direct contact with food and waste. In
addition, women are more likely to suffer from the effects of contaminated water. These issues
are compounded by the fact that there is a low percentage of Barbadians currently able to
access the BWA wastewater collection and treatment facilities, many of whom are low-incomes
households comprising women and vulnerable peoples. Furthermore, reduced water
availability owing in part to climate effects disproportionately affects women and increases
the ir unpaid domestic workloads.
71.
In the agricultural sector, women engage in farming activities on small subsistence plots
and farms to support their families, while men are mainly involved in cash crop production.
Women are faced with barriers in accessing finance for improving irrigation technologies due to
lac k of collateral.
72.
The GAP includes activities, performance indicators, sex-disaggregated targets,
timelines, responsibilities, and estimated costs for implementation. The GAP includes activities
that are mainly focused on participation of women and men in the project, namely: stakeholder
consultations involving women and women’s groups on the water and sanitation plan; inclusion
of gender considerations in the Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related legislation for
enhancing wastewater requirements and applications; training of BWA staff on gender
sensitivity; a public education and awareness campaign on the impact of climate change on
water resources; and an internship programme for women at BWA wastewater division in
collaboration with training institutions to improve their representation in technical positions. In
addition, access to project benefits is demonstrated through female and male-headed
households who will gain connection to decentralized wastewater treatment systems in Zone A
as part of the project.
73.
The project will have a social and gender specialist who will be responsible for
su pervising the implementation of the GAP as well as reporting on its progress.
74.
The AE is recommended to take into consideration the following issues and submit a
revised GAP. The GAP can be improved by including more activities that demonstrate access to
the project’s benefits by both women and men. For example, access to reclaimed wastewater by
women and men for irrigation purposes, and access to the RAFF for decentralized on-site
wastewater systems, including by businesses owned by women and female-headed households.
Measures that will be taken to reduce costs of connection and tariffs to reclaimed water,

=== PAGE 158 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 158
especially for female small scale subsistence farmers, and decentralized wastewater treatment
services for female-headed households given their limited resources to pay can also be included
in the GAP. Additionally, expected outcomes from participation and access to benefits from the
project can be included in the GAP, such as increased availability of water and wastewater
treatment services, and how stakeholder engagement will be used to address the reservations
that women and men may have regarding the use of wastewater for non-potable purposes as
well as barriers that impede payment for water and wastewater services. Targets in the GAP
will also need to be rationalized against baseline information . It is not clear whether the
baseline study undertaken for the project includes information on gender or how such
information was used to set the current targets in the GAP. s.
44.3.3.1. ROvisekrasl l programme assessment (medium risk)
75.
The total financing is USD 49,999,063 of which USD 39,390,913 is GCF grant financed.
Co-financing of USD 10,608,150 is a grant provided by BWA. Co-financing is at a ratio 1:0.27 and
2 4. 1 3. 2 p . er cAecnct roefd toitteadl feinnatnitcyi/negx. ecuting entity capability to execute the current programme
(low risk)
76.
CCCCC will act in its capacity as the AE, and also the executing entity (EE) with BWA as
the co-executing entity for some of the activities. We view positively that CCCCC has a track
record of working with BWA in Barbados in another GCF project currently under
implementation (FP060 Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados (WSRN S-
Barbados)); and that BWA is both EE and co-financier, given its strong implementing capability
i 4 n .3 . w 3. aterP arnodg rwaamstmewe-astpeer csiefcicto erx ienc Buatirobna droissk. s (medium risk)
77.
Capacity-building activities under components 3 and 4 represent 7 per cent of the total
GCF funding requested and may not result in realizing long-term benefits as expected, in
particular the benefit of creating an enabling environment as part of exit strategy and
sustainability beyond the project. Execution delays could occur as capacity-building activities
req uire buy-in from the private sector and local communities.
78.
Co-financing from BWA will be provided ultimately by the Government of Barbados
through the Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment (USD 10,608,150 in the form
of a grant) and may not be realized. The Government of Barbados (rated Caa1 stable by
Moody’s: unchanged since July 2019) is constrained by high debt levels and weak economic
growth. The COVID-19 pandemic has also weakened the Government’s balance sheet and
delayed its ambitious reform agenda. However, relatively high income levels and low exposure
to foreign-currency-denominated debt support creditworthiness. We derive comfort from the
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment, which has already sourced some of the
co-financing required to BWA; the Government’s recent debt restructuring has significantly
improved its fiscal position and we expect debt metrics to improve gradually over the next few
years as the economy opens up and the Government rebuilds its primary surplus; and existing
c 4. o 3 v .4 e . nanCtos minp tlhiea ntecrem r isshke (eht.i gh risk)

=== PAGE 159 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 159
79.
The beneficiary country, Barbados, is not subject to United Nations Security Council
restrictive measures. The AE has confirmed that project activities and its related counterparties
do not pose significant risks with respect to United Nations Security Council sanctions. The AE,
along with BWA (a state-owned company) will act as the EE. The AE has performed a
comprehensive capacity assessment on the BWA and the results did not include any major
issues in relation to an EE’s ability to carry out the planned activities. The AE has assessed that
money laundering, terrorist financing, prohibited practices and sanctions related risks are of
low probability and medium impact. Throughout the project – inclusive of procurement matters
– , the AE will apply its standard set of controls to manage all fiduciary risks. The GCF Office of
Risk Management and Compliance (ORMC) and the Compliance Team note that Barbados
continues to be listed by the Financial Action Task Force as a jurisdiction with strategic
deficiencies in its anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism regime.
Taking into consideration this high exposure, it is recommended that the AE embed enhanced
due diligence and controls in all project activities. ORMC/Compliance has conducted a review of
the project in accordance with relevant GCF Board approved policies and does not find any
material issue or deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information
for this funding proposal, the ORMC/Compliance Team have determined a risk rating of “high”
a
4.
n
3.
d
5 .
hasP nroo ojebcjet cvtiiaobni tloit yth aisn rde cqounescte pssrioocneeadliitnyg to the next steps for processing.
80.
With regards to component 2: Renewable energy and energy efficiency in wastewater
treatment, one of the intended outputs is about the adoption of energy efficiency and renewable
energy technologies. There are established business models in terms of adoption of energy
efficiency and renewable energy technologies and, once installed, these provide relatively
predictable and stable revenue streams. The use of GCF grants represents 8 per cent of total GCF
funding requested for component 2. The proposed concessionality level is justified on the
understanding that the project will create a circular economy, the enabling environment to be
more attractive for the private sector as part of exit strategy and sustainability beyond the
project, and treating water assets as a new asset class. As a result, the project will ultimately
generate adaptation benefits for the population of Barbados. In addition, financial analysis
r 4 e .3 s .6 u . lts sGhCoFw p tohrattf GolCiFo pcoronvciednintrga itni ofunl lr gisrkan (tl oisw th reis okn)l y case there the project is profitable.
81.
If approved, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in terms of
r
4
e
.3
s
.7
u
.
lt arReeac aonmdm sienngldea ptiroonp osal is not material.
8 2.
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.

=== PAGE 160 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 160
Summary risk assessment
Overall programme Medium
Accredited entity (AE)/executing
Low
entity (EE) capability
Project-specific execution Medium
GCF portfolio concentration Low
Compliance High
4. 4 Fiduciary
83.
CCCCC is the AE and the EE of the project. BWA will co-execute the project as the EE.
CCCC, as the AE, will administer the relevant GCF proceeds to be used for the financing of the
project and will guide implementation in accordance with its accreditation credentials as well as
guided by the terms of the funded activity agreement (FAA). In addition, CCCCC, as the EE, will
manage, procure and account for all activities associated with the GCF proceeds, as well as
monitor and report on the project activities to the GCF and the Government of Barbados,
through the office of the national designated authority, in accordance with the FAA and
acc reditation master agreement (AMA).
84.
BWA, as the co-EE, will provide technical support to CCCCC for the development of
terms of reference and the procurement of equipment, goods and service; and will be part of the
evaluation team and report to the CCCCC as guided by the terms set out in the Subsidiary
Agreement, the procurement guidelines of the CCCCC and/or those of the Government of
Ba rbados.
85.
The CCCCC project components will be executed by a project management office (PMO),
while those components under BWA will be executed under the management of the BWA PMO
through a dedicated project team. In addition, the project will be monitored by a project
ste ering committee comprising key stakeholders.
86.
Funding for the project will come from: (1) a grant from GCF; and (2) the BWA in the
form of a grant from the Government of Barbados through the Ministry of Finance, Economic
Affairs and Investment. CCCCC will not on-grant any monies to the BWA, nor will BWA on-grant
monies to the CCCCC. The CCCCC will procure all major goods and services for the project using
international best practices and the appropriate procurement method in accordance with the
procurement plan. The CCCCC, in accordance with its AMA, financial and accounting manual and
procurement guidelines, will procure goods, works and services for the realization of the project
ou tputs.
87.
Funding provided by the GCF will be kept in a separate project bank account. The
partners providing co-financing will manage their co-financing activities but will be obligated to
report to the CCCCC on the status of those activities. Those entities are not obligated to transfer
any monies to the CCCCC but must provide accounting evidence of transactions and
ex penditures towards their co-financing obligations.
88.
The project will be audited annually by an independent accounting firm, which is to be
selected using a competitive bidding process every five years.
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting

--- Table 1 on Page 160 ---
Summary risk assessment | 
 | 
Overall programme | Medium
Accredited entity (AE)/executing
entity (EE) capability | Low
Project-specific execution | Medium
GCF portfolio concentration | Low

=== PAGE 161 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 161
89.
As a cross-cutting project, 3R-CReWS aims to generate mitigation and adaptation results
targeting five GCF results areas. In terms of mitigation impact, the project is estimated to reduce
2
GHG emissions by 40,875 tCO eq over the lifespan of 25 years. Regarding adaptation impact,
the project will benefit 277,821 beneficiaries, the country's total population, out of which
136,220 are direct, and 141,601 are indirect. The ex-ante estimates are in accordance with the
GCF core indicator s and further details regarding calculation methodology has been submitted
in annex 22 of the funding proposal. Please find detailed assessment regarding monitoring and
ev aluation below:
(a)
The theory of change adequately explains how the results chain will cascade from the
goal statement of the project to the proposed activities and also identifies the linkages
between outputs, barriers and risks. Articulating the goal statement and outcomes helps
readers to understand the project intervention’s climate impact and ancillary benefits
(co-benefits);
(b)
The logical framework has been well designed in accordance with the GCF integrated
results management framework. The project is expected to realize the paradigm shift by
building the necessary infrastructure to scale wastewater treatment and use in the
intervention area, implementing a replicable solution for other Caribbean states and
achieving sustainability through knowledge generation and capacity-building focused
outputs;
(c)
The quantitative integrated results management framework indicators are identified
well, cover all the applicable GCF results areas, and include the necessary details about
monitoring instruments and baseline/mid-term/final target values. For the GCF results
are on enabling environment, all four core indicators are selected with a low and
medium baseline level. The project is expected to build a comprehensive enabling
environment for water security and other climate change projects at the national level;
(d)
The project has listed relevant project-specific indicators for project outcomes and
outputs to enable all-round monitoring of the project’s results. For co-benefit indicators
2
“Level of H S emissions” and “Number of odour complaints from communities
surr ounding of the Bridgetown STP and lift stations received per year”, the baseline and
target will be submitted at the end of the inception phase of the project implementation;
and
(e)
Annex 5 (implementation timetable) has been provided in a format allowing tracking of
implementation progress and milestones at the output and activity level. The
monitoring and evaluation plan provided in annex 11 is beneficial in understanding the
indicator-level breakdown of the monitoring budget.
4. 6 Legal assessment
90.
The AMA was signed with the AE on 25 May 2016 and it became effective on 23 January
2018. The Accredited Entity’s first term of accreditation is due to lapse on 22 January 2023, and
the re-accreditation of the Accredited Entity has not yet been approved by the Board. The GCF
can execute an FAA with an accredited entity that is (1) is under a valid Accreditation term and
(2) has an executed and effective AMA (including an amended and restated AMA) for
acc reditation terms following the initial term.
91.
The AE has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all
int ernal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.
92.
The proposed project will be implemented in Barbados. The GCF has signed a bilateral
agreement on privileges and immunities with Barbados.

=== PAGE 162 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 162
4. 7 List of proposed conditions (including legal)
93.
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is
ma de subject to the following conditions:
(a)
Signature of the FAA in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat within
3
180 days from the date of Board approval; and
(b)
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.
3
The GCF can only execute a funded activity agreement with an Accredited Entity that has an executed and effective
AMA (including an amended and restated AMA).

=== PAGE 163 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 163
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP192
Proposal name: The R's (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R-CReWS)
Accredited entity: Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC)
Country/(ies): Barbados
Project/programme size: Small
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
Scale: Medium to high
11.1.1.1. IAmdappatactti opno Itmenpaticat l
1.
Barbados is among the most densely populated and water-scarce countries in the world,
2
with a population density of 660 people per km and a water availability estimated at
3
approximately 305–310 m per person per year.
2.
The proposal argues that climate change would increase water stress through the
following impacts, expected for 2040–2060:
(a)
The mean annual daily maximum temperature would increase by about 1.0 °C and the
mean annual daily minimum temperature would increase by about 1.3 °C;
(b)
The number of heatwaves has already increased over the period 1991–2020 and is
expected to increase further with increasing temperatures; and
(c)
Annual mean precipitation would decrease by about 9 per cent, especially in the May–
July season, extending the dry season by two months.
3.
The decreasing amount and increasingly skewed pattern of precipitation and increasing
evapotranspiration due to higher temperatures will set the stage for increased drought, which
will further decrease underground recharge rates and increase salinization of aquifers, which
provide 95 per cent of the island’s potable water supply. The overall implication of the available
body of studies suggests that sustainable aquifer yields could decrease by around 50 per cent by
2050. This is troubling for Barbados as the level of groundwater abstraction is already between
85 and 100 per cent of the safe yield.
4.
The proposed project aims to enhance water-related climate resiliency through the
following main activities:
(a)
Upgrade of the existing Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) to achieve water
quality for reuse: conversion to Bardenpho configuration, and installation of tertiary
filters and a reverse osmosis unit;
(b)
Construction of a distribution system and injection wells, to allow for irrigation reuse
and aquifer recharge;
(c)
Installation of two pilot treatment plants;

=== PAGE 164 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 164
(d)
Installation of a 1 MW photovoltaic (PV) system in the BSTP to meet energy
requirements of the upgrade;
(e)
Implementation of energy efficiency measures and sludge dewatering at the BSTP; and
(f)
Provision of technical and institutional capacity-building and support including, among
other things: the operation and maintenance of the BSTP; a strategic plan to guide the
replication of water treatment facilities; a review of water-related legislation; the
development of a water and sanitation master plan and an action plan to engage the
private sector; the expansion and promotion of the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility
(RAFF) to provide resources for the adoption of decentralized on-site wastewater
systems; and a public education and awareness campaign.
5.
Direct beneficiaries are estimated at 136,000 people, which is roughly half the
population of the island. Indirect beneficiaries comprise the rest of the population, who would
benefit from the strengthened institutional capacity including, among other things, legislation
review, development of a water and sanitation master plan and an action plan to engage the
pr ivate sector, and a public education and awareness campaign.
6.
The BSTP is a conventional activated sludge system, with a design capacity of 9,000
3
m /day. There is no available data on current wastewater flow and quality. Hence, the proposal
estimated the flow based on water consumption, national average per capita consumption and
number of properties connected to the sewer in Bridgetown. Only 5 per cent of the properties in
Bridgetown are assumed to be connected to the sewer. According to this estimation, the plant
3
would be currently receiving an average dry weather flow of approximately 1,400 m /day. On
the other hand, the proposal states that “This [flow] is significantly lower than the flow
operations staff indicate is received by the plant, who indicated wastewater flows approach the
plant capacity at times”, and that the system also receives commercial sources of wastewater.
3 1
For these reasons, a nominal flow of 9,000 m /day was assumed to assess upgrading costs. In
the opinion of the independent TAP, uncertainty in plant influent characteristics (i.e. flow rate
pattern and concentrations of incoming pollutants) at the design stage is a major cause of plant
failure and inefficient design, with potentially severe implications during the operation and
maintenance of the facility.
In a meeting with the independent TAP, the proponent further clarified that subsequent to the
preparation of the baseline report, a water meter was installed to collect the daily flow data, and
th at samples have already been taken to characterize the raw influent, and are being analysed.
7.
In spite of the clear lack of knowledge on current average and peak flows, the upgrade of
the BSTP to a four-stage Bardenpho configuration was designed to increase the treatment
3 2
capacity to 15,000 m /day. The proposed upgrade includes two new aerobic reactors, two new
secondary clarifiers and two new tertiary filters.
1
Feasibility Report, pages 5 and 6.
2
Feasibility Report, page 32.

=== PAGE 165 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 165
8.
An assessment of wastewater flows and quality should have been carried out prior to
investment decision-making. The accredited entity indicates that “As there is no historical
wastewater quality analysis data available, the wastewater characteristics were estimated
based on typical North American wastewater characteristics”. The four-stage Bardenpho
process is a biological nitrogen removal (BNR) process. Extensive experience in BNR
wastewater treatment plants indicates that having adequate influent characterization is key for
successful design. BNR success depends to a large extent on the influent flow characteristics,
namely the ratios of readily biodegradable chemical oxygen demand and total Kjeldahl nitrogen.
Every municipality has a distinct wastewater characteristic and so sampling campaigns should
ha ve been made to make a proper influent characterization.
9.
Upgrades to Bardenpho with tertiary filters and reverse osmosis would be necessary for
achieving reuse standards. But the high uncertainty in future influent flows, and the very high
3
treatment capacity proposed (15,000 m /day) seems exaggerated based on the current
sit uation.
10.
In response to the independent TAP’s comments on plant capacity and sewer
connections, the proponent stated that “Efforts are being made to install equipment to
undertake measurements to determine what the inflow rates actually are…” and that 15,000
3
m /day is not the future capacity but the current “peak daily flow that the plant can cope with”.
However, the Feasibility Report clearly states that the current peak flow capacity of the BSTP is
3
36,000 m /day, and that the proposed modifications would “…increase the design capacity of
3 3 3
the system from existing 9,000 m /d to 15,000 m /d…”.
11.
The proponent also responded that “It is expected that over the medium-long term the
Government of Barbados and BWA [Barbados Water Authority] will realise significantly greater
sewer coverage in the Bridgetown area”, and that expanding the wastewater collection system
would entail connecting a maximum of 16,000 additional properties (approximately 41,000
people), with an estimated budget for the expansion of the collection system of USD 48 million.
It p rovided no details on how the expansion would be scheduled.
12.
The proponent also described other specifics related to the extension of the sewer
coverage: (a) there are areas that suffer from overflow of the septic tanks when the
groundwater level rises, and for this reason are already identified and prioritized for connecting
them to the sewerage system (750 households); and (b) there are two hotels planned for
construction that would be connected to the system. These would contribute an additional
3
600,000–800,000 US gal/day (2,300-3,000 m /day). The government would pay for the intra-
domiciliary connections, including all the works that need to be done inside the households. The
3
Feasibility Report, pages 8 and 32.

=== PAGE 166 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 166
independent TAP considers this an adequate means to increase people’s connectivity to the
sew er networks, thereby guaranteeing higher flow rates to the plant and less pollution.
13.
The funding proposal recognizes that potable water losses in the distribution network of
3
Barbados (lost to bursts and leakage) have been reported as approximately 20.0 Mm /year, or
roughly 38 per cent of production, and states that “Even removing all losses from the
distribution system, which is unrealistic, would not be sufficient to offset the projected impact
of climate change on aquifer yields”. However, the percentage of loss is still sufficiently high to
be taken into account as a priority for Barbados water management.
14.
Questioned by the independent TAP, the proponent clarified that 38 per cent is the total
non-revenue water (NRW) at the national level, and that it corresponds to: unbilled authorized
consumption – 3,195,820 m³ (6 per cent); unbilled unauthorized consumption – 639,164 m³ (1
per cent); meter errors – 1,597,910 m³ (3 per cent); and real losses – 14,548,218 m³ (28 per
cent). The proponent also included a brief description of recently completed, ongoing and
4
pla nned actions to reduce NRW, which include:
(a)
An ongoing BWA programme to install smart water meters to enable the identification
and correction of meter reading errors, expected to be operational by 2023;
(b)
The BWA and the Government of Barbados have been investing in a mains replacement
programme, with a total of 29.4 km of pipelines replaced in 2021;
(c)
“NRW equipment” was installed within the NRW Unit of the BWA, by the Water Supply
Upgrade Network Project (WATSNUP);
(d)
The Water Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project is replacing 16 km of pipeline, expecting
to finalize this work in 2024;
(e)
The Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability project is replacing 16 km of
pipelines;
(f)
The Production and District Metering Programme, funded by the Government of
Barbados, is installing metering and NRW software, complemented by the SMART Meter
Transformation project installing Automatic Infrastructure Metering, including smart
meters, software, analytics, reporting and connectivity to Management Information
Systems; and
(g)
Other planned projects include the Highway 7 Mains Replacement programme and the
Major Cities Programme, which includes replacement of mains and upgrading of the
distribution networks.
15.
The water distribution network is currently equipped with water meters at the user
level, which are being gradually replaced by smart water meters. Residential and commercial
tar iffs are based on increasing block tariffs, which penalize excess water use.
16.
The two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater collection and treatment
demonstration systems to be installed under activity 1.4.1 are not described in the proposal.
Questioned by the independent TAP, the proponent pointed out that this activity is fully funded
by the Government of Barbados and that it is currently under implementation, at the detailed
de sign stage, and submitted a schedule of institutional actions taken up to now.
17.
Given that the primary use of reclaimed water would be for agricultural purposes, and
that the reclaimed water would be used to recharge the aquifer only when the demand for
5
irrigation decreases, and that the estimated demand for reclaimed water for agricultural
6
irrigation is approximately ten times the volume that would be made available by this project,
4
The independent TAP Qs CC CCC Water Reuse BWA_CCCCC Responses 25_08_2022_Rev1, answer to question 4.
5
Funding proposal, page 63.
6
Funding proposal, page 57.

=== PAGE 167 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 167
it was not clear why the proposal included the construction of six injection wells. Questioned by
the independent TAP, the proponent clarified that the injection wells would be used during the
rainy season, when the water requirement for irrigation is at its minimum. Thus, in the
ind ependent TAP’s opinion, the construction of six injection wells makes sense.
18.
The project expects to achieve a greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction of 40,875
2 2
tCO e over 25 years, or 1,635 tCO e/year. This reduction comes from the installation of the PV
system. The project scenario used for calculations does not consider the emissions related to the
upgrade of the BSTP (additional reactors, secondary decanters, tertiary filters and reverse
osmosis), nor the emissions related to treatment of a higher wastewater flow rate (energy for
pumping, blowers, filtration, aquifer recharge system, irrigation distribution system, methane
emitted by additional sludge generated, etc.). No doubt the proposed PV system would reduce
energy requirements during the operation of the proposed upgrade, but the independent TAP
questions the GHG emission reductions claimed in this funding proposal.
Scale: High
11.2.2.1. PPoatreandtiiaglm fo rs khnifotw pleodtgeen atniadl learnin g
19.
Concerning knowledge and learning, activity 4.3 is focused on nationwide public
education and awareness, which would include school programmes, community consultations,
and workshops for key stakeholders such as farmers and the private sector. Knowledge
products include videos and documentary films, press releases of outputs of town hall meetings
within communities, case studies, digital flyers, posters, 40 “water Wednesdays” (8 per year), 20
newsletters (4 per year) and over 5,000 combined posts on social media accounts. The project
would also have a dedicated web page (activity 4.3.3) for reporting and sharing lessons learned
an d best practices.
20.
Project monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements are clearly described in the
f 1 u .2 n .2 d . ingC pornoptroisbaul.t ion to the creation of an enabling environment
21.
In order to enhance post-project sustainability, the project would include monitoring
systems and promote preventive maintenance through: (i) the development of a Computerized
Real-time Management System (CMMS) to establish a core electronic data collection, operation
and maintenance programme; (ii) the implementation of a sewer flow monitoring programme
to mitigate flow and load variations that could occur as a result of major storm events; and (iii)
the establishment of an on-site laboratory at the BSTP to generate influent and effluent water
qu ality data.
22.
The main revenue generation for the financial sustainability of the upgraded BSTP
would come from the Garbage and Sewage Collection Levy and the sale of the reclaimed treated
wastewater to farmers for irrigation. Other potential income would be the sale of dewatered
slu dge to be used as fertilizer.
23.
The private sector engagement in the adoption of wastewater management technologies
and use of reclaimed water and other by-products would promote the emergence of new
m 1.2 a .3 r . k etsC roenlatrteibdu toti othne t wo athstee wreagtuerla steocrtyo rf.r amework and policies
24.
Component 4 is mainly focused on providing support to improve the regulatory
framework and governance. Under this component, the project would carry out a legislative
review of the Planning and Development Act, the Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related

=== PAGE 168 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 168
legislation including the Planning and Development Regulations, the Physical Development
Plan, the Water Order Bill, the Guidelines and Protocols for Potable Water Storage and
Rainwater Harvesting, the Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan, the Guidelines and
Protocols for the Operation of Solid Waste Management Facilities, and the Integrated Blue
E
1.
c
2
o
.4
n
.
omSyc Paolalibciyl iFtyra amnedw roerpkl iacnadb iSltirtayt egic Action Plan for Barbados.
25.
To promote replication efforts, output 3.2 involves investigating and developing a
strategic plan for the installation of reverse osmosis water treatment facilities along the west
coast corridor, to collect brackish groundwater and treat it to potable water standards to
su pplement drinking water resources.
26.
The expansion and promotion of the RAFF would provide resources for the adoption of
decentralized on-site wastewater systems. The RAFF, currently being established by the BWA,
aims to mobilize funds for adaptation and mitigation initiatives in the water sector, including
tho se identified as a priority in the Climate Change Adaptation Water Master Plan of Barbados.
27.
As described in the funding proposal, the estimated demand for reclaimed water for
agricultural irrigation is approximately ten times the volume that would be made available by
thi s project, demonstrating the high potential for scalability and replicability of this project.
28.
Institutional and technical strengthening would also support replication and scalability.
29.
The independent TAP fully recognizes the urgency and importance of this funding
proposal for Barbados. However, it would like to express concern. regarding the business-as-
usual approach applied in the wastewater treatment process, not considering methane capture
and utilization as a renewable energy source or flaring at the site Therefore, the paradigm shift
criterion is assessed as medium.
Scale: High
11.3.3.1. SEnuvsitraoinnmaebnleta dl ceov-beelonpefmitse nt potential
30.
Environmental co-benefits include:
(a)
GHG emission reduction from reduced sludge transportation (which is not calculated in
the funding proposal and for this reason is considered as a co-benefit);
(b)
Improved environmental conditions, including reduced groundwater pollution, on the
land where the sludge is currently being sprayed, which is reportedly presenting
“clogging problems” (saturated land);
(c)
Reduced odour problems in the proximity of the BSTP from the enhanced sludge
management system;
(d)
Reduced groundwater contamination at the sites benefiting from decentralized
wastewater treatment systems; and
(e)
The improvement of the operation of the BSTP that would ensure higher effluent
quality, and the reduced discharge flow to the ocean, could potentially enhance water
1.3.2. qSoucailiatly c aot- tbheen ceofaitsst near the discharge point.
31.
The reduction in the consumption of irrigation water from natural sources would
increase water availability for domestic uses, thus potentially enhancing the health standard of
the population.

=== PAGE 169 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 169
1.3.3. Economic co-benefits
32.
The increased availability of water for irrigation and of treated sludge for use as soil
amendment has the potential to increase agricultural productivity, and consequently the income
of the people who depend on agriculture.
33.
It is estimated that the construction works included under this project at the BSTP and
the 9 km pipeline would create 100 temporary jobs and new opportunities for local business,
which could have positive impacts on local income. Consultancies related to baseline studies
an d strategic plans would also create additional jobs.
34.
The private sector engagement in the adoption of wastewater management technologies
and the use of reclaimed water and other by-products would generate green jobs and have
p 1. o 3. s 4 i . tiveG imenpdaecrts- soenn tshitei veeco dneovmeylo. pment impact
35.
Gender equality would be considered in the project activities as follows:
(a)
Stakeholder consultations throughout the lifetime of the project would aim to engage
women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings;
(b)
Community infrastructure improvements would include social and gender safeguards to
ensure the protection of women, children and the vulnerable;
(c)
Community engagement would ensure that the needs of both female- and male-headed
households are incorporated when installing decentralized wastewater treatment
systems;
(d)
All training activities would aim to achieve a 50/50 balance in the participation of men
and women;
(e)
The BWA staff would undergo a gender sensitivity training programme;
(f)
The update of the standard operating procedures (SOPs) and operational manual would
include gender and social inclusion considerations;
(g)
The legislative review would consider gender equality;
(h)
The water and sanitation master plan and the engagement strategy for the private
sector would promote women’s empowerment;
(i)
The management of the expanded RAFF would ensure that gender equality is promoted
as a requirement;
(j)
The public education and awareness campaign would be designed to be gender
sensitive; and
(k)
When possible, project results would be disaggregated by gender.
Scale: High
11.4.4.1. NVuelendersa obifl itthy eo fr tehcei pcoieunnttr y a nd vuln erable groups
36.
The proposal includes a climate historical data analysis, based on data for the period
1991–2020, from four weather stations located on the island, one of them having data on daily
observations (station of the Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology) (CIMH), and
the other three with only monthly averages.7
7
C1 Climate and Climate Change in Barbados, page 2.

=== PAGE 170 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 170
37.
The historical trend analysis, based on the CIMH data, was carried out using the
Cli mpact software, and arrived at the following conclusions:
(a)
The minimum daily temperature has increased during the last three decades, at a pace
of 0.19 °C per decade;
(b)
The maximum daily temperature has increased at a rate of 0.29 °C per decade;
(c)
There is no significant change in the number of small to medium precipitation events;
(d)
The total precipitation over consecutive days is increasing, especially during September
to November; and
(e)
There were no significant changes in monthly precipitation during the period 1991–
2020.
38.
Additionally, the evaluation includes a visual trend analysis of temperature and
pr ecipitation time series, which is evaluated in the following paragraphs.
39.
The temperature chart shows the increase in the lowest daily minimum temperature
and the monthly average of the daily minimum. However, the trend is not gradual throughout
the 30 years of historical data: it presents no visible trends for 1991–2010, and presents a
so mehow higher median for the period 2010–2020.
40.
The monthly maximum temperatures show an increase in peak temperatures for 2006–
2020 as compared to 1991–2005. However, rather than a trend, this is based on only three
hotter summers during the period 2006–2020. If those three events are disregarded, there is no
significant visual trend in maximum temperatures.
41.
The proposal argues that the incidence of dry periods is increasing, with the two most
severe dry periods (Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) < -2) occurring in 2017 and 2019–
2020. However, it can be seen that even though these two dry periods did occur in 2017 and
2019–2020, if one looks at the chart disregarding the last five years, a clear positive trend of the
SPI can be observed for the period 1991–2015. This suggests that even if there is a change in
precipitation, the SPI time series does not demonstrate a clear relationship between these
changes and anthropogenic climate change. These two severe dry periods can be regarded as
anecdotic.

=== PAGE 171 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 171
42.
There is a weak statistical signal of an increase in the incidence of days with heavy
8
rai nfall (>100 mm per day). However, this trend appears to be statistically insignificant.
43.
For climate projections, the climate rationale makes use of the model ensemble of phase
six of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6), and specifies which models where
used. However, the validation process for the applied models is not described in the proposal,
and thus it can be assumed that the models were not validated against historical data. In
response to the questioning of the independent TAP, the proponent presented an analysis of the
correlation between CIMH historical data and CMIP6 results for monthly and seasonal
precipitation, for the period 2015–2020. The chosen period is very short for validation
purposes. In addition, far from validating the results of the model ensemble, the charts show
poor correlations (high dispersion), and demonstrate that projections significantly
9
un derestimate monthly and seasonal rainfall.
44.
Also regarding projections, although the proposal states that historical data show that
the average daily maximum temperature has remained relatively constant during the period
1991–2020, the models predict that it would increase by approximately 1 °C in average for the
10
pe riod 2041–2060.
45.
The models also predict that average annual precipitation will decrease by 18 per cent
for the period 2041–2060. However, climate trends show that there have been no significant
changes in average precipitation during the period 1991–2020. This can be observed in the SPI
11
chart that includes past records (1991–2020) and future projections (2021–2060). This fact
rev eals the lack of validation of the models used to make forecasts.
46.
The following charts, taken from the submitted document “C1 Climate and climate
change in Barbados”, show the SPI index for 1991–2020 derived from monthly averaged daily
observations of precipitation from a weather station in Barbados (up) and the SPI index for
1991–2060 as projected by an ensemble of CMIP6 models with the SSP2-4.5 scenario (down).
The date axes are aligned to allow visual comparison. In the chart for 1991–2060 projected SPI,
the data in the period 1991–2013 is a hindcast; CMIP6 forecasts start in 2014. In this case, it can
8
C1 Climate and Climate Change in Barbados, figure 7.
9
The independent TAP Qs CCCCC Water Reuse BWA_CCC CC Responses 25_08_2022_Rev1.
10
C1 Climate and climate change in Barbados, figure 9.
11
C1 Climate and climate change in Barbados, figure 11.

=== PAGE 172 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 172
be seen that there is a poor correlation between the SPI based in observations and the SPI based
in CMIP6 results.
47.
Despite the funding proposal not having a clear data analysis (probably due to lack of
local information and funding to perform additional analyses), the water availability in
Barbados (estimated at approximately 305–310 m3 per person per year) makes Barbados a
highly stressed country from a hydrological standpoint. Water stress is likely to increase over
time due to climate change. Thus, the independent TAP considers that this is a climate-driven
f 1 u .4 n .2 d . ingE pcroonpoomsailc. and social development
48.
According to an Inter-American Development Bank survey, 17 per cent of the population
of Barbados is poor, and a further 11 per cent is considered vulnerable. The overall
un employment rate is estimated to be around 10 per cent.
49.
The significant decline in tourism due to the COVID-19 pandemic impacted the economy
as a whole, increasing the account deficit to 6.2 per cent, and contracting the real economy by
ap proximately 18 per cent during 2020 and 3 per cent in the first quarter of 2021.
50.
During 2020 and 2021, Barbados faced other two crises: the eruption of the volcano La
Soufrière in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in early 2021, which severely affected the
agricultural sector of Barbados, and the passage of Category 1 Hurricane Elsa, which caused
widespread housing stock damage and loss of key utilities such as power, Internet and water,
f 1 u .4 r .3 th . er Arebdsuecnincge tohfe a pltreordnuacttiivveit ys oouf rkceeys s oefc tfoinrsa.n cing
51.
Barbados’s public debt-to-GDP ratio increased consistently from 55 per cent in 2008 to
1 1. 4 4. 4 4. perN ceenedt b fyo rt hsetr eenndg othf e2n02in0g. institutions and implementation capacity
52.
The need for institutional and technical strengthening is recognized in the proposal and
address through a set of activities, which include providing training to all BWA staff concerning

=== PAGE 173 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 173
the operation of the upgraded BSTP, implementing decision support systems such as the CMMS,
a sewer monitoring programme, automated controls for improved energy efficiency, an on-site
laboratory, a risk management framework, updating the SOPs and operational manual, and
training to ensure there is institutional knowledge and understanding of the operational
pr ocedures.
53.
The project would also strengthen BWA’s partnerships with the private sector, civil
society and the general public through a private sector engagement strategy and action plan, a
public education and awareness programme, the expansion of the RAFF and a designated
project website.
Scale: High
11.5.5.1. CAloigunnmtreyn to wwitnhe nrasthioinpa l clim ate stra tegy an d polic ies
54.
The proposal is fully aligned with the 2021 Physical Development Plan and the Roofs to
Reefs Programme (R2RP), which provide the relevant framework for Barbados to achieve its
cli mate resilience goal and are, in turn, based on the Barbados National Climate Change Policy.
55.
The National Water Reuse Policy states that the traditional interpretation of the term
“water” must expand beyond conventional freshwater sources to include, among others,
rec laimed water and rainwater, as part of the total water resources.
56.
The installation of the PV systems is aligned with the National Energy Policy and
Im plementation Plan, which set the goal to achieve a fossil fuel-free economy by 2030.
57.
The funding proposal also presents a list of other relevant legislation and policies with
w 1.5 h .2 ic . h thCea ppraecsietyn to pf raocjcercet disi taeldig nenedti. ties or executing entities to deliver
58.
The project would be co-executed by the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre
(CCCCC) and the BWA, under the supervision of the national designated authority (NDA). The
acc redited entity is the CCCCC, a direct access entity.
59.
The CCCCC is a regional non-profit organization among member States of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), which provides climate change related policy advice and guidelines to
the CARICOM member States and to the United Kingdom Caribbean Overseas Territories, and it
is recognized by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the United
Nations Environment Programme as the focal point for climate change issues in the Caribbean,
an d by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research as a Centre of Excellence.
60.
The NDA would assist with the implementation of project activities and provide in-kind
support, in particular for those activities that require coordination among ministries and
e 1. n 5. g 3 a . gemEenngta wgeitmh eGnCtF w oint hr ecpivoirlt isnogc iaentdy voerrgiafincaiztiaotnio. ns and other relevant stakeholders
61.
The stakeholder engagement plan presents a list of key stakeholders consulted during
the inception phase, which include several government and private agencies and non-
go vernmental organizations.
62.
Key stakeholders to be engaged during the implementation phase include agricultural
associations and farmers, and the Association of Women in Agriculture.
Scale: Medium to high
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness

=== PAGE 174 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 174
1.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency
63.
The economic and financial analysis assumes a sale price for water for irrigation reuse
of USD 1.22/m3 (BBD 2.48/m3). There is no willingness-to-pay study regarding agricultural
use. The feasibility study for the Provision of Reclaimed Water for Irrigation in the South, states
that the current rate for irrigation water is USD 0.60/m3. The uncertainty on willingness-to-pay
co uld potentially reduce the long-term sustainability and economic efficiency of the project.
64.
The proponent further clarified that discussions were held with the agricultural
community through the Barbados Agricultural Society and by approaching individual and
commercial farmers. Some farmers are currently using reclaimed water and are paying the
commercial rate that is higher than the rate being considered by the project. Farmers are more
concerned with the consistency and quality of the supply than with the rate. Taking this into
consideration, the uncertainty on willingness-to-pay for reuse water for irrigation is eliminated
or, at least, considerably reduced.
65.
The estimation of operation and maintenance costs for the PV system at USD 10,000 per
year is based on literature review, being in the lower end of the range. This assumption is
applied for 29 consecutive years (2022–2050), which seems excessive considering that the
calculations do not include replacement costs. Although good quality solar panels can last up to
30 years, the inverters, which make up a significant part of the total capital cost, have a lifespan
of 10–15 years. This should have been taken into account in the operation and maintenance
c 1. o 6 s .2 t . s . Amount of co-financing
66.
Considering the activities expressly included in the funding proposal, the co-financing
ratio is quite low: ~0.2. GCF would be financing USD 39.4 million, out of a total of USD 50
million. However, when the ongoing investments for the South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant
and the expansion of the sewer collection systems, which are not expressly part of the funding
proposal, are taken into account, the total investment adds up to approximately USD 250
m
1.6
i
.
l
3
l
.
i on, Fainnda tnhcei aclo v-fiianbainlictiyn g ratio becomes significantly larger (~6.4).
67.
The capital expenditure, operational expenditure and revenues from the South Coast
Sewage Treatment Plant are included in the economic and financial analyses presented as annex
3a. However, the upgrade and expansion costs of the plant are not taken into account in the
funding proposal’s main document (i.e. not part of the present proposal), nor in the detailed
budget. An adequate cost–benefit analysis should have been carried out considering only the
co sts and revenues from the activities included in the funding proposal.
68.
Questioned by the independent TAP, the proponent answered that “…It was important
to demonstrate that the 3R-CReWS is nested in a much larger programme being implemented
by the Government of Barbados and the BWA. The 3R-CReWS, SCSTP and other development
phases are complementary as such ignoring the other development phases would not allow the
author to paint to full picture of why grant funding, which is 20% of total planned medium
investment, is being requested from the GCF. See Annex 28 for more information on the SCSTP.
It is important to note the Government of Barbados is taking a loan to complete the proposed
actions for the SCSTP. The grant, which is needed given the fiscal constraints of the country, is
being requested from the GCF is complementary to those loans being taken for other
development phases. Annex 3a covers the financial model for the programme but is dynamic
1
e
.
n
6.
o
4
u
.
gh Btoe satll powra tchtiec uesse r to switch off different development phases to observe the NPV…”.

=== PAGE 175 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 175
69.
The selection of the BSTP upgrade option was based on efficiency and effectiveness:
land area requirement, operator skill level requirement, technology adaptability, capital cost,
operating labour cost, energy requirement, process robustness, water quality achieved and
wa ter reuse applications.
70.
The selection of the construction site of the two small decentralized treatment plants
and sewage collection was based on the vulnerability of groundwater resources and on the
po tential to positively impact groundwater resources.
71.
The PV systems to be installed will withstand at least Category 3 hurricanes, thereby
promoting both climate change adaptation and mitigation benefits.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
3
72.
Water availability in Barbados (estimated at approximately 305–310 m per person per
year), makes Barbados a highly stressed country from a hydrological standpoint. Water stress is
likely to increase over time due to climate change. The proposed wastewater reuse project
represents a sustainable measure to adapt to climate change and its impact on water resources.
Also, being part of a larger initiative that includes another wastewater treatment facility, this
project represents a paradigm shift for Barbados. This initiative has the potential to be
rep licable in other Caribbean countries.
73.
Thus, the independent TAP endorses this funding proposal with the following
rec ommendations:
(a)
To continue and, if needed, increase the effort in characterizing the influent wastewater
(both flow rates and concentrations of pollutants), thereby reducing the risk of
inefficient design and plant failure;
(b)
To keep monitoring influent, effluent and operational conditions once the plant is
commissioned. This information will be very valuable for future upgrades;
(c)
To estimate the amount of emissions related to the proposed increase in wastewater
treatment, for example additional energy for blowers, pumping (within and outside the
sewage treatment plant), sludge treatment, etc.; methane emitted from increased
amounts of sludge; emissions of nitrous oxide inherent to the nitrification-
denitrification within the Bardenpho process; and to report these emissions and
compare them to GHG emission reductions claimed for the PV generation;
(d)
To monitor emissions of GHG in the upgraded sewage treatment plant;
(e)
To look for private sector parties interested in installation of methane capture and
cogeneration of energy within the facility (which would reduce GHG emissions both at
Scope 1 and Scope 2); and
(f)
To re-evaluate and make more realistic estimations of the operation and maintenance
costs for the PV system.

=== PAGE 176 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 176
Response from the accredited entity to the independent
Technical Advisory Panel's assessment (FP192)
Proposal name: The R's (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience
Wastewater Systems in Barbados (3R-CReWS)
Accredited entity: Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC)
Country/(ies): Barbados
Project/programme size: Small
Impact potential
The AE is thankful for the iTAPs overall rating of this criterion as medium to high for the impact
potential. Specifically on the adaptation impact, the AE also thanks the iTAP for its consideration
and recommendations that can be taken onboard immediately with the current Project’s design
during implementation. In addition, the AE also wishes to express thanks for the encouragement from
the iTAP to continue with the ongoing (through the co-executing entity, the BWA) implementation of
augmented influent characterization, which will be characterized more intensely, to inform the
detailed design of the proposed wastewater facility upgrades. These have been identified based on
the best available local and international technical knowledge and from regional experience to be
the four-stage Bardenpho configuration, understanding the limitations of the historical data. It is
encouraging that the iTAP views the Project design as a step in the right direction towards the
increased monitoring of the influent characteristics that will be incorporated to determine the final
detailed design of the proposed interventions. Through the iTAPs comments on characterization, this
recommendation is fully supported in the Project design and the AE is appreciative of the iTAPs
recognition of the clarifications provided.
The AE thanks the iTAP for the recognition of the positive potential impacts on Barbados’ water
security through the increased people’s connectivity to the sewer networks, thereby guaranteeing
higher flow rates to the plant and less pollution. The current NRW strategy being implemented by
the BWA is multifaceted and takes a multi-step approach towards the reduction of its NRW, and the
AE thanks the iTAP for the positive encouragement and recognition of the works completed by the
Government of Barbados through the BWA to reduce its NRW. With the Project design they are
various cross-sectoral issues that are to be addressed, which focus mainly on wastewater
management: sewer network; wastewater treatment onsite, off-site, and decentralised wastewater;
water re-use; water recycling, which are all analogous with the GCF’s water security sectoral
approaches.
The AE further thanks the iTAP for the recommendations provided through this process and
highlights the responses from the iTAP on the clarifications provided. The various Project
components are all interconnected to provide solutions to the impact of climate change on the
available potable water in Barbados. In addition, the AE thanks the iTAP for the support of the re-
use of the treated water for cross-sectoral use in agriculture. A critical element of the Project design
made provision for the potential uptake with the increase in demand for the reused water, thus
reducing the uptake (thus increasing the availability, of the already scarce potable water sources.
Paradigm shift potential

--- Table 1 on Page 176 ---
Impact potential
The AE is thankful for the iTAPs overall rating of this criterion as medium to high for the impact
potential. Specifically on the adaptation impact, the AE also thanks the iTAP for its consideration
and recommendations that can be taken onboard immediately with the current Project’s design
during implementation. In addition, the AE also wishes to express thanks for the encouragement from
the iTAP to continue with the ongoing (through the co-executing entity, the BWA) implementation of
augmented influent characterization, which will be characterized more intensely, to inform the
detailed design of the proposed wastewater facility upgrades. These have been identified based on
the best available local and international technical knowledge and from regional experience to be
the four-stage Bardenpho configuration, understanding the limitations of the historical data. It is
encouraging that the iTAP views the Project design as a step in the right direction towards the
increased monitoring of the influent characteristics that will be incorporated to determine the final
detailed design of the proposed interventions. Through the iTAPs comments on characterization, this
recommendation is fully supported in the Project design and the AE is appreciative of the iTAPs
recognition of the clarifications provided.
The AE thanks the iTAP for the recognition of the positive potential impacts on Barbados’ water
security through the increased people’s connectivity to the sewer networks, thereby guaranteeing
higher flow rates to the plant and less pollution. The current NRW strategy being implemented by
the BWA is multifaceted and takes a multi-step approach towards the reduction of its NRW, and the
AE thanks the iTAP for the positive encouragement and recognition of the works completed by the
Government of Barbados through the BWA to reduce its NRW. With the Project design they are
various cross-sectoral issues that are to be addressed, which focus mainly on wastewater
management: sewer network; wastewater treatment onsite, off-site, and decentralised wastewater;
water re-use; water recycling, which are all analogous with the GCF’s water security sectoral
approaches.
The AE further thanks the iTAP for the recommendations provided through this process and
highlights the responses from the iTAP on the clarifications provided. The various Project
components are all interconnected to provide solutions to the impact of climate change on the
available potable water in Barbados. In addition, the AE thanks the iTAP for the support of the re-
use of the treated water for cross-sectoral use in agriculture. A critical element of the Project design
made provision for the potential uptake with the increase in demand for the reused water, thus
reducing the uptake (thus increasing the availability, of the already scarce potable water sources.
Paradigm shift potential

=== PAGE 177 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 177
The AE thanks the iTAP for the overall rating of high for the Paradigm Shift Potential of the proposed
Project. The AE is also thankful for the comments received on the (a) Potential for knowledge and
learning criterion, which articulates the major aims of the criterion Project-wide and provides a
roadmap to the interconnections of the various Project sub-activities across the Components. From
the experience of the AE, the dissemination of lessons learnt through public consultation,
contribution and engagement has been vital to any successful paradigm shift campaign and this also
provides a direct interest to the general population, which assists with the public ease of
implementation as the various knowledge products are shared. Through the various mediums, such
as videos and documentary films, press releases of outputs of town hall meetings within communities,
case studies, digital flyers, posters, 40 “water Wednesdays” (8 per year) educational and current
news programme, 20 newsletters (4 per year) and over 5,000 combined posts on social media
accounts, serve as the various platforms to engage and to promote media literacy within the general
Populus.
With the Project considered holistically, the aims demonstrate, and carryout, the willingness of its
management to promote public accountability through public monitoring, which therefore
compliments the Project’s monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements. The AE also thanks
the iTAP for the recognition of the measures that the Project seek to put in place in an effort to assist
in the provision or capacity for transformational interventions to be developed to meet the paradigm
shift in water security, as identified in (b) Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment.
Moreover, as also identified in sub-criterion (c) Contribution to the regulatory framework and
policies, there is an emphasis on the preservation of existing water resources, “new” water supply
sources, both with a major focus to catalyse Barbados’ action on protection (implemented
mechanisms) from water related hazards and enhanced resilient water supply and sanitation
services. It is in this manner that the AE is thankful to the iTAP for the recognition of the vital
importance of Component 4 to address the water governance and management approach to assist in
the development of frameworks to promote new water initiatives and water infrastructure systems.
Taking into account the sub-criterion (d) Scalability and replicability, the AE recognizes that as a
Caribbean SIDS, Barbados can share its Project innovation and development pillars that can be
utilized in both the scaling-up and replication of this Project, both globally and regionally where
similar water scarcity conditions exist, based on the negative impacts of climate change. Thus, the
Project, promotes a national public RAFF to provide opportunities at the grassroots to SMSE to
become engaged. It is critical that the implementation and importance of this Project be considered
to be much more than a business-as-usual and thus with the various Project components for the
various monitoring of potential resources, the Project design allows for the capturing of any
additional resources, through resource recovery, to maximize on the renewable energy (chemical)
that can be utilized. Once more, the AE is thankful to the iTAP for their recognition of how the
proposed Project intends to catalyse its impact beyond a one-off project or programme investment.
Sustainable development potential
The AE thanks the iTAP for the overall rating of high for the Sustainable Development Potential of
the proposed Project. The Project considered the results area for the enhancement of water
conservation and water efficiency and water re-use – in alignment with the GCF investment criteria.
As the iTAP articulated in the (a) Environmental co-benefits, the GHG emissions reduction, reduced
groundwater pollution, reduced odours, reduced groundwater contamination and reduced discharge
flow to the ocean (reduced nutrient loading in the nearshore environment) were all considered. The
value-added environmental benefits and co-benefits could in the future also provide a preliminary
pathway towards the overall number of sustainable water-food-energy security nexus solutions that
can now be considered with the aforementioned-benefits. Moreover, with the (b) social co-benefit
being linked to potentially have a positive impact to enhance the health standard of the population.
Following these co-benefits, it is therefore worthy to also comment on the (c) Economic co-benefits
which were incorporated to provide opportunities through the increased availability of water for

--- Table 1 on Page 177 ---
The AE thanks the iTAP for the overall rating of high for the Paradigm Shift Potential of the proposed
Project. The AE is also thankful for the comments received on the (a) Potential for knowledge and
learning criterion, which articulates the major aims of the criterion Project-wide and provides a
roadmap to the interconnections of the various Project sub-activities across the Components. From
the experience of the AE, the dissemination of lessons learnt through public consultation,
contribution and engagement has been vital to any successful paradigm shift campaign and this also
provides a direct interest to the general population, which assists with the public ease of
implementation as the various knowledge products are shared. Through the various mediums, such
as videos and documentary films, press releases of outputs of town hall meetings within communities,
case studies, digital flyers, posters, 40 “water Wednesdays” (8 per year) educational and current
news programme, 20 newsletters (4 per year) and over 5,000 combined posts on social media
accounts, serve as the various platforms to engage and to promote media literacy within the general
Populus.
With the Project considered holistically, the aims demonstrate, and carryout, the willingness of its
management to promote public accountability through public monitoring, which therefore
compliments the Project’s monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements. The AE also thanks
the iTAP for the recognition of the measures that the Project seek to put in place in an effort to assist
in the provision or capacity for transformational interventions to be developed to meet the paradigm
shift in water security, as identified in (b) Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment.
Moreover, as also identified in sub-criterion (c) Contribution to the regulatory framework and
policies, there is an emphasis on the preservation of existing water resources, “new” water supply
sources, both with a major focus to catalyse Barbados’ action on protection (implemented
mechanisms) from water related hazards and enhanced resilient water supply and sanitation
services. It is in this manner that the AE is thankful to the iTAP for the recognition of the vital
importance of Component 4 to address the water governance and management approach to assist in
the development of frameworks to promote new water initiatives and water infrastructure systems.
Taking into account the sub-criterion (d) Scalability and replicability, the AE recognizes that as a
Caribbean SIDS, Barbados can share its Project innovation and development pillars that can be
utilized in both the scaling-up and replication of this Project, both globally and regionally where
similar water scarcity conditions exist, based on the negative impacts of climate change. Thus, the
Project, promotes a national public RAFF to provide opportunities at the grassroots to SMSE to
become engaged. It is critical that the implementation and importance of this Project be considered
to be much more than a business-as-usual and thus with the various Project components for the
various monitoring of potential resources, the Project design allows for the capturing of any
additional resources, through resource recovery, to maximize on the renewable energy (chemical)
that can be utilized. Once more, the AE is thankful to the iTAP for their recognition of how the
proposed Project intends to catalyse its impact beyond a one-off project or programme investment.
Sustainable development potential
The AE thanks the iTAP for the overall rating of high for the Sustainable Development Potential of
the proposed Project. The Project considered the results area for the enhancement of water
conservation and water efficiency and water re-use – in alignment with the GCF investment criteria.
As the iTAP articulated in the (a) Environmental co-benefits, the GHG emissions reduction, reduced
groundwater pollution, reduced odours, reduced groundwater contamination and reduced discharge
flow to the ocean (reduced nutrient loading in the nearshore environment) were all considered. The
value-added environmental benefits and co-benefits could in the future also provide a preliminary
pathway towards the overall number of sustainable water-food-energy security nexus solutions that
can now be considered with the aforementioned-benefits. Moreover, with the (b) social co-benefit
being linked to potentially have a positive impact to enhance the health standard of the population.
Following these co-benefits, it is therefore worthy to also comment on the (c) Economic co-benefits
which were incorporated to provide opportunities through the increased availability of water for

=== PAGE 178 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 178
irrigation and of treated sludge for use, as soil amendment has the potential to increase agricultural
productivity. The iTAP’s assessment provided a clear indication of the importance and relevance of
these interconnected activities of the Project and thus, their meaningful contribution and engagement
are both critical and necessary in the adoption of wastewater management technologies and the use
of reclaimed water and other by-products. Thus, aiming to generate green jobs and have positive
impacts on the local economy.
The AE has always considered the (d) Gender-sensitive development impact to be very vital,
especially with Projects that have a direct positive impact on the households, which in Barbados, are
mainly managed by the Females, especially with the raring of children. As such, there was a focused
approach in the design to engage women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings. In addition,
through the engagement of these groups, it is also important that the Project considered the GCF’s
social and gender safeguards (as standards) to ensure the protection of women, children and the
vulnerable in implementing gender-inclusive climate and disaster resilience capacity development
initiatives. The AE thanks the iTAP for the comments on the innovativeness of incorporating these
social and gender elements in the various aspects of the Project proposal that include Project specific
activities such as the standard operating procedures (SOPs) and operational manual, legislative
review, water and sanitation master plan and the engagement strategy for the private sector would
promote women’s empowerment, the expanded RAFF, public education, and awareness campaign,
inter alia.
Needs of the recipient
The AE is thankful for high rating given to this investment criterion and the recognition that
Barbados is a highly stressed country from a hydrological standpoint. Despite limited climate data
availability, the AE was able to demonstrate that this is a climate driven funding proposal. Further,
AE is grateful for acknowledgement given to how the project responds to needs related to economic
and social development, financing, institutional capacity.
Paragraph 35 indicated that if the three temperature records that breach 35 Degrees Celsius in the
summers between 2006-2020 are disregarded then there is no significant visual trend in maximum
temperatures. This is not entirely accurate as pre-2005 temperature rare surpassed 32.5 Degrees
Celsius; however, post 2005 there are several times 32.5 Degrees Celsius was surpassed.
The AE knowledge that there is limited climate data for building the climate rationale, which is
challenge faced by many Caribbean SIDs, not just Barbados; However, the AE welcome the GCF’s
board approval/endorsement at B.33 of “Steps to enhance the climate rationale of GCF-supported

--- Table 1 on Page 178 ---
irrigation and of treated sludge for use, as soil amendment has the potential to increase agricultural
productivity. The iTAP’s assessment provided a clear indication of the importance and relevance of
these interconnected activities of the Project and thus, their meaningful contribution and engagement
are both critical and necessary in the adoption of wastewater management technologies and the use
of reclaimed water and other by-products. Thus, aiming to generate green jobs and have positive
impacts on the local economy.
The AE has always considered the (d) Gender-sensitive development impact to be very vital,
especially with Projects that have a direct positive impact on the households, which in Barbados, are
mainly managed by the Females, especially with the raring of children. As such, there was a focused
approach in the design to engage women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings. In addition,
through the engagement of these groups, it is also important that the Project considered the GCF’s
social and gender safeguards (as standards) to ensure the protection of women, children and the
vulnerable in implementing gender-inclusive climate and disaster resilience capacity development
initiatives. The AE thanks the iTAP for the comments on the innovativeness of incorporating these
social and gender elements in the various aspects of the Project proposal that include Project specific
activities such as the standard operating procedures (SOPs) and operational manual, legislative
review, water and sanitation master plan and the engagement strategy for the private sector would
promote women’s empowerment, the expanded RAFF, public education, and awareness campaign,
inter alia.
Needs of the recipient
The AE is thankful for high rating given to this investment criterion and the recognition that
Barbados is a highly stressed country from a hydrological standpoint. Despite limited climate data
availability, the AE was able to demonstrate that this is a climate driven funding proposal. Further,
AE is grateful for acknowledgement given to how the project responds to needs related to economic
and social development, financing, institutional capacity.
Paragraph 35 indicated that if the three temperature records that breach 35 Degrees Celsius in the
summers between 2006-2020 are disregarded then there is no significant visual trend in maximum
temperatures. This is not entirely accurate as pre-2005 temperature rare surpassed 32.5 Degrees
Celsius; however, post 2005 there are several times 32.5 Degrees Celsius was surpassed.
The AE knowledge that there is limited climate data for building the climate rationale, which is
challenge faced by many Caribbean SIDs, not just Barbados; However, the AE welcome the GCF’s
board approval/endorsement at B.33 of “Steps to enhance the climate rationale of GCF-supported

=== PAGE 179 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.02
Page 179
activities [GCF/B.33/05]”, which is intended to strengthen the ability of AEs to clearly demonstrate
the climate impact potential of proposals.
Country ownership
The AE thanks the iTAP for its review and comments on this criterion.
This project is country owned and led and is an integral part of the Government of Barbados Roofs
to Reefs Programme (R2RP).
Stakeholder dialogue is corner stone of the development of the proposal and will continue to be for
the rest of project cycle. In fact, stakeholders at the community level are critical for the realisation
of the intended paradigm shift and hence the success of this project.
Efficiency and effectiveness
The AE thanks the iTAP for its review and comments on this criterion.
Nested in the US$2 billion R2RP, this project is one aspect of a larger programme to transform
wastewater into a resource. The US$50 million for 3R-CReWS represents 20% of the already
identified medium term investments in the wastewater sector of Barbados. This investment has the
potential to impact 136,220 (66,748 males and 69,472 females) direct beneficiaries and 141,601
(69,384 males and 72,217 females) indirect beneficiaries and mitigation co-benefit of 40,875 tCO2e
avoided over 25 years.
The Government of Barbados must be applauded for being a shining example and playing her part
to combat climate change for people, even when faced with COVID-19 recovery efforts and high
public debt-to-GDP ratio that has increased consistently from 55 per cent in 2008 to 144 per cent by
the end of 2020.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
The AE thanks the iTAP of its endorsement and recommendations.
The recommendations presented are being taken on board and some will form part of the Standard
Operating Procedures (SOP) for the upgrade Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP). Further,
the AE will develop an Operations Manual which, among others, shall include: (i) methods for
characterizing the influent wastewater (both flow rates and concentrations of pollutants); (ii)
definitions of the monitoring influent, effluent and operational conditions; (iii) methods to estimate
the amount of emissions related to the proposed increase in wastewater treatment and how it will be
conducted; and (iv) a framework and method to monitor emissions of GHG in the upgraded sewage
treatment plant.
Further, efforts are on the way to assess the feasibility for implementing a waste to energy
technologies (centralised and/or decentralised).
As note by the iTAP, this initiative has the potential to be replicated in other Caribbean countries.
AE [CCCCC]as mandated by the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) heads of government intends
to continue to coordinate the region’s response to climate change, which includes developing and
implement transformative and impactful projects and programmes for addressing climate change.

--- Table 1 on Page 179 ---
activities [GCF/B.33/05]”, which is intended to strengthen the ability of AEs to clearly demonstrate
the climate impact potential of proposals.
Country ownership
The AE thanks the iTAP for its review and comments on this criterion.
This project is country owned and led and is an integral part of the Government of Barbados Roofs
to Reefs Programme (R2RP).
Stakeholder dialogue is corner stone of the development of the proposal and will continue to be for
the rest of project cycle. In fact, stakeholders at the community level are critical for the realisation
of the intended paradigm shift and hence the success of this project.
Efficiency and effectiveness
The AE thanks the iTAP for its review and comments on this criterion.
Nested in the US$2 billion R2RP, this project is one aspect of a larger programme to transform
wastewater into a resource. The US$50 million for 3R-CReWS represents 20% of the already
identified medium term investments in the wastewater sector of Barbados. This investment has the
potential to impact 136,220 (66,748 males and 69,472 females) direct beneficiaries and 141,601
(69,384 males and 72,217 females) indirect beneficiaries and mitigation co-benefit of 40,875 tCO2e
avoided over 25 years.
The Government of Barbados must be applauded for being a shining example and playing her part
to combat climate change for people, even when faced with COVID-19 recovery efforts and high
public debt-to-GDP ratio that has increased consistently from 55 per cent in 2008 to 144 per cent by
the end of 2020.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
The AE thanks the iTAP of its endorsement and recommendations.
The recommendations presented are being taken on board and some will form part of the Standard
Operating Procedures (SOP) for the upgrade Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP). Further,
the AE will develop an Operations Manual which, among others, shall include: (i) methods for
characterizing the influent wastewater (both flow rates and concentrations of pollutants); (ii)
definitions of the monitoring influent, effluent and operational conditions; (iii) methods to estimate
the amount of emissions related to the proposed increase in wastewater treatment and how it will be
conducted; and (iv) a framework and method to monitor emissions of GHG in the upgraded sewage
treatment plant.
Further, efforts are on the way to assess the feasibility for implementing a waste to energy
technologies (centralised and/or decentralised).
As note by the iTAP, this initiative has the potential to be replicated in other Caribbean countries.
AE [CCCCC]as mandated by the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) heads of government intends
to continue to coordinate the region’s response to climate change, which includes developing and
implement transformative and impactful projects and programmes for addressing climate change.

=== PAGE 180 ===
Gender documentation for FP192

=== PAGE 181 ===
Copyright © 2022 by Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre
Published by Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre, Belmopan, Belize
Digital Edition (September 2022)
Printed Edition (September 2022)
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) and may be downloaded and shared as long as the Centre
is credited. No use of this publication may be made for resale or for any other commercial
purpose whatsoever. The Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) would
appreciate a copy of any publication that uses this report as a source. The views and
interpretations in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the CCCCC, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre, Ring Road, P.O. Box 563, Belmopan, Belize
Visit our website at http://www.caribbeanclimate.bz
ISBN-13 978-976-8317-16-2 (paperback)
ISBN-13 978-976-8317-17-9 (pdf)

=== PAGE 182 ===
Document Revision History
Re Rev Description Author Reviewer Approver Rev Date
v
A Issued as a Draft Mar. 7, 2021
Dr. Virginia Albert Nick St- Stuart Torr
Poyotte Georges
0 Issued as Final Sept. 20. 2021
Dr. Virginia Albert Nick St- Stuart Torr
Poyotte Georges
1 Issued as a Oct. 18, 2021
Revised Final Dr. Virginia Albert Nick St- Stuart Torr
Poyotte Georges
This Document was further revised following its October 18th, 2021 Submission to the
CCCCC in August 2022, by Elishah St. Luce. The August 2022 revision was done to
reflect changes made to the Project Proposal following October 2021. This revision builds
on existing body of work presented in October 2021 and where necessary, augmented
information is presented following further research conducted for the purpose of this
revision.
Rev No. Rev Description Author Revision Date
2 Issued as Draft Final Elishah St. Luce Aug 19th, 2022
August 19, 2022|
Page iv

--- Table 1 on Page 182 ---
Re
v | Rev Description | Author | Reviewer | Approver | Rev Date
A | Issued as a Draft | Dr. Virginia Albert
Poyotte | Nick St-
Georges | Stuart Torr | Mar. 7, 2021
0 | Issued as Final | Dr. Virginia Albert
Poyotte | Nick St-
Georges | Stuart Torr | Sept. 20. 2021
1 | Issued as a
Revised Final | Dr. Virginia Albert
Poyotte | Nick St-
Georges | Stuart Torr | Oct. 18, 2021
 |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 182 ---
Rev No. | Rev Description | Author | Revision Date
2 | Issued as Draft Final | Elishah St. Luce | Aug 19th, 2022

=== PAGE 183 ===
Contents
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS .............................................................................................. 7
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................... 10
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................................... 15
2.1 Objectives and Associated Outcomes ................................................................................. 15
2.2 Project Background ............................................................................................................... 16
2.3 Methodology ...................................................................................................................... 18
GENDER ANALYSIS ........................................................................................................................ 22
2.4 Legislative, Regulatory and Institutional Frameworks ........................................... 22
2.4.1 International Framework ....................................................................................... 22
2.4.2 Regional Framework .............................................................................................. 27
2.4.3 National Framework ............................................................................................... 29
3.1 Contextual Analysis ......................................................................................................... 38
3.2 Stakeholder Mapping .................................................................................................... 51
3.2.1 Internal Stakeholders ............................................................................................. 51
3.2.2 External Stakeholders ............................................................................................ 52
3.2.3 Stakeholder Feedback .................................................................................................. 53
FINDINGS......................................................................................................................................... 60
4.1 Gender Context ................................................................................................................. 60
4.2 Gender Roles ....................................................................................................................... 62
4.3 Resources .............................................................................................................................. 64
4.4 Decision Making ................................................................................................................. 66
4.5 Beneficiaries ......................................................................................................................... 67
MAINSTREAMING GENDER INTO THE PROJECT CYCLE ......................................................... 69
5.1 Project Initiation Stage ..................................................................................................... 69
5.2 Implementation Stage ................................................................................................... 69
5.3 Monitoring and Evaluation Stage ............................................................................. 82
5.4 Project Accountability Stage ...................................................................................... 82
5.5 Project Closure Stage ..................................................................................................... 82
5.6 Project Organizational Structure ............................................................................... 82
5.7 Project Plans, Budgets, Reports .................................................................................. 83
5.8 Project Data Management ......................................................................................... 83
5.9 Building Gender Sensitivity Capacity ...................................................................... 84
CLOSURE .......................................................................................................................................... 85
REFERENCES ..................................................................................................................................... 86
Aug. 19, 2022 | Page v

=== PAGE 184 ===
A ppendix 1 - Results of Stakeholder Surveys and Interviews .......................................................... 88
Appendix 2 -Interview with Mrs. Shelley Parris, Senior Engineer, BWA (Feb 19, 2021) .. 90
Appendix 3 - 3R-CReWS Project Gender Risk Matrix ................................................................. 91
Appendix 4 - Gender Action Plan ............................................................................................ 93
Aug. 19, 2022 | Page vi

=== PAGE 185 ===
AC RONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Acronym/Abbreviation Definition
BCRWSP Barbados Climate Resilience Wastewater Systems Project
BGIS Barbados Government Information Service
BSTP Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant
BWA Barbados Water Authority
BPfA Beijing Platform for Action
CARICOM Caribbean Community
CARIWN Caribbean Water Institute
CBD Convention on Biological Diversity
CCCCC Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre
CDB Caribbean Development Bank
CEDAW Convention on the elimination of all forms of Discrimination
against Women
CERMES Centre for Resource Management and Environment Studies
CGA Country Gender Assessment
CRF Caribbean Resilience Facility
CRWSP Climate-Resilient Water Safety Planning
DPR Direct Potable Reuse
DRM Disaster Response Management
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction
ECLAC Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
EPD Environmental Protection Department
ESIA Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
GAF Gender Analysis Framework
GAP Gender Action Plan
Aug 19, 2022| Page vii

--- Table 1 on Page 185 ---
 | 
Acronym/Abbreviation | Definition

=== PAGE 186 ===
Acronym/Abbreviation Definition
GCF Green Climate Fund
GEF Global Environmental Fund
GEF-CReW Global Environment Facility Caribbean Regional
Fund for Wastewater Management
GEI Gender Equality Indicators
GFDRR Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
GHG Green House Gases
GOB Government of Barbados
GWP Global Water Partnership
GW21 Global Water 21
IDB International Development Bank
IGDS Institute of Gender Development Studies
ILO International Labour Organization
IPR Indirect Potable Reuse
IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature
KII Key Informant Interview
LWPG Lima Work Programme on Gender
LGBTQIA Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer and/or
Questioning, Intersex, and Asexual and/or Ally
MCO Multi-Country Office
MHH Men Headed Households
MOU Memorandum of Understanding
NGO Non-Government Organizations
PSC Project Steering Committee
SAMOA SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SIA Social Impact Assessment
Aug 19, 2021 | Page viii

--- Table 1 on Page 186 ---
 | 
Acronym/Abbreviation | Definition

=== PAGE 187 ===
SGBV Sexual and Gender Based Violence
SIDS Small Island Developing States
TOR Terms of Reference
UN United Nations
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environmental Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UN-MCO United Nations Managed Care Organization
UN-WMCO United Nations Women Multiple Country Office
UN-SDG United Nations Sustainable Development Goal
UWI University of the West Indies
UWI-IGDS University of the West Indies- Institute of Gender and Development
Studies
WHH
Women Headed Household
UNEP
United Nations Environmental Programme
3R-CReWS Reduce, Reuse and Recycle for Climate Resilience
Wastewater Systems in Barbados
Aug 19, 2022 | Page ix

=== PAGE 188 ===
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The objectives of this report are to provide an assessment of the potential gender sensitivity
issues associated with this Project and to provide the GOB with information that would
influence the adoption of policies necessary to ensure men, women and LGBTQIA persons
have equal opportunity to participate in the process of wastewater system development in
Barbados. The issue of gender equality continues to be high on the development agenda
in Barbados because gender indicators show that although more women attain higher
levels of education there are still more women than men in the lower socio-economic
bracket. Barbados has achieved significant human development gains, and while there have
been advancements to achieve gender equality, there are still areas of pervasive inequality.
The introduction covers objectives and associated outcomes of the project and provides
a background which examines the international, regional, national and wastewater sector
frameworks.
Next the report clarifies issues of gender and gender analysis, by focusing on targeted areas
of investigation with relevance for the conceptualized 3R-CReWs Project. In undertaking
this analysis, components of the Gender Analysis Process Model were used to conduct the
gender equality assessment of the project. The model comprises of four main parts, namely
Gender Screening, Gender-Related Data Collection, Gender Impact Assessment and
Mainstreaming Gender in the Project Cycle in conformity with the GCF standards.
Barbados has made recognizable Human Development gains and has made improvements in
legislation that promote gender equality. However, societally, and institutionally, there remain
recognized inequities. Linked to those, is the unequal power relationships that are often
detrimental to the promotion and protection of women and girls.
Mapping of the internal stakeholders revealed that out of the ten-member BWA Board;
seventy percent of directors are men and thirty percent are women. This indicates the
Board decisions relating to project policy, oversight, and approval of project plans,
budgets and reports are influenced more by men. At the BWA, more men are employed in
technical and engineering fields. Conversely more women are employed in clerical
professions. This is reflective of wider underrepresentation of women in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields across Barbados. Given the
technical nature of the wastewater project, it is likely to attract more men than women.
There is however, a need to address the gender gap that exist within the BWA, at the level
of the Board of Directors, and the professional and technical support staff of the Authority:
There is also a need to address the gender gap that exist with aspects related to more men
than women are involved in the technical work of the Wastewater Sector Infrastructure
and Services while more women serve in administrative capacities. Of note is that KII at
the BWA revealed that there are no discriminatory policies in terms of recruitment and
pay. A Labour union equally represents the needs of male and female employees. The
10

=== PAGE 189 ===
BWA’s gender sensitivity training for its employees in collaboration with the
UWI-IDGS is ongoing and is seen as a way to reduce the existing high percentage gender
imbalance among employees. Training however, should be made mandatory for certain
categories of staff, including Project staff. The project also, therefore proposes as a low
hanging fruit, a STEM Internship programme over its five years of implementation at the
BWA. The Project also proposes a gender balanced Project Streeting Committee, PSC, to
the extent possible, and the representation of the Bureau of Gender Affairs on the PSC.
Mapping of the external stakeholders also revealed that there is also a 60 % gender gap
among the 30 parliamentarians, a 14% gender gap among the 21 senators, and a 60 %
gender gap among the 30 Cabinet Ministers. Consequently, decisions taken at levels of the
political directorate, the Cabinet of Ministers, and the BWA Board are influenced by more
men.
This report includes primary data collected from sources such as a stakeholder survey and
two key informant interviews as well as secondary data collection. Brief abbreviated
details of the findings follow. Stakeholder responses to a survey on climate change and
wastewater collection and treatment indicated that generally, there are many issues where
both men and women share similar views on wastewater collection and treatment among
the stakeholders in Barbados. There are, however, instances where the views of men and
women differ especially when it comes to discharging untreated wastewater to the ground.
Men appear to differ from women on willingness to pay for wastewater improvement, in
the sense that men are seemingly more concerned with paying for wastewater
improvement. Women typically need more water during their daily activities and might
be willing to pay more to satisfy their needs. Note, a limited “Willingness to Pay” survey
was conducted but the survey was cancelled early, due to unfavourable conditions in the
country. Limited trends were examined from this data and analysed in this report.
Importantly is that Barbados experiences a feminization of poverty where more female
headed households are represented in poverty brackets than male headed households.
Therefore, despite the results from limited stakeholder survey which are not statistically
significant, the ability of women to pay for services given socio-economic challenges
needs to be actively considered in project incentivisation activities as well as in
rearticulating the RAFF.
As indicated in a case study on Understanding Unequal Relations of Gender in the
Caribbean (Bobb, 2019), on average men spend longer hours a week doing paid work away
from the home while women spend longer hours doing unpaid domestic work including
cooking, gardening, collecting, and storing water for domestic use, caring for children and
the elderly and the animals. Even when women spend the same number of hours a week
doing paid work away from the home, they still are expected to do most of the unpaid
domestic work. Stakeholder consultative processes must reflect the challenges on time
availability of women to respond to surveys and to participate in community level
meetings. Therefore, unique approaches including door to door consultations or carefully
11

=== PAGE 190 ===
selected time periods for stakeholder consultations need to be reflective of the realities of
women in Project communities.
Women in the Eastern Caribbean region experience various gaps in access to health, social
protection, vocational and technical education, productive resources, economic
opportunities, as well as voice and agency. All of these are associated with their increased
vulnerability to disasters and climate change hazards. The Analysis found that climate
change impacts on the wastewater sector is a serious challenge to the national development
in Barbados, including wastewater management. Drought conditions resulting from
climate change are likely to cause serious water shortages in Barbados which can pose
great challenges for women who are primarily care givers for children and the elderly.
Women are very vulnerable in the time of disaster. However, any effort to reduce exposure
to climate risk to allow speedy recovery by victims.
The review of non-potable water re-use found that while reclaimed water is not safe for
drinking it can be recycled for specific non-potable purposes such as irrigation and aquifer
recharge. The review also found that as the 15th most water-stressed country in the world
per-capita, Barbados should consider the reuse of treated stormwater, greywater, and
blackwater to tackle the issue of water scarcity. The review of Wastewater and its
Relevance to Sanitation and the Environment (Witmer, 2017), found that women are more
likely to be affected by lack of wastewater treatment, reuse, and poor management than
men because they are more in direct contact with food, faeces, childcare, and healthcare.
They are also more likely to suffer from the amount of pesticide, hormones, medication,
chemicals in wastewater. This is compounded by the fact that that there is a low percentage
of Barbadians currently able to access the BWA wastewater collection and treatment
facilities. The Legislative and Policy environment is also absent to ensure smooth
implementation of the wastewater priorities. Some of the legal instruments governing the
wastewater sector are outdated because they have been in force for over forty years and as
such, they are likely to limit the ability of the BWA to upgrade its systems and operations
and do not necessarily reflect the needs of the wastewater sector and the Project at this
time. The project will provide the avenue to update the legislation, including gender
responsive considerations.
The GOB has the option of offering subsidies to deprived and vulnerable groups of the
society, or promoting collaboration between public and private sectors to develop
innovative models for the generation of water. Vulnerable groups, which comprise of a
larger percentage of women and girls, stand to benefit from opportunities that facilitate
stronger and less biased decision-making.
This Gender Analysis highlights an absence of mechanisms to foster greater stakeholder
participation in the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of project
activities. Additionally, the BWA appears to lack the human resource, institutional and
information capacity to identify the causes of vulnerability among women and other
vulnerable groups. The project presents an opportunity to strengthen legislative framework
12

=== PAGE 191 ===
by also including gender equality considerations. The Project through the support of a
Social and Gender Specialist will improve stakeholder engagement and provide a resource
to ensure that the Project actively responds to the needs of vulnerable populations,
including female headed households that are in poverty. Given the importance of water
for human survival, the BWA should make every effort to secure adequate financial and
human resources to provide high quality service in the water and wastewater sector.
The prevalence of SGBV, though higher in intimate partner relationships is still present
outside of the private sphere in Barbados. Therefore, projects such as these need to promote
a preventative approach to SGBV. This includes zero tolerance policy to SGBV and code of
conduct for project staff and all personnel interacting with communities. In addition, there has
to be gender responsive complaint mechanisms that prove useful for victims of SGBV, if
prevention is not achieved. Gender sensitivity training is useful as well in addressing SGBV
risks, however these are to be made mandatory to staff based on roles and functions.
A review of this project’s Stakeholder Engagement Report found that it is necessary to
educate the public on the positive social impacts of the project. The project’s public education
campaign, like the stakeholder engagement efforts needs to be carefully crafted to effectively
target diverse groups on their relevant needs, reservations and expectations. Project personnel
should equally ensure gender issues are mainstreamed in the implementation process.
Therefore, Stakeholder Engagement processes carried out by the BWA needs to be gender
responsive to adequately respond to the needs of male and female headed households.
Successful implementation of this project will be beneficial to several stakeholders, if not the
entire country, including the marine environment. The Project across all its components
directly targets 136,220 people in Barbados. 66,748 (49%) men and 69,472 (51%) women are
likely to be direct beneficiaries from the implementation. There is a similar distribution of
indirect beneficiaries Important to note is that this is reflective of the overall population of
Barbados. A more detailed look at the beneficiaries of the Project by component suggest that
the project is taking an approach of leave no one behind. More specifically, the Project
positions that 100% of female headed households and 100% of male headed householder
respectively will benefit from the installation of decentralized wastewater management
systems in zone A. It is however important to identify the recurrent costs that are associated
with the connection to improved wastewater services. Given that women do most of the
domestic and care work, they are greater users of water and wastewater services and will
benefit more than men from the implementation of the project at the Domestic Level. On the
other hand, a key beneficiary group identified by the Project are farmers, in this regard, there
will be higher numbers of male beneficiaries than male beneficiaries given the share
participation of male to female in Agriculture. The Tariff structure for water used for irrigation
should be mindful of the often-small scale agricultural activities performed by women vis-a
vis larger commercialised agriculture often headed by men. Important is that the project works
along with the Association of Women in Agriculture to ensure that women farmers (including
for subsistence) receive information on the benefits of using reclaimed water and are also
13

=== PAGE 192 ===
supported with access to reclaimed water services and other by-products of treated waste
water.
This report summarises the gender issues and draws specific conclusions pertaining to key
areas of the project activities that require attention. It also recommends actions required to
align with Project goals and stakeholder gendered needs of the project. Finally, the actions
recommend to mainstream gender within all stages of the project cycle have been used to
compile a Gender Action Plan. A copy of the GAP is listed as Appendix 3 to this report.
14

=== PAGE 193 ===
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this report is to present a Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan
related to this “Consultancy to Produce Requisite Design, Studies and Plans for the
Green Climate Fund Proposal” that examines “The 3R’s (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle)
for Climate Resilience Wastewater Systems in Barbados” (the “Project”). This
introduction commences with a brief background and justification to the gender
analysis and action plan.
Conceptually, gender refers to the economic, social, political, and cultural
attributes and opportunities associated with not only the female and male gender but
also LGBTQIA persons. The social definitions of what it means to be a woman, or a
man vary among cultures and has changed over time. Gender is a socio-cultural
expression of characteristics and roles that are associated with certain groups of people
with reference to their sex and sexuality.
“Gender analysis/assessment refers to methods used to understand
relationships between men and women, their access to resources, their activities,
and the constraints they face relative to each other. A comprehensive gender
analysis/assessment entails the examination of the different roles, rights, needs,
and opportunities of women and men, boys, and girls in a given project/program
context. It is a tool that helps to promote gender – relevant entry points, policies
and identify opportunities for enhancing gender equality in a particular
project/program. In the case of climate change projects/programs, a well-done
gender analysis/assessment helps to identify multiple causes of vulnerability,
including gender inequality. It also helps to identify and build on the diverse
knowledge and capacities within communities/households that can be used to
make them more resilient to climate related shocks and risks.”11
A gender analysis is a useful tool to identify points of intervention in a project cycle at
which existing or potential disparities in gender impacts can be compensated for or
eliminated. Gender analysis is a methodology that describes the existing gender relations
in a particular environment, ranging from within households, or firms, to a larger scale of
community, ethnic group, or nation. It involves collecting and analysing sex-disaggregated
data and other qualitative and quantitative information. The analysis involves the process
of organizing and interpreting, in a systematic way, information about gender relations to
make clear the importance of gender differences for achieving development objectives.
2.1 Objectives and Associated Outcomes
15

=== PAGE 194 ===
The main objectives of this report are to provide an assessment of the gender sensitivity
issues associated with this Project. Another objective is to provide the GOB with
information that would influence the adoption of policies necessary to ensure men,
women and vulnerable groups (including the poor, elderly, people with disabilities,
LGBTQIA people etc) have equal opportunity to participate in the process of wastewater
development in Barbados.
2.2 Project Background
The goal of 3R-CReWS project is to facilitate the enhancement of the health, wellbeing,
and productivity of Barbadians through the use of carbon neutral and climate resilient
water and energy management technologies and strategies that ensures water is protected,
managed, recycled, reused, and conserved.
The goal of 3R-CReWS is to facilitate the enhancement of the health, wellbeing, and
productivity of Barbadians through the use of carbon neutral and climate resilient water
and energy management technologies and strategies that ensures water is protected,
managed, recycled, reused, and conserved.
Wastewater management strategies using reclaimed water will be a critical component to
help mitigate impacts on groundwater levels, tightly linked to overall island water
resources. Tertiary treatment of wastewater will allow for the reuse of water for non-
potable sources, such as agriculture, landscaping, turf maintenance, and recharging the
aquifer. The Project proposes that secondary treated sludge can be used as fertilizer for
the agricultural community and activated sludge can be used in landscaping, turf
maintenance of lawns, reclamation, soil erosion, and dump covering.
To this end, the main objectives of the 3R-CReWS project are to:
1. increase knowledge of wastewater generation including sources of wastewater and
the quantity and quality impacts, as well as optimize treatment and minimize
energy consumption and associated GHG emissions;
2. build resilience into Barbados' wastewater management systems, which results in
increased water availability, production, distribution, and access thereby
improving the community’s resilience, health and wellbeing, and water and food
security;
3. produce a treated wastewater effluent quality so that it can be reused for
agricultural purposes, reducing stress on diminishing groundwater resources and
potable water supplies as a result of climate change;
4. enable the use of reclaimed water for aquifer recharge thereby reducing saline
intrusion and contamination of ground water resources while enhancing water
security, particularly during period of droughts for Barbados;
5. reduce GHG emissions, increase self-sufficiency, contribute to the electricity grid
16

=== PAGE 195 ===
and to contribute to the frequency stabilisation of the electricity grid and act as a
power shortfall filler;
6. Increase supply of locally sourced renewable energy that allows for a long-term
source of revenue through a feed-in tariffs program;
7. provide a standard and formal guidance to regulate and promote the use of
reclaimed water and obtain greater by-in from stakeholders;
8. build capacity and re-train BWA staff, including the private sector, to conduct
preventive maintenance and adopt climate-risk related adaptation strategies to
increase the wastewater collection and treatment systems resiliency; and
9. promote and demonstrate actions that encourage all water users in Barbados,
including tourists, to conserve and efficiently use water resources.
For achieving the goal and specific objectives, the 3R-CReWS is organised into four (4)
key components. These 4 components are synonymous with the following 4 outcomes of
the project:
1. Enhanced availability, management and use of tertiary level reclaimed water to
improve the water sector’s resilience to climate change
2. Climate resilient low carbon operations achieved at BSTP
3. Enhanced capacity and capability to support a preventative maintenance (PM) and
climate resiliency programme
4. An enabling environment is created for wastewater technologies and use of
reclaimed water
Collectively, these four outcomes/components are designed in consideration of the
barriers that exist in achieving a paradigm shift in the adoption of wastewater treatment
technologies and reuse options in Barbados. These barriers include the limited fiscal space
that exist in a highly indebted country, limited technical capacities in the public and
private sectors to fully maintain and advance the adoption of wastewater technologies,
limited knowledge and awareness about the usefulness of reclaimed water as a resource,
and the absence of comprehensively developed and mainstreamed policy and regulatory
frameworks that promote the adoption of wastewater treatment technologies and reuse
options, particularly at the household level.
This report assesses the gender equality challenges facing the GOB, that includes the
BWA, as it pursues the development and implementation of this Project. It also examines
gender sensitivity issues of a social, economic, political, and cultural nature that policy
analysts and policy makers should take into consideration when planning, preparing the
17

=== PAGE 196 ===
following phases of this Project, including the Detailed Design and implementing the
Construction of this Project. The report also describes the application of a gender
responsive approach, adopted by the GCF, to assess the processes and operations of
the Project. The GCF has a clear mandate to enhance a gender responsive approach
in its process and operations as it seeks to maximize the impact of its funding for
adaptation and mitigation in promoting environmental, social, economic development
co- benefits globally. The GCF also seeks to engage with in-country driven projects
that promote involvement of relevant stakeholders including vulnerable groups and
addressing gender aspects.
Climate change is posing challenges to the national development of Barbados, and
therefore should be considered in all aspects of development, especially in water and
wastewater management. However, when considering climate change initiatives, it is
imperative that we focus on issues that will result in projects being more sustainable and
equitable. Gender equality plays a role in resolving problems associated with climate
change in our societies. Governments and agencies should ensure that they effectively
engage the broader society, including all genders, in discussions and decisions that
affect them and ensure that their policies are aligned to the UN SDGs, especially SDG-
5 that relates to gender equality that cuts across all the other SDGs. An objective of a
government plan should be to enhance gender equality in its governing structures and
operations and to foster greater stakeholder involvement in the design,
implementation, and evaluation of their projects. The GOB also seeks to provide a
working environment that facilitates balance and offers a safe working environment for
all.
2.3 Methodology
The Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan related to this “Consultancy to Produce
Requisite Design, Studies and Plans for the Green Climate Fund Proposal” that examines
“The 3R’s (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Climate Resilience Wastewater Systems in
Barbados” (the “Project”) seeks to provide a baseline for gender responsive action and
inclusion within the Water Sector of Barbados. The Assessment and analysis will be used
to inform the scale up and/or enhancement of gender-responsive interventions that seeks
to address the identified gaps for achieving gender equality both from the perspective of
the service provider and consumers.
The assessment included a desk review of available secondary data from Barbados and
the wider Caribbean; assess the gender perceptions of wastewater stakeholders through
stakeholder consultations, questionnaires and key informant interviews; and the analysis
of data to determine gendered indicators baseline.
i. Desk Review
• Literature Review: This stage included literature review including existing
18

=== PAGE 197 ===
international, regional and national frameworks for gender equality and the extent
to which national water management legislation, policies and procedures included
these agreed international and regional gender equality considerations and
commitments. During this stage, the review sought to identify relatable regional
and international gender indicators that the project can contribute to, including the
indicators aligned with SDGs 5 and 6.
• Secondary data review: Data collected from secondary sources include several
reports, on the findings of case studies related to gender and research papers on
various aspects of gender relations, wastewater management and climate change.
These include but are not limited to:
GOB Records on Social, Political and Economic and Climate Change Issues
o
Understanding Unequal Relations of Gender in the Caribbean
o
Barbados Agriculture Sector on Gender, Climate Change and Water
o
Barbados Fisheries Sector on Gender, Climate Change and Water
o
Country Gender Assessment, Barbados (2017)
o
Additionally, the secondary data review analysed data as it relates to regional and
national response to climate change, including:
• Gender Responsive Disaster Preparedness and Recovery in the Caribbean
• Non-Potable Water Generation, Distribution and Re-use
• WSRN Gender Assessment- water use and women
• Impacts of Climate Change on Women and Men in the Caribbean
• UN SDG’s Related to Human Rights of Gender, Water and Sanitation
The review of secondary data provided an opportunity for a deeper situational analysis
of how gender is reflected in the water sector as a comparison of the Country Gender
Assessment, which has articulated some barriers and gaps to the participation of women
in technical employment as well as issues of access to essential services, including water
for the most vulnerable groups which includes women, children, LGBTQIA and persons
with disabilities.
ii. Exploring Perceptions
The collection of qualitative data was done through stakeholder consultations,
questionnaires and key informant interviews to help the consultant to understand the
extent of awareness and impact of gender inequalities on the water sector, including the
extent of inclusivity within the BWA and the responsiveness of the delivery of water
services for men and women. It is important to note that data collection for this Gender
Study was done in tandem with the Stakeholder Engagement Report.
19

=== PAGE 198 ===
iii. Stakeholder Consultations:
Two (2) stakeholder workshops were held to disseminate information on baseline
information identified and conceptual design of project. Stakeholders include key water
and climate change agencies, private sector actors, community leaders, and
representatives from CCCCC.
iv. Stakeholder Surveys:
Following a stakeholder mapping a questionnaire was designed and administered to 49
key stakeholders in Government Ministries, the private sector, community
associations, the University of the West Indies Gender Studies Department and NGOs.
It resulted in 24 respondents completing the questionnaire (either partially or fully).
To further substantiate the gendered perceptions as it relates to wastewater collection
and management, the consultant reviewed and included data from the Willingness to
Pay Survey (administered in 2020). The survey was administered to 75 respondents (19
females, 56 males) across the country representing heads of household. While all 75
respondents did not answer each question, the analysis utilized a ratio of 8:4.75
male/female to assess each question. These responses, presented a rich primary source
of perceptions of males and females on key wastewater issues in Barbados.
Key Informant Interviews (KII): Interviews were conducted with representative from
University of the West Indies Institute for Gender and Development Studies (UWI
IGDS) to evaluate the gender perception of BWA staff. Another KII was a Senior
Engineer from the BWA to capture views on progress and barriers for women within
the wastewater sector.
v. Analysis
This stage of the assessment process took into consideration both primary and secondary
quantitative and qualitative data to determine perceptions, trends and attitudes of the
sector towards gender equality. It included a review of statistical data from the Barbados
Country Gender Assessment 2016. To carry out this gender analysis, and in keeping
with the GCF template, the assessment used components of the Gender Analysis
Process Model which is comprised of four main elements namely: Screening, Data
Collection, Gender Impact Assessment and Gender Mainstreaming of the Project cycle.
Each element involves carrying out several gender-related activities in a one-step or two-
step exercise. The model helped to examine the different roles, rights, needs and
opportunities of women, men, and LBGTQIA persons who are key stakeholders of the
project. Table A provides a description of each component of the Gender Analysis
Process Model and by activities to be carried out under each step.
Table A. Description of the Gender Analysis Process Model
No Component Step 1 Step 2
20

--- Table 1 on Page 198 ---
 |  |  | 
No | Component | Step 1 | Step 2

=== PAGE 199 ===
1 Screening Categorization of gender Mapping the key internal
dimensions of the Project goals and/or institutional and
to identify areas for in-depth external Project
analysis. stakeholders.
2 Data Collection Collection of evidence of Review of existing national
gender differences in and water and wastewater
stakeholder interaction with sector policies, strategies,
existing and planned water and action plans for
and wastewater sector integration of gender
infrastructure and services. considerations.
Gender Analysis of data to Assess impacts (main/
3
Impact determine gendered needs ancillary), risk perception,
Assessment of the wastewater sector and equality of distribution
infrastructure and services. of Project benefits.
4 Mainstreamin
Recommend actions align with Project goals and
g Gender in
stakeholder gendered needs.
the Project
Cycle
vi. Limitations
The gender analysis process had several constraints that limited the extent of the data
collection and analysis processes.
• The review of secondary data was constrained from deeper gendered analysis as
most data on usage collected was not disaggregated. Additionally, it was not
possible to identify vulnerable groups including, LGBTQIA people and persons
with disabilities from the data.
• The assessment was carried out during the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic, as
a result most consultations were conducted in the virtual space, including
questionnaires which limited the opportunity to assess and adjust questions and
contents for clarity, especially with community representatives. It also affected
the ability to adjust for greater inclusivity of vulnerable groups.
• The Willingness to Pay survey as a key data source to inform the analysis was
cut short due to high level political decision making. The information gathered
is analysed in this report, however there cannot be statistical significance in the
analysis of data collected.
21

--- Table 1 on Page 199 ---
Screening | Categorization of gender
dimensions of the Project goals
to identify areas for in-depth
analysis.
Data Collection | Collection of evidence of
gender differences in
stakeholder interaction with
existing and planned water
and wastewater sector
infrastructure and services.
Gender
Impact
Assessment | Analysis of data to
determine gendered needs
of the wastewater sector
infrastructure and services.
Mainstreamin
g Gender in
the Project
Cycle | Recommend actions align with Project goals and
stakeholder gendered needs.

=== PAGE 200 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS
2.4 Legislative, Regulatory and Institutional Frameworks
2.4.1 International Framework
This Gender analysis looks at the international frameworks and institutions in place the
administration of conventions, protocols and agreements related to gender equality and
wastewater which will have bearing on the implementation with this project. A number of
relevant gender equality conventions and Protocols as highlighted in Table B, have
been ratified by the GOB and applied by the BWA Wastewater Division.
Table B GOB Ratified International Conventions and Protocols on Gender Equality
and Wastewater
No Convention Purpose Operating Practices
1 Convention on Require signatory governments to BWA currently
promotes equity as it
the Elimination of take action to promote and protect
seeks to achieve
All Forms of the rights of women by including the
gender sensitivity and
Discrimination principle of equality in legislation
balance between
against Women and
male and female
19791 operationalizing it in their country. staff.
Article 14, pays special attention to
discrimination against rural women,
and to ensure their access to rural
benefits.
22

--- Table 1 on Page 200 ---
 |  |  | 
No | Convention | Purpose | Operating Practices
 |  |  | 
 | Convention on
the Elimination of
All Forms of
Discrimination
against Women
19791 | Require signatory governments to
take action to promote and protect
the rights of women by including the
principle of equality in legislation
and
operationalizing it in their country.
Article 14, pays special attention to
discrimination against rural women,
and to ensure their access to rural
benefits. | 

=== PAGE 201 ===
2 Beijing Platform for The platform encourages BWA will collect use
Action 19952 governments to collect data on dis- aggregated to
the impact of environmental cater for gender
degradation on women, as well as difference in the
develop gender- sensitive wastewater sector.
databases. The Declaration calls
for ensuring that ‘women's The project will
priorities are included in public undertake gender
investment programmes for sensitive
economic infrastructure, such as consultations to
water and sanitation. ensure that women
and men’s needs are
reflected in
infrastructural
development.
Similarly, the
adjustments to RAFF
should ensure that
women’s needs and
those of the
vulnerable to inform
rearticulation of the
RAFF.
3 Agenda 21, UN- Calls for sex-disaggregated data, BWA in collaboration
SDG-5 and gender-sensitive databases with the UWI-IGS is
20153
and promotes the empowerment of
currently training staff
on gender sensitivity
women and gender equality
issues to create greater
regarding land ownership, resource
awareness among
stewardship, education, and employees in the work
employment issues. environment.
4 The CBD 19934 CBD has adopted a Gender A GAP (see Appendix
Plan of Action and update it for 5) in the Project is
the period 2015-2020. It requires indicative of
countries to implement commitment to the
integrated actions to convention.
enhance the monitoring framework
and indicator system for gender
mainstreaming at national level.
23

--- Table 1 on Page 201 ---
Beijing Platform for
Action 19952 | The platform encourages
governments to collect data on
the impact of environmental
degradation on women, as well as
develop gender- sensitive
databases. The Declaration calls
for ensuring that ‘women's
priorities are included in public
investment programmes for
economic infrastructure, such as
water and sanitation.
Agenda 21, UN-
SDG-5
20153 | Calls for sex-disaggregated data,
and gender-sensitive databases
and promotes the empowerment of
women and gender equality
regarding land ownership, resource
stewardship, education, and
employment issues.
The CBD 19934 | CBD has adopted a Gender
Plan of Action and update it for
the period 2015-2020. It requires
countries to implement
integrated actions to
enhance the monitoring framework
and indicator system for gender
mainstreaming at national level.

=== PAGE 202 ===
5 The UN Recognizes the important role and This Project is designed
Convention to participation of women in to respond to
Combat combatting desertification and conventions with
Desertification mitigating the effects of drought. Gender Analysis and a
19965 Monitors whether GAP.
parties have integrated gender into
the implementation of the
i
There are also several international institutions involved in the design and implementation of
wastewater projects in the Caribbean that require gender equality issues be taken into
consideration. Among them include:
1. The UN which has a mandate to implement the SDG-5 agenda which focuses on
“Empowering Women and Promoting Gender Equality;”
2. IFI’s, such as the World Bank have a mandate to assist with the protection of the
global environment to promote environmentally sound and sustainable economic
development in member countries. The CDB has a mandate to promote economic
growth and systematic reduction of poverty through social and economic
development;
3. The GCF and GEF which have a mandate to support on international projects, provide
new and additional grant and concessional funding for approved projects, assist
developing countries by investing in projects to implement climate change adaptation
and mitigation measures to strengthen national capacity to cope with the damaging
effects of climate change while they overcome the fiscal constraints of COVID-19. It
should also be noted that the CCCCC, supporting the GCF by providing project
management services to this (and other) Project, has a mandate to implement
climate change projects requiring gender- related analysis in the Caribbean; and
4. The UNEP which has a mandate to coordinate responses to environmental issues
within the UN system by implementing programmes on sustainable development,
climate change, disasters and conflict, ecosystem management and environmental
governance.
The Sustainable Development Goals
SDG 6 Water and Sanitation
SDG 6 speaks to achieving (by 2030) access to adequate and equitable sanitation and
hygiene for all, paying special attention to the needs of women and those in vulnerable
situations, including LGBTQIA persons.
A safely managed central wastewater treatment facility is one where excreta is safely treated
and disposed or treated on-site using soak away fields. Globally more than 80% of
24

--- Table 1 on Page 202 ---
The UN
Convention to
Combat
Desertification
19965 | Recognizes the important role and
participation of women in
combatting desertification and
mitigating the effects of drought.
Monitors whether
parties have integrated gender into
the implementation of the

=== PAGE 203 ===
wastewater, resulting from human activities, is discharged into rivers or the sea without any
form of treatment, and therefore a target for this Project should be to improve the amount
of wastewater that is treated and reused as reclaimed water.
The issue of water availability for hygiene proved critical during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Barbados Today Newspaper published that some residents at Boscobelle, in St. Peters,
experienced conditions that had them wondering how they are to effectively sanitize with
poor water service, where days go by without water coming from their taps. This further
emphasizes the importance the residence attached to water in combating the spread of this
pandemic. There is now a greater opportunity for Barbados to promote and implement SDG-
6 on water and sanitation and all the other SDGs by 2030.
SDG-5 Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
Gender equality promotes basic human rights and is therefore foundational for
achieving the other SDGs1. The principle of leaving no one behind requires gender-
transformative water and sanitation programmes. The 3R-CReWs project will benefit
from mainstreaming SDG Targets into project activities. More particularly:
5.5 Ensure women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for
leadership at all levels of decision making in political, economic and public life;
5.b Enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and
communications technology, to promote the empowerment of women and;
5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion
of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.
Water and sanitation, like gender equality, are human right issues that the GOB has a
responsibility to enforce for the advancement of the society. By enforcing these rights,
communities, and vulnerable groups, which comprise a larger percentage of women and
girls, will benefit from opportunities that facilitate stronger and less biased decision-
making.
The UN standards, on access to clean water, indicated that lack of access to clean water,
(at least 5 litres a day) represents one tenth of the daily average amount used by developed
countries to flush toilets. Also, lactating mothers who engage in moderate physical activity
use up to 7.5 litres of water per day. Ensuring safe sanitation also requires substantial hygiene
education and promotion2.
3 Oxfam, 2020 Achieving Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 6
4 www.jamaicaobsever.com/latestnews/CARICOM_developing_regional_gender_equality strategy
2 ibid
25

=== PAGE 204 ===
“SDG 5 speaks to gender equality and empowerment of women being a
fundamental human right and calls for legislation to promote gender equality and
empowerment of all women and girls.”
Therefore, the importance of water for human survival should drive the BWA to make every
effort to secure adequate financial and human resources to provide high quality, gender
responsive and socially inclusive service in the water and wastewater sector.
26

=== PAGE 205 ===
2.4.2 Regional Framework
At the regional level there are several institutions with policy and legal mandates to
address gender equality issues relating to wastewater projects being implemented on
behalf of Caribbean member states. Brief details of the current work of regional institutions
that is relevant to this Project follow.
The mandate of the CARICOM Regional Secretariat is to implement regional plans,
programs, and projects beneficial to member states. In March 2019, the Secretariat in
collaborated with the UN- MCO, developed a Regional Gender Equality Strategy to
accelerate the effective implementation of key priority actions that member countries have
signed on to, following the BPfA conference. The strategy is designed to assist those
countries which are yet to fully implement the Beijing declaration that includes women's
economic empowerment and freedom from violence.3 In 2015, the CARICOM
Secretariat, also developed and supported the adoption by member states of a Gender
Equality Indicators model, to measure the advancement of gender equality, including the
status of women, men and LGBTQIA persons, as well as a strategy for measuring these
indicators at the regional and national level. Some of these relevant indicators were used
to address gender equality issues related to this Project.
As part of its mandate, the UN ECLAC has developed a model Gender Equality Plan for
use by member countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. According to ECLAC, the
plan has been customized and adopted by most countries in the region, but Barbados is not
listed as one of the countries with such a plan or policy.4
GWP-Caribbean also has a mandate to implement gender-related projects in the
Caribbean. The institution undertakes regional case studies and maintains project
databases which member states are given full access to. Barbados is a member of the
GWP-Caribbean, and as such has access to databases and case studies of GWP projects
in the water and wastewater sector. This partnership represents another opportunity for
the BWA to access specific information that includes gender mainstreaming
recommendations related to the wastewater sector.
The CCCCC has a mandate to implement climate change projects requiring gender-
related analysis in the Caribbean. In keeping with its mandate, the CCCCC has adopted
a Climate Change Framework, that includes a Gender Policy for the coordination of the
Caribbean’s response to climate change, which involves working on effective solutions and
projects to combat environmental impacts and global warming.
The CDB has a mandate to promote economic growth and systematic reduction of
poverty through social and economic development. The GCF has accredited the bank to
provide financing for regional projects in various sectors on its behalf and in this capacity,
the CDB has funded several BWA infrastructure projects which requires that the
27

=== PAGE 206 ===
Authority complies with provisions of the bank’s gender policy to ensure consideration of
projects submitted for financing (Isaacs, 2017). In 2008, the bank adopted a Gender
Equality Policy and Operational and Project Strategy to support its project financing
strategy. In January 2016, the CDB commissioned a CGA, for Barbados to inform the
implementation of gender equality strategies of the bank and its partners in the country.5
According to the CGA report, several persons interviewed stated that “law and policy in
Barbados facilitates equal opportunities and those institutions are gender neutral in their
treatment of women and men,” (Allen and Maughan, 2016).
The CGA proposed certain strategies that are relevant to this Project, such as it requires
Barbados to engage in research that would generate disaggregated data to implement
programmes to enable men, women and LGBTQIA persons to overcome many social
issues such as poverty alleviation, gender stereotypes and on vulnerability to and impact
of environmental disasters. Barbados is also expected to engage in training stakeholders
through workshops to increase the capacity of women in the leadership of government
department and the wastewater sector.
Finally, UWI has a mandate to spearhead the training and research efforts in the
Caribbean region. To fulfil its mandate, UWI established CERMES based at UWI Cave Hill,
Campus in Barbados with the capacity to undertake studies focusing on areas such as
gender and climate change, and on disaster risk management in the Caribbean. CERMES
can also undertake studies aimed at integrating gender concerns in water and wastewater
infrastructure projects in Barbados. Additionally, UWI has also established the IGDS
which conducts regular programs on gender, climate change and disaster risk reduction. The
UWI IGDS recruit students to pursue post-graduate research in the fields of water and
wastewater (Isaacs, 2017), and has been collaborating with the BWA, to implement gender
sensitivity a training for BWA employees.
Given that Barbados is a member of all six regional institutions, the BWA can have access
to the CARICOM list of GEIs and the Gender Equality strategy as well as the UN ECLAC
Model Gender Equality Plan. BWA should also be able to access case study reports and
project data from the GWP-Caribbean and take advantage of support provided by CCCCC
on climate change adaptation and mitigation. It is also noted that BWA is already
collaborating with UWI- IGDS on training and research relating to the wastewater project
and is seeking financing from GCF through the CDB for the implementation of this project.
28

=== PAGE 207 ===
2.4.3 National Framework
At the national level, there are institutions with policy and legal mandates to address gender
equality. The GOB has taken several steps to improve the framework for wastewater policy,
legislative instruments, and institutional arrangements. A description of the national
initiatives relevant to this Project follows, but further discussion on proposed policy reform
related to this project is also included in the Conceptual Design report.
1. National Sustainable Development Policy
In 2004, the GOB adopted a National Sustainable Development Policy to guide decisions
and actions at all levels in the country.
2. Draft National Gender Equality Policy
Although the GOB has a revised Draft National Gender Equality Policy, it is yet to be
approved by the Cabinet of Ministers and tabled in parliament for discussion and
endorsement (Isaac, 2017). While this Policy is not endorsed, Barbados has been recognized
as making steps to improve legislation that fosters increased equality.
3. National Climate Change Policy
The Government of Barbados approved a National Climate Change Policy in 2012. The
country’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (now known as NDC) as
communicated to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in 2015,
lists 6 national plans and strategies for which climate change adaptation would be
incorporated3. These include:
- Medium Term Growth and Development Strategy 2013 – 2020;
- Physical Development Plan;
- White Paper on the Development of Tourism in Barbados and National Adaptation
Strategy to Address Climate Change in the Tourism Sector in Barbados;
- Coastal Zone Management Plan;
- Storm Water Management Plan;
- Other sectoral plans including for agriculture, fisheries, water and health.
While the Climate Change Policy makes mention of gender issues, there was limited
presentation of strategies for mainstreaming gender in relevant sectoral climate change
interventions. The Policy however states that that vulnerable groups, including women and
young men, should be targeted and participate in action to address environmental threats
3 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-fp060-water-sector-resilience-nexus-sustainability-
barbados-wsrn-s
29

=== PAGE 208 ===
and damage4.
4. Wastewater Tariff Policy
In July 2009, BGIS reported that the GOB had approved a new tariff policy and structure
for the BWA in which the minimum charge moving from $20.00BBD (US$10) to $32.00BBD
(US$16) for both domestic and commercial metered customers. However, it is noted that
there was no change in the rate for the sewage tariffs which remained at 1/3 of the water
bill for domestic customers and 2/3 of the water bill for commercial customers.
5
Given that
the tariff policy and structure has been in place for twelve years, it is recommended that the
GOB consider engaging key stakeholders with a view to examine cost recovery challenges
and measures needed to update this policy. The GOB should update the tariff policy to
support a BWA cost recovery for its wastewater services taking into consideration gender
equality issues affecting the poor and vulnerable. Such a consideration may include
reduced rates for identified vulnerable persons.
5. National Legal Instruments
In October 1980, the GOB enacted the Barbados Water Authority Act as the primary legal
instrument to govern the operations of water and wastewater services in Barbados. The
Act is accompanied by the BWA (Sewerage Regulations), 1980, (S.I. No. 151 of 1980), to
regulate sewage, effluent wastewater, discharge, water charges, authorization, permit,
equipment, and inspection; including the sewerage treatment plants, packaged plants of
hotels and businesses, or household’s sceptic tanks and suck-wells (Isaac, p-100). In 1985,
the GOB enacted the Barbados Authority Act, 274a, L.R.O., with Part IV of the Act making
provision for the establishment of a Water and Sewage Division to be responsible for
wastewater management. In 2009, the GOB also enacted the BWA Act (Validation of
Water and Sewerage Rates), to validate the increase in water and sewerage rates levied and
collected by the BWA from 1
st
January 2005 to the date of the BWA (Water and Sewerage
Rates) Regulations, 2009, (S.I. No. 69 of 2009).
The BWA Act of October 1980, is the primary legislation governing the provision of water
and wastewater services in Barbados. The Act is supported by the BWA (Sewerage
Regulations), (S.I. No. 151 of 1980), introduced to regulate sewage, effluent wastewater,
discharge, water charges, authorization, permit, equipment, and inspection including the
sewage treatment plants, packaged plants of hotels and businesses, and household septic
systems and suck-wells (Isaacs, 2017). 6 This legal instrument should be placed high on the
BWA agenda for revision since it has been implemented for over forty years and the BWA
should improve its efforts to lobby the GOB to amend the Act, as the current instrument
does not reflect present day gender issues.
In 2020, the Government of Barbados enacted the Employment (Prevention of
4 ibid
5 https://gisbarbados.gov.bb/blog/new-watertariff
6 https://www.ecolex.org/details/legislation/barbados-water-authority-act-1980-lex-faoc
30

=== PAGE 209 ===
Discrimination) Act, 20207. This Act prevents discrimination in an employment context in
over fifteen (15) areas8. Including sexual orientation, gender, family responsibility, age and
physical features. The Act prevents discrimination in recruitment and selection; even where
these functions are executed by recruitment agencies9. The Act identifies that an act of
discrimination can occur, “directly or indirectly, whether intentionally or not, makes a
distinction, creates an exclusion or shows a preference, the intent or effect of which is to
subject the other person to any disadvantage, restriction or other detriment.” The Act also
identifies an act of discrimination may occur where “the person, directly or indirectly, whether
intentionally or not, subjects the other person to any disadvantage, restriction or other
detriment” … in identified circumstances. This legislation has identified a tribunal where
complaints of discrimination can be made.
In 2017, The Government of Barbados enacted the Employment Sexual Harassment
(Prevention) Act, 201710. The Act makes provision for the protection of employees in both
the public sector and private sector from sexual harassment at their workplace; provides a
framework for the reporting of sexual harassment cases by employees and a method of
resolving such cases; establishes a procedure for the hearing and determination of matters
related to sexual harassment; and provide for related matters.
6. National Collaborating Institutions
As indicated earlier, in 1985, the GOB in keeping with Part IV of the of the Barbados Authority
Act, 274a, established the Water and Sewage Division within the BWA to be responsible for
wastewater sector management. Currently, in addition to the BWA Wastewater Division,
Barbados has several public institutions with mandates that have a direct impact on gender
equality issues relating to the wastewater sector. They are as follows:
1. The Barbados Poverty Alleviation Bureau and the Office of the Director of Poverty
established in 1998 with a responsibility to examine and report on the living conditions
of the poor and vulnerable11;
2. The Bureau of Gender Affairs, Ministry of Youth, and Family and Sports responsible
for monitoring and evaluating gender equality policies, plans and programs of
government. The Bureau is responsible for the integration of gender in all national
development policies and programs to achieve gender equity and equality.; and
3. The Environmental Projection Department (EPD), has completed a wastewater reuse
policy to facilitate the treatment of wastewater for reuse in drip irrigation, toilet
7 https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=en&p_isn=110880 Accessed: September 5, 2022
8 https://barbadostoday.bb/2021/03/18/btcolumn-discrimination-in-the-workplace-can-be-covert/ Accessed: September 5, 2022
9 Ibid.
10 chrome-
extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://oig.cepal.org/sites/default/files/2017_brb_employmentsexualharassmentpreventionact.pdf
Accessed: September 5, 2022
11 https://www.gov.bb/State-Bodies/poverty-alleviation
31

=== PAGE 210 ===
flushing, decentralized sanitation systems including septic tanks, sewage packaged
plants and suck-wells (Isaacs, 2017).
The above-mentioned institutions collaborate with each other to bring greater synergy
between gender equality and wastewater issues.
Overall data collected from government records indicates that the GOB has made some
progress on social, political, and economic issues relating to gender equality. However,
during the implementation of the Project it is necessary that the BWA ensures compliance
with provisions of relevant conventions, policies, agreements, and laws. Where there are
gaps identified, BWA needs to lobby the government authorities to make the appropriate
improvements.
Gender Equality Indicators Adopted by Barbados
Gender Equality Indicators refer to sixteen measures adopted by the United Nations to
track progress made by member states towards achieving the goals of SDG 5. CARICOM
has adopted a regional list comprising thirty-three GEIs. This gender analysis applied some
of the gender equality indicators adopted by the GOB from the CARICOM list of GEIs.
Table C National List of Gender Equality Indicators Applied by Category
No Category CARICOM CARICOM/National Indicator
1 Economic Indicator 1  More of the persons in poverty are women
Activity Indicator 8  15.7% of Barbados population lives in poverty
 Poor women 21%, Poor men 13,96% Extreme
Indicator 10
poor women:4.7%, Extreme poor men: 2.7%
Indicator 11
(Beuermann 2017)
2 Education Indicator 14 Barbados Population statistics:
 90.68% completed tertiary education
 93.4% completed primary education21
 89.5% and 87.6% females and males
respectively with at least secondary
education
(Allen et al. 2016)
More women, 40 years and under have
university education
50% of emigrants as against 30% of locals have
university
32

--- Table 1 on Page 210 ---
 |  |  | 
No | Category | CARICOM | CARICOM/National Indicator
 | Economic
Activity | Indicator 1
Indicator 8
Indicator 10
Indicator 11 | 
 | Education | Indicator 14 | 

=== PAGE 211 ===
3 Public Indicator 28
Parliament has 30 seats. Women including the
Participation Indicator 29
Prime Minister, holding 6 seats or 20% compared to
24 seats or 80% held by men.12
Indicator 30 Head of State: Governor General is a woman.
Indicator 31 The Cabinet comprises nineteen (19) or (73%) men
and seven (7) or 27% women13
2.4.4 BWA Framework for Wastewater Sector Services
The BWA is the primary entity, supported by the Ministry of Transport, Works and Water
Resources, with a mandate to deliver satisfactory water and wastewater services to citizens
of Barbados, and as such, is responsible for applying the gender equality policy at the
level of the wastewater sector. For the delivery of wastewater services, BWA is required
to maintain an appropriate organizational structure to exercise utility oversight, a system
for data collection and analysis, and wastewater treatment facilities. Details of the several
gender equalities issues to be addressed for effective implementation of the project.
2.4.5 BWA Organizational Structure
The configuration of the organizational structure of the BWA makes provision for several
functional departments including Finance, Human Resource and Customer Service. The
structure also includes a Wastewater Division which is specifically responsible for
wastewater management. As of August 2022, the Barbados Water Authority had 753
employees. 556 (73.8%) were men and 197 (26.2%) were women. This represents a 3%
drop in total employees from 2016, when a Gender Analysis for the GCF Funded WSRN
Project was undertaken. Important to note, is female employment dropped from 28.1% of
the BWA workforce to 26.2%. In 2016, The workforce age ranged from 20–67 years with
a mean age of 39 years. Approximately half of the BWA employees (61 %) are aged 40-59
years, with the majority of men being 50-59 years (23%) and women 40-49 years (9.9%)14.
The BWA staff are almost equally employed in technical (48.5%) and non-technical roles
(51.5%), with technical being defined as all job titles related to project management,
22
12
https://caribbeanelections.com Barbados Election Results 2018
22
13
https://www.gov.bb Barbados Current Cabinet of Ministers
14 file:///C:/Users/Admin/Downloads/BP20-CCC-01-00-RPT-Gender-Analysis-Report-Rev1.pdf
33

--- Table 1 on Page 211 ---
Public
Participation | Indicator 28
Indicator 29
 | Indicator 30
 | Indicator 31

=== PAGE 212 ===
engineering, science, vocational, heavy equipment operation and field work activities of the
utility, and non-technical referring to all other capacities. “Men and women are almost
evenly represented in non-technical roles (26.8% and 24.6% respectively), while there is a
significantly greater proportion of the BWA staff that are men (45%) versus women (3.5%)
employed in technical roles”15. In the Legal and Compliance Unit, The Customer Service
Unit, as well as the Human Resource Unit, there is an over representation of women (100%,
89%, 72%) respectively. On the other hand, the Engineering Unit (75%), the Distribution
Unit (95%) and the Drawing Office (100%) has over representation of men.
From interviews conducted during this gender analysis, the perception is that the BWA has
demonstrated that as an employer, it provides equal opportunities to men, women, and
LGBTQIA persons in the recruitment of employees and this unwritten policy is maintained
in staff training, deployment, compensation, and mobility. One KII respondent stated that
the BWA employees are unionised and as such, the BWA is committed to implementing
provisions of the collective agreement which addresses the gender equality issues
highlighted earlier. Important to note is that this is in keeping with the findings of the
Country Gender Assessment (CGA) conducted in 2016 by the CDB. The CGA 16
highlighted that …
“A number of interviewees stated that law and policy in Barbados facilitate equal opportunities
and that institutions are ‘gender neutral’ in their treatment of women and men. They saw
differences in economic and social outcomes for men and women (if acknowledged to exist) as
resulting from individual choice and tradition rather than systematic impediments. A few
interviewees were actively opposed to developing actions based on gender considerations. Others
acknowledged gender-related constraints, but most said that gender was not something they
generally took into account while working”.
Despite outcomes demonstrating gender imbalances in participation and representation, the
views that BWA is an equal opportunity employer remains relatively constant. Important
to address however are the institutional cultural biases that may perpetuate inequality.
Gender sensitivity training, encouraging more young women in STEM and having more
women in leadership roles may help in shifting cultural nuances over time. While there are
no recognized formal impediments to gender equality in the workplace, culture and
stereotypes may influence how policies and laws are implemented.
2.4.6 BWA Board Governance
The BWA ten-member Board of Directors is appointed by the Ministry of Transport, Works,
and Water Resources for a three-year period. At the commencement of this Gender
Analysis, it was noted that the BWA Board of Directors comprised of two women one
of whom was the chairperson of the Board, and eight men, an arrangement which reflects
15 file:///C:/Users/Admin/Downloads/BP20-CCC-01-00-RPT-Gender-Analysis-Report-Rev1.pdf
16 Caribbean Development Bank Country Gender Assessment Barbados, 2016
34

=== PAGE 213 ===
a gender-imbalanced in the gender make-up of the Board. Since the execution of this
study, the Board changed leadership. The BWA Board is therefore male headed.
Increase in women’s participation in prominent decision-making spaces provides an
opportunity not only for equality of representation bur equality of decision-making
outcomes. Women’s participation in water governance is essential for achieving SDGs
5 and 6 as is a target of both17.The Beijing Platform for Action calls for guaranteeing
that ‘women's priorities are included in public investment programmes for economic
infrastructure, such as water and sanitation’. Women’s voices are increasingly
strengthened when women have a seat at the decision-making table, and moreover, when
women who fill those seats: i. have the technical competence to contribute meaningfully
to decision making and, ii. are empowered to do so. As predominant water users within
the household, and increasingly present users of water in private sector, it is imperative
that female representation on boards such as the BWA is prioritized.
Table D: Composition- BWA Board of Directors
Stakeholder Total Male Female
BWA Board of Directors 10 7 or (70%) 3 or (30%)
2.4.7 BWA Wastewater Division
The current wastewater management system, used by the BWA to provide wastewater
services to the citizens of Barbados, comprises of two treatment plants that are the
Bridgetown Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) and the South Coast Sewage Treatment Plant
(SCSTP). Disaggregated dated obtained from a January 2021 staff survey of the BWA
indicated that out of a total staff complement of fifty-eight that work at the treatment plants,
forty-nine employees or 85% of them are men while only nine, or 15%, are women. The
above data confirms the high level of gender-imbalance among the technical staff of the
Wastewater Division. This situation is not unique to Barbados, The World Bank’s Water
Global Practice published a report highlighting that “women make up less than 1 in 5 of the
water workforces (in water utilities) and constitute only 23% of engineers and managers in
the sector”.1819
In an assessment of the gender segmentation of labour within the BWA, Issacs and Trotz
(2017) identified that of technical fields within the BWA, the greatest disparity in
employment was in the vocational area, 26.8% men to 0.8% women. This category
comprised artisan electricians, fitters, masons, plumbers, welders, heavy equipment
operators, sewage inspectors and workshop employees. According to disaggregated staff
data of January 2021, there is a 68% gender imbalance in favour of men on the staff
of the BWA Wastewater Division confirming that more men are employed doing paid
17 Ibid
18 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32319
19
Oxfam, 2020 Achieving Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 6
35

--- Table 1 on Page 213 ---
Stakeholder | Total | Male | Female
 | 10 | 7 or (70%) | 3 or (30%)

=== PAGE 214 ===
work in the wastewater sector. Therefore, in addition to the gender sensitivity which it has
already initiated, BWA needs to create greater opportunities to attract more women to the
sector. This imbalance in representation at the wastewater division is reflective of: i. the
nature of work performed at treatment plants; and ii. the entry level requirements for the
jobs available at the division. More men are drawn to vocational and engineering
educational and training programmes than women. Work undertaken at the treatment plans
are viewed as heavily laborious and physical and may therefore draw more men than women
to apply and take up vacant positions. There is however also the room for expectation that
cultural norms may deter women with an interest in performing in this sector to take on
open positions.
Data from The Barbados Vocational Training Board (BVTB) (2013) revealed the male-
female ratio of graduates as 62.7 to 37.3, very similar to 2003 ratios20. A review of 2019-
2022 Graduates suggests a similar pattern. Training areas such as plumbing, electricals,
machinery operators were male dominated, while programmes such as sewing, cosmetology
and international cooking had greater female graduates21. Similarly, The University of the
West Indies Vice Chancellor’s report 2020-2021, demonstrated overall a higher enrolment
rate of females (68.7%) to males (31.3%)22. However, the report identified the male
dominated faculties to be Engineering (65.67%) and Sports (65.7%). Employees with the
requisite technical skills will be the most eligible, and first to benefit from potential jobs
created by projects of this nature23. There is therefore a need for stronger affirmative action
policies to increase women’s representation across the water sector.
Table E. Gender Distribution and Gap of Wastewater Division Staff, 201
Stakeholder Total Male Female Gender Gap
Division Staff by Location
BSTP/SCSTP 6 4 or (67%) 2 or (33%) 34%
BSTP 29 26 or (90%) 3 or (10%) 80%
SCSTP 23 19 or (83%) 4 or (17%) 66%
58 49 or 84% 9 or 16% 86%
2.4.8 BWA Gender Equality Strategy
The BWA does not have a written Gender Equality Strategy. The organization has unwritten
practices of non-discrimination, and equal pay for equal work as was cited by one KI.
Unionization has helped in this regard. However, a well-defined Gender Equality Strategy
is not elaborated. The Project provides the space to document policies of non-discrimination
20 Ibid.
21 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YPdpiMj4WD4
22 https://uwi.edu/vcreport/
23 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-fp060-water-sector-resilience-nexus-sustainability-
barbados-wsrn-s
36

--- Table 1 on Page 214 ---
Stakeholder | Total | Male | Female | Gender Gap
Division Staff by Location |  |  |  | 
 | 6 | 4 or (67%) | 2 or (33%) | 
 | 29 | 26 or (90%) | 3 or (10%) | 
 | 23 | 19 or (83%) | 4 or (17%) | 
 | 58 | 49 or 84% | 9 or 16% | 

=== PAGE 215 ===
through upgrades of SOPs. Important is that the Employment (Prevention) of
Discrimination Act of 2020 applies to the BWA, including as it relates to recruitment and
provides an avenue for complaints to a tribunal where the BWA violates the law.
2.4.9 BWA Gender Sensitivity Training
With Support from the Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados
(WSRN) Project, The BWA is undertaking Gender Sensitivity Training which stated in
October 2020, and was facilitated by UWI-Gender Studies Department (UWI-IGDS). The
programme was designed to train 500 BWA employees to help them develop a better
understanding of gender sensitivity issues within the Authority. The programme contains
several modules of video presentations and three case studies which include gender
components on water and wastewater issues, fish processing and farming topics. It also
includes a component on the water and energy nexus and covered areas like drought
management, rainwater harvesting and increased water storage. In an interview with UWI-
IGDS, it was confirmed that the training involved six workshops with up to 22 participants
in each session and was delivered over five days. The training uses videos, case studies,
handouts, small group activities and facilitator-led plenary presentations and discussions.
The programme was designed to redress the personal and urgent relations of gender. Table
F shows the disaggregated data on BWA employees who participated in the gender
sensitivity training.
Table F: Disaggregated Data on Staff Attendance in the BWA/UWI-IGS Gender
Sensitivity training
Session Date Total Male Female
2020
8
th
October 23 14 or 61% 09 or 39%
9
th
O ctober 24 10 or 42% 14 or 58%
15
th
O ctober 21 8 or 38% 13 or 62%
16
th
October 23 13 or 57% 10 or 43%
22nd October 16 9 or 56% 7 or 44%
23rd October 19 11 or 58% 8 or 42%
29th October 18 12 or 67% 6 or 33%
30th October 17 8 or 47% 9 or 53%
Total 161 85 or 53% 76 or 47%
At the end of the programme all successful employees will receive a Certificate in Gender
Equality Issues. Participation in trainings is encouraged, but not made mandatory for staff.
Trainings have had varying degrees of success in terms of participation. Incentives for
attending training often results in increased attendance.
An interview with a female Senior Manager at the BWA revealed that the training is a
necessary initiative to expose BWA employees to gender sensitivity and to encourage
gender equality relating to co-workers, customers, and clients. The gender sensitivity
programme, is ongoing within the framework of the WSRN Project. Training for gender
37

--- Table 1 on Page 215 ---
Session Date | Total | Male | Female
2020 |  |  | 
 | 23 | 14 or 61% | 09 or 39%
 | 24 | 10 or 42% | 14 or 58%
 | 21 | 8 or 38% | 13 or 62%
 | 23 | 13 or 57% | 10 or 43%
 | 16 | 9 or 56% | 7 or 44%
 | 19 | 11 or 58% | 8 or 42%
 | 18 | 12 or 67% | 6 or 33%
 | 17 | 8 or 47% | 9 or 53%
 | 161 | 85 or 53% | 76 or 47%

=== PAGE 216 ===
equality can be a transformative process that provide knowledge, techniques and tools to
develop skills and changes in attitudes and behaviours. However, the effectiveness of these
programmes is often a result of a continuous and long-term process that requires
commitment of all parties24. Similarly, as posited by the European Institute for Gender
Equality, if implemented systematically gender training facilitates more efficient actions
and a positive change in attitudes25. Likewise, there are certain categories of employee,
depending on job functions, who should be mandatorily trained in relevant areas of gender
sensitivity.
3.1 Contextual Analysis
3.1.1 Gender Equality and Diversity
This report examines gender equality from a broad perspective which embraces the human
rights of all citizens in Barbados, in relation to how climate change is impacting the
wastewater systems in the country. It is worthy to note that this contextual analysis centre on key
equality pillars that are considered relevant to this 3R-CReWS Project.
It addresses equality among men, women and the LGBTQIA community, to avoid
discrimination in the society regardless of gender identity. It is important to address
gender equality from this perspective to bring parity between genders and persons of
LGBTQIA orientation thereby, respecting their rights as humans. The ILO has taken
initiatives to address issues relating to women and LGBTQIA on the sex-based
discrimination by advancing the rights of low-waged women and families of the LGBTQIA
community. Much has been achieved in terms of human rights of women and people of
LGBTQIA community. Also, a case can be made for the inclusion of women and social
minorities in the gender equality debate (Johnson 2019). Johnson argues:
“…that gender equality, gender management and gender mainstreaming
approaches overlook most problems faced by people from LGBTQIA community
and from women of colour. Gender equality is done in a framework which
includes vulnerable groups like LGBTQIA integrated in the project with no
discrimination.1”
A large percentage of gay and lesbian adults face some form of discrimination especially
on the job although it is argued that there has been progress over the last two decades legally.
However, the LGBTQIA community still experience gender bias in Barbados. For example,
LGBTQIA persons currently do not have the same rights as non-LGBTQIA people.
Intimate acts performed by LGBTQIA persons in Barbados are still considered to be illegal
and there is a penalty where the maximum sentence is life imprisonment although it is
24 https://www.unwomen.org/en/how-we-work/capacity-development-and-
training#:~:text=It%20helps%20women%20and%20men,equal%20human%20rights%20for%20all.
25 https://eige.europa.eu/gender-mainstreaming/toolkits/gender-equality-training/why-invest-gender-equality-training
38

=== PAGE 217 ===
not enforced. The (Barbados Today Newspaper, Dec. 2014) reported that;
“… stigma and discrimination, forms a property damage, ostracism and verbal
abuse from strangers and family alike, unjustifiable denial of employment, denial
of housing, reflection and abandonment by family, friends and society at large.2”
Every effort is made to advance the cause of all vulnerable groups of all genders, to avoid
any form of discrimination and ensure that everyone’s needs are adequately addressed in
the Project cycle.
3.1.2 Gender Equality and Climate Change
The Project’s Proposal puts forward in its climate rationale that “the climate change risk
profile of Barbados is dominated by coastal and weather effects, especially sea level rise,
storm surge, increased tropical storm and hurricane intensity and frequency; and other more
slow-onset environmental impacts, such as flooding and drought, which is a very important
and specifically Barbadian nuanced issue, as the country already suffers from water scarcity,
and changes in rainfall patterns exacerbate this considerably”26. Climate models show that
conditions will be warmer and drier in the Caribbean, resulting in water availability issues.
As Cited in the Project’s Proposal, it has been reported by the BWA that Barbados has been
experiencing less rainfall recently than the mean rainfall amount of 1,270 mm/year
measured at the GAIA27. Barbados experienced an annual rainfall of 736.5 mm in 201928.
…Shifting climatic conditions are leading to increasing
interruptions in potable water availability. Water scarcity can cause
a variety of health problems by reducing the amount of water
available to practice basic hygiene which increases the risk of
chemical and microbial contamination (Halcrow, 2011); these can
lead to gastrointestinal diseases and other health risks. Studies in
the Caribbean show an association between climate variability and
increasing incidence of dengue fever. Rainwater storage is being
promoted as an adaptation option to increase availability of
freshwater; however, environmental health officers report an
increase in the Aedes aegypti (mosquito that carries yellow fever)
index due to mosquito breeding in domestic rainwater storage tanks.
These health issues often affect women as primary caregivers and
homemakers; children and elderly are also at greater risk. Men in
formal work tend to have greater access to clean water and therefore
26 Integrated Solutions, Funding Proposal -3R-CReWs Project, 2021
27
Barbados Weather Climate Data: http://www.barbadosweather.org/barbados-weather-climate-data.php
28
Barbados Weather: http://www.barbadosweather.org/index.php
39

=== PAGE 218 ===
at lesser risk for vector borne diseases29.
Many studies have highlighted that women are more vulnerable to the effects of climate
change than men. In countries such as Barbados, women and men in rural areas are
vulnerable when they are highly dependent on local natural resources for their livelihood.
It is therefore important to identify gender-sensitive strategies to respond to environmental
and humanitarian crises caused by climate change as women are not only vulnerable to
climate change, but they are also effective actors or agents of change in relation to both
mitigation and adaptation.
There are many researchers30 who support the idea that gender inequity is making the
impacts of climate change worse. They suggest that by bringing the voices of more
women/LGBTQIA persons into responses to climate change will help all countries. Gender
inequalities affect the abilities of men and women to adapt to climate change particularly in
areas of services, decision-making and access to and control of assets. Women are further
limited by gender norms, roles and biases across the ecology of Caribbean countries. For
women, their role as caregivers and homemakers can be challenged by effects of climate
change on availability of food and water and fuel scarcity. These may force women to spend
more time trying to access these resources and thereby affects their expected roles as
homemakers and breadwinners. Such challenges increase stress and tension within the home
and can subsequently lead to manifestations of gender-based violence. Men are also
susceptible to negative impacts of climate change. High levels of stress due to unavailability
of resources, compromised land and assets, and loss of income can lead to anger which can
further encourage self-harm and substance abuse. Loss of income and resources due to
climatic events may also lead to sexual and domestic violence against partners or children.
Climatic events inflict deep and lasting impacts on the poor and vulnerable who are least
able to withstand their onslaught31The Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC) has published technical reports on the environmental vulnerability of
Caribbean SIDS and Barbados in particular32. The position of ECLAC is that “vulnerability
is, in part, a function of gender”. Barbadian strategies to address climate change identifies
the need to support the poor and disadvantaged who have fewer resources or buffers against
climate change or other shocks”33 .These strategies do not explicitly present strategies to
advance gender equality in addressing issues of climate change sectorally, nor
systematically. Poverty data in Barbados reveals that, a larger percentage of women are
represented and affected in the poor and vulnerable groups because more women find
themselves in poverty brackets. As stated in the CDB Gender Assessment Report, “In
29 Integrated Solutions, Funding Proposal -3R-CReWs Project, 2021
30
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/07/gender
31 Government of Barbados (2012), Barbados Growth and Development Strategy 2013–2020, Economic Affairs Division, Ministry of Finance and
Economic Affairs, Bridgetown, p. 2.; as cited in CDB CGA (2017)
32 Ibid, Pg 73
33 Ibid, Pg 73
40

=== PAGE 219 ===
Barbados there is a high rate of poverty among female-headed households. 19.4%, of
female-headed households are poor, compared to 11.5% of male headed households, and
15% of all households” (Baksh & Associates, 2016B)34.
Figure 1 Gendered Impact of Climate Change in the Caribbean35
The IUCN believes that it is possible to strengthen climate action by promoting gender
equality and that since women and men experience climate change differently, gender
inequalities will persist around the world, affecting the ability of individuals and
communities to adapt. They posit the view that by recognizing the important contributions
of women, as decision makers, stakeholders, educators, carers, and experts across sectors
and at all levels, can lead to successful, long-term solutions to climate change. Women
have also proven to be leading the way towards more equitable and sustainable solutions
to climate change.36
3.1.3 Gender Responsive Disaster Preparedness and Recovery in the Caribbean
The World Bank’s Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery GFDRR and the
Caribbean Resilience Facility (CRF), published a desk review on Gender Responsive Disaster
Preparedness and Recovery in the Caribbean (as cited in footnote)37. The main findings of
the desk review are:
34 Ibid, Pg 73
35 Study of the Impacts of Climate Change on the Women and Men of the Caribbean. Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience Countries (Informed by
FAO 2017b)
36
https://www.iucn.org/resources/issues-briefs/gender-and-climate-change
37 https://openknowledge-worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/35215/Gender-Responsive-Disaster-Preparedness and
Recovery in the Caribbean
41

=== PAGE 220 ===
• Women in the CRF countries experience various gaps in access to health,
social protection, vocational and technical education, productive resources,
economic opportunities, and voice and agency, all of which are associated
with their increased vulnerability to disasters and climate change hazards;
• Although indicators for educational attainment—measured as the number
of years of education—are almost the same for men and women in the CRF
countries, a significant gender gap persists at the level of technical and
vocational programs that might prevent women from improving their
access to income-earning opportunities, particularly in the recovery and
reconstruction programs in post-disaster settings;
• Strong evidence shows that in resource-poor nations, disasters make women
more vulnerable to reproductive and sexual health problems, suggesting the
necessity to include women’s health as a critical component of disaster relief
programs;
• An analysis of social indicators in the CRF countries demonstrates various
gender gaps in social protection, all of which make women more vulnerable to
disaster impacts due to their lower safety nets compared to men;
• Women’s domestic burdens and their primary responsibility for the well-being
of their families limit their economic opportunities and increase burdens
imposed on them in disaster situations;
• Higher unemployment rates, access to fewer economic opportunities, lower
wages, vulnerable employment, and insufficient social support systems for
domestic workers result in women’s limited access to safety nets compared to
men, making them more vulnerable in disaster situations;
• Although there are no exact statistics about the number of women in DRM
and climate change related decision-making positions, a general trend, based
on the number of women in national parliaments, and ministerial and
managerial positions, points to significant decision-making gender gaps.
• Country reports from the CRF countries provide evidence of persistent
violence due to inadequate protection measures for GBV victims, limited
responsive care, treatment, psychosocial and other supportive services, and
sub-culturally institutionalized violent practices. Importantly, the trend
exacerbates during disasters and in post-disaster settings; and
• A lack of focus prevails with men and boys’ vulnerability and capacity
analyses, compounded by limited efforts to engage men and boys adequately
as allies to achieve gender equality in disaster preparedness and recovery 38
38 https://openknowledge-worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/35215/Gender-Responsive-Disaster-Preparedness and
Recovery in the Caribbean
42

=== PAGE 221 ===
3.1.4 Unpaid Work
A case study undertaken (Bobb, 2019), describes the challenges faced by persons of
different gender when it comes to their access to clean water. Based on its findings, the
study concludes that access to water is critical to one’s quality of life and affects men and
women differently. The case highlights the challenges of Wendy, a 34-year-old married
mother of two children who resides in St. John, Barbados. For half of the year, Wendy’s
household comprises of herself and her two children: a single parent due to her husband,
Bernard, who works overseas on the farm labour program and contributes financially to the
household.
In summary, this case study (Bobb, 2019) indicates that the woman spends at least thirty-
two hours a week doing paid work, and twice that time doing unpaid domestic work at
home including, cooking, washing, gardening, caring for her children and the animals
and fetching and storing water for domestic use. Men, on the other hand, spend
approximately forty hours a week doing paid work but very little time doing unpaid
domestic chores. Although this case study does not necessarily represent the situation
throughout all of Barbados it does highlight, what appears to be, a common trend in the
country. The CGA (2016), similarly identified that studies in Barbados have shown that
women, in part because many are single parents, participate in income-generating activities
in both the formal and informal economies as well as carrying out the majority of unpaid
care activities.
3.1.5 Sexual and Gender Based Violence
The CGA identified that “patriarchal gender norms are often used to justify violence
against women who do not ‘know their place’ with regard to remaining within the private,
domestic sphere. These norms also support male control over the bodies of women and
girls and entitlement to sexual pleasure, justifying sexual violence”39. These findings
were advanced as a result of studies conducted by the Bureau of Gender Affairs/
Caribbean Development Research Services in 2009 which found a prevalence of violence
of 27% among adult women over the previous year. Correspondingly, A study on
interpersonal violence in three Caribbean countries: Barbados, Jamaica, and Trinidad and
Tobago, revealed that violent acts are most commonly perpetrated by a partner within a
relationship (59.0% on male victims and 66.7% on female victims)40. Important to note
is that the study found that the levels of any violence decreased as the victim’s ages
increased—falling from 72.4% among the 15–18-year-olds to 67.3% among the 27–30-
year-olds (p = 0.03). Reported physical violence fell from 66.2% among the 15–18-year-
olds to 49.0% among the 27–30-year-olds (p < 0.001). Reported sexual coercion fell from
39 Ibid.
40 Le Franc E, Samms-Vaughan M, Hambleton I, Fox K, Brown D. Interpersonal violence in three Caribbean countries:
Barbados, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago. Rev Panam Salud Publica. 2008;24(6): 409–21.
43

=== PAGE 222 ===
60.3% among the 15–18-year-olds to 50.1% among the 27–30-year-olds (p < 0.001)41.
For Barbados, of survey respondents 50.0% of women compared to 44.7% of men
revealed experience of physical aggression within an intimate partner relationship.
Similarly, 52.8% of women and 39.6% of men reported sexual coercion in Barbados.
Reports of Domestic Violence across the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
increased during the COVID-19 lockdown. The UN Women identifies that Barbados, in
particular, experienced an approximately 38 per cent increase in reported cases of
domestic violence, many of which were intimate partner violence.” 42
While Gender Based violence is found to be more prevalent in intimate partner settings,
it is also recognizably present in public spaces as well. There is however, limited
information and no comprehensive study on Sexual and Gender Based Violence in the
workplace in the Caribbean and specifically, in Barbados. The IFC identifies though, that
30%-50% of women in Latin America and the Caribbean have experienced sexual
harassment at work43. Positively, Barbados is one of three Caribbean Countries, also
including Belize and the Bahamas with specific legislation which addresses sexual
harassment44.
In addition to CEDAW, Barbados has ratified key international and regional human
rights instruments related to gender equality, namely the Inter-American Convention on
the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women. It has also
ratified the eight core International Labour Organization (ILO) Conventions. In 2016,
there were amendments to the domestic violence laws providing for more powers to the
police as well as changes to the definitions of forms of domestic violence, including
physical, emotional and financial abuse and harassment and the expanded scope to use
of electronic means to perpetuate violence. The Employment Sexual Harassment
(Prevention) Act was passed 201745 and provides an avenue for complaints where
harassment occurs in the workplace.
The prevalence of violence against women, and in particular young women and girls,
warrants a cautious approach to implementing community-based intervention under the
3R-CReWS Project. Importantly, is that the BWA recognizes the risks that may arise
from infrastructure works within communities. Projects like the 3R-CReWs bring people
and social transformation to the communities in which they operate. They may therefore
invariably exacerbate existing risks of Sexual and Gender Based Violence. Addressing
gender-based violence, including exploitation and harassment, in infrastructure projects
41 Ibid
42 https://gisbarbados.gov.bb/blog/domestic-violence-increased-with-covid-
19/#:~:text=In%20the%20first%20two%20quarters,reported%20incidents%20of%20domestic%20violence. Accessed:
August 15 2022
43 www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/42b50ce3-3867-48b2-9818-acfbc4080ea2/202007-IFC-GBV-
COVID+D.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=ndOei13
44 https://www.world-psi.org/en/barbados-pilot-study-gender-based-violence-public-sector accessed August 15th, 2022
45 ibid
44

=== PAGE 223 ===
is important because construction sites can become spaces where female workers, people
with diverse gender identities and those who live or work in the vicinity are
victimized46. SGBV must be prevented to ensure wellbeing of vulnerable groups in
project vicinity. Similarly, if not intentionally addressed, sexual and gender-based
violence can easily be ignored47. Women working in traditionally male-dominated
contexts, in isolated workspaces, or in occupations or shifts in which they constitute a
small minority may be at increased risk of SGBV
48
The Project’s Environmental and Social Impact Ass. essment puts forward that
“Section 154 of Barbados law is implicit about Sexual Exploitation,
Abuse, and Harassment (SEAH) but covers all aspects. By interpretation,
it articulates that the government will not tolerate SEAH in any form. This
is also the commitment CCCCC and GCF. Therefore, stringent policies
and safeguards are instituted at all levels of projects funded by CCCCC
and the GCF. In instances where it has been determined that a person has
been a victim of SEAH the AE/IE/IA will consult and work with the
relevant government ministry, department, or NGO to ensure that the
victim is place at a safe location and protected from further SEAH”.
The project must also be cognizant that while prevention of SGBV is the most effective
strategy, it must also provide an avenue for victims of SGBV to complain and to receive
redress for their victimization. Therefore, the Project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism must
be sufficiently responsive to allow for internal and external filing of SGBV and SEAH
related complaints.
3.1.6 Barbados Agriculture Sector -Gender, Climate Change and Water
The 3R-CReWs Project identifies that agriculture continues to compete with other sectors
for scarce resources such as water, land, labour and capital49. With the GOB’s increased
call for greater domestic food production through new and improved methods of farming
as a response to climate change, there is identified need for greater water availability, for
irrigation purposes. The Project conceptualizes that this should lead to improved food
security and health and well-being of the population. The outputs of Component four (4)
are critical to social acceptance and to spur demand. The component targets farmers and
communities. In particular, the development of incentive programme and public
awareness. During consultations with farmers, including with the Association of Women
in Agriculture, there was overwhelming consensus that Farmers are supportive of the use
of treated wastewater. According to the Baseline study for the project, farmers have been
experiencing the impact of prolonged dry periods. This has resulted in loss of income.
46 https://atalayar.com/en/blog/infrastructure-works-without-gender-based-violence access August 15th, 2022
47 https://blogs.iadb.org/sostenibilidad/en/the-many-faces-of-sexual-and-gender-based-violence-in-development-projects/
48 https://blogs.iadb.org/sostenibilidad/en/the-many-faces-of-sexual-and-gender-based-violence-in-development-projects/
49 Integrated Solutions, Funding Proposal -3R-CReWs Project, 2021
45

=== PAGE 224 ===
Farmers were equally cited as seeing benefits of nutrients in the water for the crop.
Farmers, particularly small farmers, are significantly impacted by both increased
production costs and lacking rainfall for rainfed crops50. Further to this point, an article
was published recently in the Barbados Advocate (2020), pleading with the government
to give farmers financial support for their water bills. Specifically, Mr. James Paul, the
Chief Executive Officer of the Barbados Agricultural Society, expressed concern for
farmers, explaining that the garbage and sewage contribution, imposed through BWA
utility bill, has resulted in a spike in agriculture operational costs (Barbados Advocate
2020). This, in combination with the increase in cost for irrigation, profit decrease from
lost crops, places farmers and the agricultural industry at a heightened risk.
Agriculture is more than a job for many women in the Caribbean. Women engage in
subsistence agriculture to support their families, while men are more likely to engage in
cash crop production51. The CGA puts forward that “although much of subsistence
agriculture is not captured in employment or GDP statistics and is carried out by the so-
called ‘economically inactive’ population, it is nevertheless a critical contributor to the
livelihoods of poorer people and is also important for food security”. Many of the small
subsistence plots and smallest farms in Barbados are female owned. Larger farms tend to
be owned by males. Close to 80% of all farms in Barbados are owned by men (79.7%)52.
The UNWOMEN’s 2017 gender analysis of employment in six (6) CARICOM countries
provided data on share of women’s employment in a number of standardized occupations
in Barbados. The Analysis utilised the ILO’s International Standard Classification of
Occupations (ISCO) definition “a set of tasks and duties performed, or meant to be
performed, by one person, including for an employer or in self-employment”, in the
classification and computation of the share of women’s participation in occupational
categories. Correspondingly, the analysis found that men are more likely than women to
be employed in agriculture in Countries like Barbados, although this disparity is not as
glaring as in other CARICOM countries like Jamaica and Guyana.
Figure 2: Share of women and Men by Occupation in Six Caribbean Countries
50 https://www.fao.org/americas/noticias/ver/en/c/419202/
51 CGA Barbados, 2016
52 Ibid.
46

=== PAGE 225 ===
Source: Taken from Status of Women and Men Report: A Gender Analysis of Labour
Force Data and Policy Frameworks in Six Caribbean Countries, UNwomen, 2017
Women’s non-ownership of resources, like land and proof of formal work, that could be
used for collateral constrains their access to credit for agriculture and also for productive
work in other sectors. For some women, they rely on a male relative with collateral to
apply on their behalf, others, like unmarried women, are not able to do so53. Facilities that
allow for farmers to access credit to improve irrigation or access to reclaimed water should
therefore be aware of barriers that women often face to formally access finance for
upgrade to their agricultural production.
The Association of Women in Agriculture in Barbados was consulted as part of larger
stakeholder engagement process during the development of this 3R-CReWS Project. This
representative group is seen as a critical stakeholder for the project in soliciting further
acceptance of women farmers of use and reuse of wastewater and by-products. Similarly,
this group is identified as a conduit for sharing information and opportunities with women
farmers so that they can benefit from access to information on use of reclaimed water, but
also access to reclaimed water for irrigation.
3.1.7 Barbados Fisheries Sector - Gender, Climate Change and Water
A case study undertaken by the Gender in Fisheries Team and UWI Centre for Resource
Management and Environmental Studies as part of the 2014 Barbados Green Economy
Scoping Study for the GOB argued that the fishing sector is an important water user. The
53 Ibid.
47

=== PAGE 226 ===
activities of the fisheries sector along with the value change would be significantly
affected by any changes in water quantity and quality. The main findings of the study were:
3.1.2.1 In Barbados, fisheries have been an important part of the national economy
and culture from the earliest recorded times;
3.1.2.2 Men typically dominate the harvest sector in Caribbean small-scale fisheries
while women play a critical role in the post-harvest sector in fish processing and
trade, and in ancillary activities, such as financing;
3.1.2.3 Post-harvest processing activities consume and waste large quantities of water;
and
3.1.2.4 The fisheries sector provides vital benefits to society and is also an important water
user.
Climate change presents key challenges for small-scale fisheries and mariculture and is
projected to have significant impacts on the lives of people dependent on these activities.
Changes in ocean temperature and chemistry are already affecting the distribution and
abundance of marine organisms. The precise magnitude of future impacts of climate change
on fisheries, in particular small-scale fisheries, are still poorly understood, since they involve
numerous interactions with fragile and complex ecosystems that are often already affected by
other stressors such as overfishing or pollution54. Assessing and managing risks to increase
resilience and decrease poverty, inequality, and food insecurity are thus a priority of
international cooperation55.
3.1.8 Non-Potable Water Generation, Distribution and Re-use
The overall implication of the available body of work suggests that sustainable aquifer
yields could decrease by around 50% by 2050. Approximately 57 Mm3/yr is extracted from
groundwater resources for domestic potable water distribution and an estimated 11 Mm3/yr
is extracted for agricultural irrigationn56. The exact amount of water extracted by agriculture
is much higher as most points of extraction are un-metered private wells. A study on Non-
Potable Water Generation, Distribution and Re-use: Analysis of Alternatives, which was
published in May 2021. The study identified that wastewater that is not safe for drinking
but can be recycled or reclaimed for specific non-potable purposes. The study examined
three forms of non- potable water namely; a) stormwater which is water from precipitation
such as rain; b) greywater which is wastewater generated in households or office buildings
from sinks, showers, baths, washing machines or dishwashers. It is easy to treat and reuse
54 Climate change and small-scale fisheries: A climate risk management perspective for the Caribbean 17 December 2021 -
https://reliefweb.int/report/haiti/climate-change-and-small-scale-fisheries-climate-risk-management-perspective-caribbean
55 Ibid
56
Integrated Sustainability (2021). Feasibility Study See Section 1.1.2
48

=== PAGE 227 ===
greywater for the purposes of flushing toilets, landscaping, crop irrigation and other non-
potable uses; and c) blackwater which is wastewater generated from toilets and contains
pathogens such as faeces, urine water and toilet paper from flushed toilets. The paper
identified at least three ways to tackle the issue of water scarcity such as; a) increase water
rates, to encourage less water wastage; b) offer subsidies to deprived and vulnerable groups
of the society; and c) promote collaboration between public and private sectors to develop
innovative public-private partnership project models for the generation of water.
It is understood that approximately 8% of the properties in Barbados are connected
to a wastewater collection system that directs their sewage to a wastewater treatment
plant. This means that approximately 92% of the population, that are not connected, use
some form of on-site wastewater disposal and treatment system. Most of these low-
income persons comprise of women and vulnerable groups.
It is recognized that the BWA, and the GOB, are currently initiating a project to develop
more wastewater collection and treatment systems, especially in Zone A areas that are
located over sensitive aquifer and groundwater well abstraction locations. This initiative will
most likely positively impact some of the vulnerable communities, including low-income
households and women in particular.
Reuse of wastewater produced by the Project should increase the water supply and
consequently minimize the negative impact of climate change on women and vulnerable
groups with respect to social and economic issues. Therefore, Women and other vulnerable
groups stand to benefit from the recycling and reuse of reclaimed water because this will be
contributing to a reduction in water scarcity and make more quantities of water available to
women as the larger consumers of water domestically.
While the potential benefit to women and vulnerable groups is noted, it is also important to
note the financial, informational, and unpaid work barriers that may impede women heads
of households and women led enterprises, including those in agriculture from benefiting
equally from access to reclaimed water. The 3R-CReWS Project cannot work on the
assumption that increased connections automatically translate to increased access. Barriers
that impede payment for wastewater services at the domestic level and connection to
services that allow for use of reclaimed water for small business, including small farmers is
an important consideration in costing wastewater service provision and also in determining
the parameters for the RAFF support. Wastewater Strategies, Operational plans and policies
must equally consider these barriers to sustained access to services by vulnerable groups.
Although wastewater is not always at the top of the agenda when discussing gender
issues, women are more likely to be affected by lack of wastewater treatment, reuse, and
poor management than men because they are more in direct contact with food, faeces,
childcare, and healthcare.
There are concerns about the amount of pesticide, hormones, medication, and chemicals
in wastewater which could seriously affect the health of all genders (Witmer, 2017).
49

=== PAGE 228 ===
3.1.9 Disaggregated Data for Wastewater
Other gender related issues associated with the wastewater sector are the absence of
adequate sex disaggregated data. At both the national and international levels, there is a
lack of sex-disaggregated data on water and sanitation. “As early as 1995, the Beijing
Declaration called on international organizations, NGOs and the private sector to
develop ‘gender-sensitive databases, information and monitoring systems’ on ‘the
impact on women of environmental and natural resource degradation, deriving from,
inter alia, unsustainable production and consumption patterns, drought, poor quality
water, global warming, desertification, sea-level rise […]”.57 This absence of data
results in a gap in service delivery and in ensuring equitable access to water and
sanitation services. This gap was demonstrable during the development of this Gender
Assessment. Based on roles performed by men and women, and resources accessible to
them, the analysis has hypothesized that in the domestic sphere, the availability of
affordable reclaimed wastewater can be beneficial for women in their performance of
care roles and may lessen the load of their double duty as breadwinners and as carers.
The dearth of research and data on the wastewater sector, and more specifically, the
absence of sex-disaggregated data, makes it difficult to present strong evidence-based
actions.
3.1.10 Social Impact of Upgrading Wastewater Systems
It is recognized that a full ESIA was developed for this Project. As such, this section is meant
to highlight some of the high-level issues related to how this Project may impact the public,
but further details should be drawn from the full ESIA and ESMP.
SIDS generally lack the capacity to establish and utilize legal and administrative frameworks
that define the responsibilities for the various government departments with a mandate to
design and execute projects having a need for environmental impact and social assessment.
The discharge of primary treated wastewater into the ocean has the potential to cause
marine environment and health problems resulting in a negative impact on citizens, tourism,
and the economy in Barbados.
Upgrading the wastewater systems also has several positive impacts, such as
improved wastewater collection, while higher treatment should result in improved health
conditions for the people especially women and other vulnerable groups. Reducing the
amount of wastewater discharged into the ocean should also have a positive effect on
the marine environment that relates to tourism as the main economic sector. “An increase
in potable water security by eliminating potable water demands for applications that can use
non-potable reclaimed water, as well as the increased use of reclaimed water would also
allow the agricultural industry to be more resilient to the impacts of climate change”58.
57 United Nations. (1995). Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. Op. cit. As cited in 3 Oxfam, 2020 Achieving
Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 6
58 Integrated Solutions, Funding Proposal -3R-CReWs Project, 2021
50

=== PAGE 229 ===
If energy can be generated from the waste, this helps the country’s 2030 renewable
energy goals, that should lead to a better quality of life for all citizens of Barbados. Also,
if farmers benefit from using reclaimed water, that contains nutrients as fertilizer, for
irrigation, then farmers, of all genders, could lower operating costs. Finally, if reclaimed
water (from the treatment plants) is used to recharge the aquifer, then this provides more
water reliability to all the people in this country - which helps businesses, and residents
and tourists. This would provide farmers with a more reliable water source, as the level
of water in the wells are often negatively impacted during droughts.
There are many social benefits to be derived from the implementation of this Project
including short-term employment during the preparatory and construction phases of the
project as part of efforts to upgrade the wastewater systems in Barbados. It will also allow
for the integration of gender across all adaptation and mitigation initiatives, build long-
term partnerships among stakeholders and improve capacity building and research for
informed climate action and training for BWA employees (Tortz et al., 2018). In this regard
women stand a great opportunity to be included in the implementation of the project to
address issues of concern to them because there are many more men employed in the
wastewater sector.
Educating the public on the positive social impacts of this Project is recommended by
inviting the public, like schools, to visit the Project and gain first-hand knowledge of the
positive activities. Every effort should be made to avoid discrimination on the Project as
noted by (Husbands and Dey, 2002). A lack of communication and negative media
coverage could affect the outcomes of the project (Husbands and Dey, 2002). One of the
prerequisites for the Project success are good appraisal processes in conjunction with
management and/or Contractors who possess the necessary motivation.
3.2 Stakeholder Mapping
The BWA Wastewater Division, is the primary authority with the responsibility to provide
potable water and manage the collection, treatment, and disposal process of wastewater in
Barbados (Isaacs, 2017). The Gender mapping identified individuals or organizations with
an interest or concern about the Project. These individuals or organizations, as outlined
within the Projects’ Stakeholder Engagement report, are categorized as internal and
external stakeholders of the Project.
3.2.1 Internal Stakeholders
The internal stakeholders include all persons operating within the BWA, who have a vested
interest in the outcome of the Project. They contribute to the internal functions of the
authority and affect its overall performance. The key internal stakeholders include the
Board of Directors which is responsible for approving the strategic and operational plans,
programs, projects along with their budgets, monitor implementation, evaluate, and
51

=== PAGE 230 ===
approve reports. Other internal stakeholders include the management and support staff of
the BWA Wastewater Division which is responsible for developing the annual work plans
and budgets, implement approved activities and reporting on progress. The BWA also reports
directly to the Ministry of Transport, Works, and Water Resources.
Mapping of the internal stakeholders revealed that there is a gender imbalance in the
ten- member Board with eighty percent of directors being men and twenty percent women.
Therefore, the Board decisions relating to policy, oversight, and approval of Project plans,
budgets and reports are influenced by men more than woman. Similarly, as highlighted
in Section 2, there is a gender gap of more men and women performing technical
functions at the BWA management level.
3.2.2 External Stakeholders
In Accordance with the Project’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan, the 3R-CReWS Project’s
external stakeholders include all persons or organizations with a vested interest in the
outcome of the project but operate outside of the BWA. On the one hand, they express
opinions on the operations of the BWA and in this way can influence its performance
while on the other hand, they can be influenced by the work and the performance of the
Authority.
At the national level, decisions relating to wastewater policy and legislation are made
by the Parliament and the Executive. Therefore, the mapping of key external
stakeholders covered parliamentary representatives, senators, and ministers. Mapping of
the external stakeholders revealed that at the national level, there is a 60% gender gap
among the 30 parliamentarians, a 14% gender gap among the 21 senators, and a 60%
gender gap among the 30 Cabinet Ministers. Although it should be stated that not all
ministries have direct influence or involvement over this Project. To see the full list of
parliamentarians that are involved in this project (including a measure of their involvement
in this Project), refer to Table B in the Stakeholder Engagement report. Consequently,
decisions taken by the political directorate and the Cabinet of Ministers involved in this
Project are influenced by men.
Table G: below, shows the gender distribution of the members of the Legislature and
Executive branches of the Government of Barbados. 59
Table G. Gender Distribution and Gap of the Barbados Legislature and Executive
Institution Total Male Female
House of Assembly
Government Parliamentarian 29 23 or 77% 6 or 20%
Opposition Parliamentarian 01 1 or 3% -
Total 30 24 or 80% 6 or 20%
59
htpps://www.barbadosparliament.com
52

--- Table 1 on Page 230 ---
Institution | Total | Male | Female
House of Assembly |  |  | 
 | 29 | 23 or 77% | 6 or 20%
 | 01 | 1 or 3% | -
 | 30 | 24 or 80% | 6 or 20%

=== PAGE 231 ===
The Senate
Government Senator 12 7 or 58% 5 or 46%
Independent Senator 7 4 or 57% 3 or 33%
Opposition Senator 2 1 or 5% 1 or 11%
Total 21 12 or 57% 9 or 43%
The Cabinet
Cabinet Minister* 30 24 or 80% 6 or 20%
*It is noted that Barbados appointed its first female Prime Minister to head the Government in 2018 and was re-
elected in 2022.
There are several other important external stakeholder organizations in the public sector,
the private sector, and the civil society sector. The country first female Prime Minister was
elected to a second term in 2022. Additionally, the country has its second female Governor
General. In addition to social assistance, the Government places strong emphasis on
facilitating and supporting women entrepreneurship and business development as one way
of responding to rising levels of unemployment, retrenchment and to assist with the
economy’s recovery. Included are incentives for micro and small businesses such as grants,
loans, technical assistance.60
3.2.3 Stakeholder Feedback
As part of Stakeholder Engagement process, a questionnaire was administered to key
stakeholders in Government Ministries, the private sector, community associations, the
University of the West Indies Gender Studies Department and NGOs. In total, the
survey was sent by email to 49 key stakeholders. With only 24 responding. Table H
presents the disaggregated data on a survey among stakeholders to obtain their views
on the questions relating to climate change and wastewater collection and treatment in
Barbados. A comparison is made regarding the views expressed by men and women to
identify similarities or differences between the genders. The acronyms used are shown
at the bottom of this table for quick reference.
Table H Results from key Stakeholder Surveys
No. Questions Women’s Response % Men’s Response %
Q1 Is your home or business connected to a sewer Y:43 N:57 Y:43 N: 57
and waste/water treatment plant?
Q2 Do the current wastewater collection systems Y:43 N:57 Y:43 N: 57
and treatment plants adequately protect the
environment?
Q3 Does the general practice of discharging Y:29 N:71 Y: 71 N: 29
untreated wastewater to the ground protect
the island ground water quality?
60 2021 Barbados NDC Update – July 2021
53

--- Table 1 on Page 231 ---
The Senate |  |  | 
 | 12 | 7 or 58% | 5 or 46%
 | 7 | 4 or 57% | 3 or 33%
 | 2 | 1 or 5% | 1 or 11%
 | 21 | 12 or 57% | 9 or 43%
The Cabinet |  |  | 
 | 30 | 24 or 80% | 6 or 20%

--- Table 2 on Page 231 ---
No. | Questions | Women’s Response % |  | Men’s Response % | 
Q1 | Is your home or business connected to a sewer
and waste/water treatment plant? | Y:43 | N:57 | Y:43 | N: 57
Q2 | Do the current wastewater collection systems
and treatment plants adequately protect the
environment? | Y:43 | N:57 | Y:43 | N: 57
Q3 | Does the general practice of discharging
untreated wastewater to the ground protect
the island ground water quality? | Y:29 | N:71 | Y: 71 | N: 29

=== PAGE 232 ===
Q4 All homes, offices, businesses and industries Ag:43 D:57 Ag: 86 D:14
should be connected to a sewer and
wastewater treatment plant?
Q5 How concerned are you that climate change VC:85 MC:15 VC:58 MC: 42
could reduce the quantity of drinking water
available?
Q6 How concerned are you that climate change MC:57 NC: 43 VC:57 MC:43
could reduce the quality of drinking water?
Q7 How concerned are you that climate change VC: 42 SC:57 VC:86 SC:14
could increase the cost of drinking water?
Q8 How concerned are you that climate change VC: 71 NC:29 VC:43 NC:57
could increase the cost of wastewater
collection and treatment?
Q9 How concerned are you that decreased MC:86 SC:14 MC:71 SC:29
drinking water availability could affect
Barbados’ economy?
Q10 How concerned are you that lack of sewage MC:57 SC:43 MC: 71 SC:29
collection and treatment could affect
Barbados’ economy?
Q11 Do you think wastewater treatment benefits the AL: 86 MoC:1 AL:71 MOC:29
environment? 4
Q12 How important do you think it is for the VI: 85 Y:29 VI:71 Y:29
government to invest more money to increase
water supply?
Q13 How important do you think it is for the VI: 71 Y: 29 VI:71 Y:29
government to invest more money to provide
wastewater collection and treatment?
Q14 How concerned are you about using reclaimed MC:14 NC:71 MC:29 NC:71
treated wastewater to satisfy non potable (eg.
Irrigation) water demands?
Q15 How concerned are you about using highly HC: 14 NC: 86 HC:14 NC:86
treated reclaimed water to recharge
groundwater?
Q16 There are inadequate government standards Ag: 29 D: 71 Ag: 14 D: 86
and regulations in place to safely enable
reclaimed water to be used to satisfy non-
potable water demands.
Q17 How much in favor are you of implementing Ag: 71 D: 29 Ag: 1
treatment technologies to recover water, 4
energy and nutrients for wastewater?
54

--- Table 1 on Page 232 ---
Q4 | All homes, offices, businesses and industries
should be connected to a sewer and
wastewater treatment plant? | Ag:43 | D:57 | Ag: 86 | D:14
Q5 | How concerned are you that climate change
could reduce the quantity of drinking water
available? | VC:85 | MC:15 | VC:58 | MC: 42
Q6 | How concerned are you that climate change
could reduce the quality of drinking water? | MC:57 | NC: 43 | VC:57 | MC:43
Q7 | How concerned are you that climate change
could increase the cost of drinking water? | VC: 42 | SC:57 | VC:86 | SC:14
Q8 | How concerned are you that climate change
could increase the cost of wastewater
collection and treatment? | VC: 71 | NC:29 | VC:43 | NC:57
Q9 | How concerned are you that decreased
drinking water availability could affect
Barbados’ economy? | MC:86 | SC:14 | MC:71 | SC:29
Q10 | How concerned are you that lack of sewage
collection and treatment could affect
Barbados’ economy? | MC:57 | SC:43 | MC: 71 | SC:29
Q11 | Do you think wastewater treatment benefits the
environment? | AL: 86 | MoC:1
4 | AL:71 | MOC:29
Q12 | How important do you think it is for the
government to invest more money to increase
water supply? | VI: 85 | Y:29 | VI:71 | Y:29
Q13 | How important do you think it is for the
government to invest more money to provide
wastewater collection and treatment? | VI: 71 | Y: 29 | VI:71 | Y:29
Q14 | How concerned are you about using reclaimed
treated wastewater to satisfy non potable (eg.
Irrigation) water demands? | MC:14 | NC:71 | MC:29 | NC:71
Q15 | How concerned are you about using highly
treated reclaimed water to recharge
groundwater? | HC: 14 | NC: 86 | HC:14 | NC:86
Q16 | There are inadequate government standards
and regulations in place to safely enable
reclaimed water to be used to satisfy non-
potable water demands. | Ag: 29 | D: 71 | Ag: 14 | D: 86
Q17 | How much in favor are you of implementing
treatment technologies to recover water,
energy and nutrients for wastewater? | Ag: 71 | D: | 29 | Ag:

=== PAGE 233 ===
Q18 For the following statement please indicate Ag: 57 D: 43 Ag: 7
how strongly you agree or disagree with it? 1
(Only BWA customers connected to the
sewer should pay for the cost of wastewater
collection and treatment)
*Acronyms
Y: Yes/ N: No VC: Very SC: NC: Not VI: Very
Concerned Somewhat Concerne Importan
Ag. Agree MC: Much MoC: H C: A L: A lot
D: Disagree Concerne Moderately Highly
The survey demonstrated that the opinions of men and women stakeholders who responded
varied on the effects of climate change related to the wastewater management system
in Barbados. Men and women shared similar views on the numbers and adequacy of sewer
connection to treatment plants as a protection to the environment, reduction of quality of
water through climate change, economic impact, benefits of wastewater to the
environment, government greater investment to increase water supply and treatment, use
of reclaimed treated wastewater for irrigation, inadequate government standards and
regulations to enable reclaimed water to be used for non-portable water and agreed to
recover water, energy and nutrients from wastewater. These views reflect a lack of
understanding of the extent of the wastewater problem in the country. This calls for greater
public education in this regard.
All respondents expressed concern that climate change would affect the quantity of
drinking water with 85% of women and 58% of men rated as very concerned. This is
reflective of the statistical data showing that in general, women engage in more water
related tasks within the household, such as cooking, cleaning, and washing, and therefore
tend to report greater amounts of water usage (Suchorski, 2009). 78.5% of respondents
expressed concern that climate change could reduce the quality of drinking water,
although the responses show that women are on the two extremes of this response with
57% of women very concerned, while the remaining 43% are not concerned about
drinking water quality. At the community level, households are concerned with the impact
of water scarcity, including availability of quantity and quality water to households,
interruptions in water supply, costs associated with improved wastewater collection
systems, and environmental impacts of using wastewater. With the high number of female-
led households, and given that women, children and elders are primary users of water, a
concerted effort to address these concerns from a gendered and rights-based approach is
paramount. Strengthened capacities of BWA technical and administrative staff on
application of gender-sensitive/responsive approach to implementation would seek to
mitigate the concerns of the primary water users, including other vulnerable groups.
All respondents felt that the impacts of climate change would affect the cost of drinking
55

--- Table 1 on Page 233 ---
Q18 | For the following statement please indicate
how strongly you agree or disagree with it?
(Only BWA customers connected to the
sewer should pay for the cost of wastewater
collection and treatment) | Ag: 57 | D: | 43 | Ag:

--- Table 2 on Page 233 ---
Y: Yes/ N: No | VC: Very
Concerned | SC:
Somewhat | NC: Not
Concerne | VI: Very
Importan
Ag. Agree
D: Disagree | MC: Much
Concerne | MoC:
Moderately | H C:
Highly | A L: A lot

=== PAGE 234 ===
water in Barbados with 64% expressing they are very concerned (33% females, 67%
males). It is important to note, that of the survey respondents, 43% of females and males
respectively, indicated that they are connected to a sewer and/or wastewater collection
plant. These, respondents felt that the current system adequately protects the environment
and felt that all homes should be connected to a sewer and/or wastewater collection plant.
More men than women agreed all homes, offices and businesses should be connected to a
sewer treatment plant. However, more women are of the view that only BWA customers
connected to sewer should pay for the cost of wastewater collection treatment plant.
Neither men nor women appear to be concerned about using highly treated reclaimed
water/wastewater to satisfy non portable water demands like irrigation. The reaction is
positive and project strategies can capitalize on this general acceptance to increase
connection to waste water treatment systems and eventual non-potable use of reclaimed
water.
In summary, there are many issues where both men and women share similar views on
wastewater collection and treatment among the stakeholders in Barbados. There are,
however, instances where there are differences in the views of men and women, especially
in the area of discharging untreated wastewater to the ground. Another area where men
appear to differ from women is in the area of willingness to pay for wastewater
improvement. Men are seemingly more concerned with paying for wastewater
improvement. Women typically need more water during their daily activities and might
be willing to pay more to satisfy their needs.
Willingness to Pay
A Limited Willingness to Pay Survey was initiated in 2021 where 75 individuals (19
females, 56 males) participated. All respondents indicated that they were representing
households (there were no business responses). The administration of this survey was
halted as GOB requested a hold on the process due to unfavourable economic conditions.
Trends were examined from this data and are included in the 3R-CReWs Project
Feasibility Study. From the information gleaned, the data collected can provide some
perspective on the impact of cost and willingness to pay for upgrades to the current system
to address gaps in wastewater collection and treatment. 45% of respondents (8:4.75 male
to female) provided responses regarding increasing the monthly costs for upgrading the
wastewater management system in Barbados including for planning, construction,
operation and maintenance. The average cost respondents were willing to pay was BDS
$15.94 monthly. The data showed no glaring differences in women’s and men’s
willingness to pay. A gendered analysis of cost must take account for the wage gap
between males and females, especially considering the 8:4.75 male/female ratio in the
willingness to pay survey. Similarly, it is important to emphasize that the findings of the
willingness to pay survey does not bare statistical significance given its limited number of
respondents relative to the population of Barbados. Therefore, strategies to expand
connectivity to treatment systems must ensure prior, gender responsive consultations with
male and female headed households and must document their views whether divergent or
56

=== PAGE 235 ===
similar. The UWI IGDS put forward in a KII that the Welfare Department periodically
makes provisions to supply water to those who can’t afford to pay their water bills. The bills
have doubled recently as a levy for wastewater was added now. Management is now
included on the water and wastewater bill. It was confirmed that the minimum charge is now
($37.5) United States dollars per month which includes solid waste.
Consistent with survey issued to key stakeholders, 75% of respondents agreed that
Barbados was experiencing a shortage of clean water. While 93% felt that Barbados would
benefit from improved wastewater management. UWI-IGDS identified that there are
several households that do not have flushable toilets and some people are squatters making
sanitation a big issue. There are still several people who use pit latrines.
The UWI-IGDS opined in a KII that using reclaimed water may be difficult for people
to accept. It might be a hard sell for many. Recently several blue pipes were replaced
by black pipes. Although the use factor was identical a lot of people resisted because
they thought the black pipes were giving dirtier water. Interestingly the limited
Willingness to Pay survey revealed that 82.8% of respondents agreed that if wastewater
was treated to the highest level, it could be distributed in a pipe system for uses other than
drinking, including watering household gardens (91%) and household toilet flushing
(95%). Of note is that only 46% agreed that this type of water is useful for laundry. There
was no noticeable divergence in views of men and women. It remains important however
that the project utilized gender sensitive communication campaign to address reservations
that men and women may have regarding the use of wastewater for non-potable purposes.
57

=== PAGE 236 ===
Table I Survey Responses on Awareness of Wastewater System Improvement
Needs and Cost
No. Questions Responses Participants Gender
% Reponse
1 Where does wastewater -Into a septic tank or 37% of 62 =23 M =13,
go when it leaves your hole/well (that does not F=10
home? connect to a soak-away
field)
-Into a septic tank or
hole/well that connects 21% of 62=13
to a soak-away field
M=7, F=6
(that soaks into the
ground) 42% of 62=26
M=14, F=12
- Other
2 How often is water supply -Rarely once or twice 38%of60=23 M=13,
interrupted? for the year F=10
-Only a few times per 35% of 60=21
year 27% of 60=16 M=12,
-Other
F=09
3 How satisfied are you with -Satisfied 53% of 58=31 M=17 ,
the water flow? -Neutral/Unsure 29% of 58=16 F=14 M=09
-Dissatisfied 18% of 60=11 F=07 M=06
4 Aware of Water Aware 66% of 60=38 M=21 ,
conditions Not aware 34% of 60=20 F=17
5 Water aspects that are -Very important 93% of 57=53 M=29,
very important -Not important 7% of 57=4 F=24
M 02
6 Average amount Willingness to pay $15.94 100% of 34=34 M=19,
from respondents Bds monthly F=15
Willingness to pay below 67% of 34=23
$15.94 Bds monthly M=13,
7 Maximum in Willingness to pay above 33% of 34=11 M=06 =05
additional amount $15.94 Bds monthly
8 Do you
agree/disagree with
these statements: Average agreed 84% 84% of 56=47 M=26,
-Barbados has a of total responses F=21
shortage of available Average Neutral 14%, 14% of 56=8
clean Water of total responses M=04F=0
-Discharging Average Disagree 2%, 2% of 56=2 M=01,
wastewater into sea of total responses F=01
58

--- Table 1 on Page 236 ---
No. | Questions | Responses | Participants | Gender
 |  |  | % | Reponse
 | Where does wastewater
go when it leaves your
home? | -Into a septic tank or
hole/well (that does not
connect to a soak-away
field)
-Into a septic tank or
hole/well that connects
to a soak-away field
(that soaks into the
ground)
- Other | 37% of 62 =23
21% of 62=13
42% of 62=26 | 
 | How often is water supply
interrupted? | -Rarely once or twice
for the year
-Only a few times per
year
-Other | 38%of60=23
35% of 60=21
27% of 60=16 | 
 | How satisfied are you with
the water flow? | -Satisfied
-Neutral/Unsure
-Dissatisfied | 53% of 58=31
29% of 58=16
18% of 60=11 | 
 | Aware of Water
conditions | Aware
Not aware | 66% of 60=38
34% of 60=20 | 
 | Water aspects that are
very important | -Very important
-Not important | 93% of 57=53
7% of 57=4 | 
 | Average amount
from respondents | Willingness to pay $15.94
Bds monthly
Willingness to pay below
$15.94 Bds monthly | 100% of 34=34
67% of 34=23 | 
 | Maximum in
additional amount | Willingness to pay above
$15.94 Bds monthly | 33% of 34=11 | 
 | Do you
agree/disagree with
these statements:
-Barbados has a
shortage of available
clean Water
-Discharging
wastewater into sea | Average agreed 84%
of total responses
Average Neutral 14%,
of total responses
Average Disagree 2%,
of total responses | 84% of 56=47
14% of 56=8
2% of 56=2 | 

=== PAGE 237 ===
9 Use of treated Approve 82%, of 82% of 56=46 M=25,
wastewater for non- total 11% of 56=6 F=21
drinking purposes Use of responses 7% of 56=4 M=03,
wastewater for crops Neutral 11%, of total F=03
responses M=02,
Disapprove 7%, of total F=02
responses
Ability to Pay
Labour force participation is lower among women than men, but similar percentages are
classified as unemployed (8%). The difference in labour force participation is accounted for
by the consistently higher participation of men in formal employment and of women in the
so-called ‘economically inactive’ population61. The CGA identified the stratification of
labour based on sex. Men and women are mostly economically active in distinct work areas,
albeit having some areas of congruence. This may account for gender wage gap identified
to be 18.9% (average male wage 18.9% higher than average female wage). Men are mostly
employed in the areas of construction, mining and quarrying; wholesale and retail;
transportation and storage; and public administration and defence. The largest numbers of
female employees are in wholesale and retail; accommodation and food services (tourism);
health and social work; education; and public administration and defence.
A UN women study (2017) in six Caribbean countries, including Barbados found that in all
countries, the rate of employment increases with increasing education. The differences in
employment vis a vis educational level was largest for women in St. Lucia and Barbados,
where fewer than a fifth of women with primary education are employed as against
approximately seven in every ten women with tertiary education. In Barbados only 19% of
women and 33% of men respectively with a primary education were employed compared to
69% of women and 72% of men with a tertiary education being employed62. The 2017 study
revealed a constant pattern across countries is that the employment rate is lower for women
than men at each of the three levels of education. The study put forward that “The gender
difference in this respect tends to be smaller for those with tertiary education than for those
with only primary education. Given that women tend to be more highly educated than men
in these six countries, the lower employment rates for women suggest the economy is not
taking full advantage of the available human resources. Conversely, many women are not
reaping the full potential".
In addition, studies have identified that poverty is concentrated among households headed
by women, which account for 47.5% of all households. The rate of poverty in female-headed
households is 19.4%, compared with 11.5% in male-headed households and 15% in all
61 Country Gender Assessment (CGA) Barbados – Caribbean Development Bank, January 2016
62
A Gender Analysis of Labour Force Data and Policy Frameworks in Six CARICOM Member States-
STATUS OF WOMEN AND MEN REPORT-PRODUcTive EMPlOyMENT AND DEcENT WORk FOR All, UNWomen, 2017
59

--- Table 1 on Page 237 ---
Use of treated
wastewater for non-
drinking purposes Use of
wastewater for crops | Approve 82%, of
total
responses
Neutral 11%, of total
responses
Disapprove 7%, of total
responses | 82% of 56=46
11% of 56=6
7% of 56=4

=== PAGE 238 ===
households. Poor female-headed households also have the highest dependency ratio, with
74.8% non-earners per household compared with 68.6% in poor male-headed households
and 49.9% in the total population63. The UWI-IGDS confirms that single women head 57%
of households in Barbados. Among the households, these include migrant women caring for
critically ill relatives or those with disabilities64.
To this end, strategies for expanding access to sewage treatment systems and associated
cost, need not only take into account male and female headed household differences but
should also consider the educational level of household heads in determining the ability
to pay for services. Consideration of Gender intersectionality in this regard is important
and may serve to inform the articulation of national wastewater strategies, legislation and
RAFF.
FINDINGS
The Gender Impact Assessment is the third part of the gender analysis process model
which involved determining the gendered needs of the wastewater sector and services
as well as an assessment of the impacts (main/ancillary), risk perception, and equality
of distribution of the Project benefits. Using the GCF’s Gender Assessment template, the
results of the gender analysis have been organized in a manner to respond to five key
questions; What is the context? Who does what? Who has what? Who decides? and Who
benefits? Details of responses received are presented under separate headings in the sub-
sections that follow.
4.1 Gender Context
The GOB seeks to develop and implement this climate resilience wastewater systems
Project to address several national development challenges facing the country. Some of
the factors that are regarded as relevant to the Project include:
 Citizens of Barbados generally experience limited access to the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities of the BWA;
 The absence of an approved national gender policy and lack of provisions in
wastewater legislation currently in force makes it imperative for the GOB to intensify
efforts to create a more enabling legal environment for implementation of the project.
Moreover, the project provides an opportunity for update of the wastewater legislation
and masterplan in a gender responsive manner that includes meaningful consultation
with women and women’s representative groups;
 The Project presents an opportunity to expand the availability of sex-disaggregated
data for water and sanitation services. The increased availability of data may help
63 Country Gender Assessment (CGA) Barbados – Caribbean Development Bank, January 2016
64 KII- UWI IGDS
60

=== PAGE 239 ===
close policy and practice gaps in providing equitable access to water services;
 The BWA and other public agencies with mandates to provide wastewater services
to citizens are expected to give due consideration to address the social, political, and
economic problems that citizens face and to collaborate with each other to resolve
them;
 Authorities operating in the wastewater sector, such as the BWA, have a
responsibility to consult citizens, as key stakeholders, on issues that affect them to
ensure that national wastewater policies are aligned to the UN-SDGs. More,
specifically, these institutions are also expected to highlight SDG-5 by adopting
appropriate strategies and plans which promotes gender equality in the wastewater
sector;
 Given that climate change impacts on the wastewater sector is a serious challenge
to national development in Barbados, it is imperative that efforts to improve
wastewater management focus on initiatives to achieve more sustainable and
equitable services. It is also important for the Project to identify the various causes of
vulnerability and take steps to build on the diverse knowledge and capacities within
the communities/households that can be used to make wastewater services more
resilient to climate-related shocks and risks.;
 Citizens would appreciate if the Project would include governing structures and
operating mechanisms to foster gender sensitive stakeholder participation in
the design, implementation, and evaluation of the Project. The project should refrain
from operating under the assumption that initial connection to wastewater services
immediately translates to benefits for more women than men. It is important to
consider sustainability of access by reviewing wastewater costing structure and
incentive programmes.
 Stakeholders should also be offered opportunities to better understanding the gender
roles and power relations among different men and women involved the Project. An
examination of the different roles, rights, needs, and opportunities of men and women,
boys, and girls will help provide guidance on measures required to promote the gender
equality using relevant gender entry points, policies, and identify opportunities for
enhancing gender equality within the project
 Barbados has made recognizable Human Development gains and has made
improvements in legislation that tend to gender equality. However, there remains
inequities. Linked to those, is the unequal power relationships often detrimental to the
promotion and protection of women and girls. The prevalence of SGBV, though
higher in intimate partner relationships is still present outside of the private sphere.
Therefore, projects such as these need to promote a preventative approach to SGBV.
This includes zero tolerance policy and code of conduct for project staff and staff
interacting with communities. In addition, there has to be gender responsive complaint
61

=== PAGE 240 ===
mechanisms that prove useful for victims of SGBV, if prevention is not achieved.
Gender sensitivity training is useful as well in addressing SGBV risks, however these
are to be made mandatory to staff based on roles and functions.
 As an employer, the BWA should also seek to provide a non-discriminatory
working environment that facilitates gender-balance in appointments and gender
sensitivity in the decisions and actions of the project staff. The BWA also seeks to
offer a safe working environment for its managerial, technical, and administrative
staff and those assigned to the Project; and
 The project provides key stakeholders with a unique opportunity to undertake a
stakeholder review of the existing policy and legal instruments as well as the main
institutions making up the operating environment. It also allows the opportunity to
strengthen policies related to gender equality and update and enact wastewater
legislation and introduce regulations to guide the decisions and actions of staff within
the BWA, the Wastewater Division, and the Project.
 During the Project implementation, it recommended that the GOB take steps to create
an enabling legal environment by providing appropriate policy, legislative and
institutional support where needed. The primary legislation that governs the
operations of the BWA, is the BWA Act, of October 1980, Cap. 274a LRO, 1985. The
Act is supported by the BWA (Sewerage Regulations), 1980, (S.I. No. 151 of 1980),
and the BWA (Validation of Water and Sewerage Rates) Act, 2009.
 It is noted that some of these legal instruments are outdated because they have been in force
for over forty years and as such, they are likely to limit the ability of the BWA to upgrade
its systems and operations and do not necessarily reflect the needs of the wastewater sector
and the Project at this time. Efforts by the relevant Ministries and Bureau of Gender Affairs
of the GOB to advance gender equity and equality are commendable but more is still needed
to be done.
 The BWA, and the Ministry of Transport, Works and Water Resources, should encourage
the GOB, through the Ministry of Legal Affairs, the Bureau of Gender Affairs and the
Department of Labour, to undertake a comprehensive review of the legal instruments and
take steps to strengthen provisions for gender equity and equality. These Ministers should
table an updated wastewater legislation that is gender sensitive in Parliament for enactment
and should introduce updated supporting regulations as required.
4.2 Gender Roles
 With regards to the division of labour between men, women, there are more men than
women employed in the technical professions (Allen et.al., 2016). In the case of the
technical professions, this pattern is also reflected in the wastewater sector as a
January 2021 staff survey indicates that the staff complement of the Wastewater
Division is currently made up of 83% men and 17 % women.
62

=== PAGE 241 ===
 Currently, the BWA has more men involved in the technical aspects of the
Wastewater Division management role, while women serve in more administrative
capacities. It is therefore important for the BWA to conduct a gender needs
assessment of its wastewater services team and adopt an employment promotion
strategy to bring about a more gender balance among BWA wastewater employees;
 Generally, there appears to be more women employed in the informal economy as
vendors, speculators, janitors, baby-sitters, shop operators and in the service industry
and professions such as nursing and teaching. In the labour force, there are more
men employed in the formal economy while conversely more women are in the
‘economically inactive’ population which is classified as the informal economy.
Women are typically selected to care for children and the elderly. Among the
elderly, men are more likely to live alone than women.65.
 In general, more men are employed in the formal economy as information
technologists, technicians, professionals such as engineers and occupy top managers
or chief executive. Most of these jobs require long hours of specialized training, they
are also more competitive, require high level of knowledge and skills and they are
generally more secured and are high paying jobs. Given the technical nature of this
wastewater Project, it is expected that it will attract more men than women. While the
BWA’s gender sensitivity training for its employees in collaboration with the UWI-
IDGS is commendable, there are more steps required to increase participation of
underrepresented groups in technical fields and in leadership positions at the BWA.
Trainings are voluntary and may not be as impactful in ensuring transformational
change if intended recipients do not participate. The BWA making trainings mandatory
for certain staff, such as those in HR and even for members of Management, will go
further to ensuring that cultural challenges to gender equality are addressed.
Additionally, if the BWA acts as a champion for women in STEM, this may influence
female youth, who have not selected career paths, to view STEM as a viable career
option for them.
 There are more men involved in providing wastewater services and importantly in
waste water decision making. On the other hand, women are the dominant users of
water in the Domestic Sphere. Improved wastewater services, resulting from this
Project, should result in more women having access to water to carry out daily chores
efficiently and effectively. However, how provision of services is rolled out and the
cost of services may be impacted by who makes decisions. Therefore, it is important
for the BWA to ensure that women are consulted and provided opportunities for
sustained access to water. Also important is that at the Project Board level, women and
women’s representatives should have equal participation in determining how the
benefits of the project are ascribed.
65 Allen, C. F & Maughan, J. & Baksh, J & Associates, January (2016). Gender Situation in Barbados CDB
Country Assessment (CGA)
63

=== PAGE 242 ===
 With respect to household management, most poor households are headed by
women, and therefore women stand to benefit from any treatment in wastewater
and increase in the quantities of non-potable water, if it is within their ability to pay
for it. Women are usually the ones who spend longer hours doing unpaid domestic
work such as cooking, gardening, collecting, and storing water for domestic use,
caring for children and the elderly, and the animals. 66
4.3 Resources
 Despite the general acceptance of the principle of comparable worth, more men than
women are likely to be employed in positions related to finance, technology,
information services, and the legislature, management, and technical professions67.
Consequently, more men than women are likely to have greater control over and
benefit from resources. There are some women whose economic status also improve
because they gain access to resources through marriage, common law relationships
and inheritance.
 The CGA identifies that the majority of self-employed persons, employers and
owners/managers of businesses are men. Research from the University of the West
Indies (UWI) as cited by the CGA, revealed the following difficulties for women’s
entrepreneurship and ownership:
1. Lack of access to credit, especially because of lack of collateral to secure
loans;
2. Weaker professional networks than men;
3. Lack of knowledge about procedures for incorporation, registration and
the taxation system;
4. Care roles
 The inability to produce job letters is also a greater barrier to access to finance for
women than for men as women have lower levels of employment in the formal sector.
The CGA posits that the formality of credit institutions and a history of discrimination
may make women, specifically socio-economically deprived women feel
uncomfortable to access services68. Risk taking aversion may compound vulnerable
women’s comfort in accessing services that are necessary to acquire resources such as
land or for enterprise start up or expansion.
 Barbados has universal access to primary and secondary education such that 90.6%
66 Bobb, D., (2019), Understanding Unequal Relations of Gender in the Caribbean, Wendy Water Woes: A
Barbados Case Study, UWI-IGDS, BWA, GCF, CCCCC.
67 Allen, C. F & Maughan, J. & Baksh, J & Associates, January (2016). Gender Situation in Barbados CDB
Country Assessment (CGA)
68 CGA Barbados, 2016
64

=== PAGE 243 ===
of attendees’ complete tertiary education while 93.4% complete primary education.
As well, more young women 40 years and below, have completed university
education and 50% of immigrants as against 30% locals have university education
(Beuermann, 2017). While education is accessible to both women and men, in recent
years, more women tend to pursue higher education continuously for a longer period
through distance learning to help them secure better paying jobs. The UN Women’s
gender analysis on employment trends in six Caribbean countries identified that
women need to have higher educational levels than men if they want earnings at the
same level as those of men. Students who stay longer in the education system are
likely to begin doing economic work later, however, once employed the nature of the
jobs secured ensures increased earning potential.
 Conversely, data shows that more men than women enrol for technical programmes
than women. Trotz and Issacs (2017) posits that low enrolment of women in technical
programmes can be linked to gender norms, roles and perceptions that act as a barrier
for women’s greater participation in these fields. “Water and wastewater treatment
usually fall under the field of Civil and Environmental Engineering. In the
Caribbean, the main training institutions with this program are the University of the
West Indies St. Augustine Campus in Trinidad and Tobago, the University of
Technology in Jamaica, and the University of Guyana. The percentages of females
have remained constant over nearly a decade with ~30% and ~45% enrollment
between 2006 and 2014 for undergraduate and graduate engineering programs. This
is significantly different from the overall UWI enrollment which showed the
proportion of females to males was 68.5% to 31.5% for total University enrolment,
with the St Augustine campus having 63% female enrolment for 2013/2014”69.
 There are Policies and laws that provide for equal access for women and men to land
holdings and tenure in Barbados. These have been in place since 196870. “The Town
and Country Planning Act (1968) (Amended 2003) provides for land and water rights
and legal security of tenure for all individuals irrespective of gender”71. However,
available evidence according the Country Gender Assessment suggests that men own
the bulk of land and other productive resources.
 The fact that men predominantly own land is much linked to the fact that the majority
of large agricultural land holdings are male owned and therefore men are
predominantly large-scale farmers, while women farm at a smaller scale and for
subsistence. Mechanisms used to target farmers for information sharing about the use
of reclaimed water needs to take this into consideration. Similarly, efforts at engaging
the private sector as partners and as potential beneficiaries of RAFF resources similarly
need to consider the needs of small-scale farmers. This has baring of livelihood and
69 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-fp060-water-sector-resilience-nexus-sustainability-
barbados-wsrn-s
70 CGA Barbados, 2016
71 ibid
65

=== PAGE 244 ===
food security for vulnerable populations.
 Access to monetized resources has impact on this project since the persons with more
financial resources are better able to pay for wastewater services72. Therefore, it is
reasonable to advance that more men than women will be able to afford water and
wastewater services73. Men also tend to have greater access to technical knowledge
and skills upgrading in wastewater because there are fewer women employed in the
sector. Incentives for development of domestic reuse and reclaimed waster
systems may benefit more men as a result.
4.4 Decision Making
There are several levels of decision making associated with the implementation of this 3R-
CReWS Project. Brief discussions on the different categories of decision makers and the
type of project decisions they are required to make follows.
 Parliamentarians as policymakers decide on the laws that influence gender equality
practices in Barbados. At present, parliament has 20% female and 80% male
representation with a first woman Prime Minister and a first woman Senate President.
In the twenty-six members Cabinet of Ministers, 73% of them are men and 27% are
women including the Prime Minister. Since there are more men than women in
Parliament, most of the decisions taken are likely to reflect the thinking of men. In
the absence of gender sensitivity training, male parliamentarians are slow to
recognize the need and urgency of making provisions for gender equality in
legislation;
 Cabinet ministers make public policy decisions to address issues relating to gender
equality and wastewater infrastructure and services. They may encourage men and
women as key stakeholders in the wastewater sector to participate in formulating
wastewater or gender policies in so far as these will affect them;
 The current ten member BWA Board, which was appointed in 2018 for a three-year
term, comprise 7 men or directors and 3 women directors. With the current gender
imbalance, the Board decisions will be influenced by the male directors. Women and
girls are key water and sanitation stakeholders, but this has not translated to practice
within the sector in Barbados. Of the fifty-eight staff attached to the Wastewater
Division 49 (or 84%) of them are men while only 9 (or 16%) are women. Similarly,
with the gender imbalance, support level decisions will also be influenced by the male
staff;
 In the households, men normally make most of the decisions as the bigger contributor
to the household income. Although women have made strides through education and
in gaining paid employment in management and supervisory levels in the public and
72 Ibid.
73 Ibid
66

=== PAGE 245 ===
private sector, they are relied upon in doing most of the domestic work and making
decisions in the household. However, like much of the English-Speaking Caribbean,
there is a substantial number of single female heads of households. Therefore,
consultation processes need to be mindful that stakeholder engagement activities reach
and document needs and decisions of these households.
4.5 Beneficiaries
 The Project across all its components targets 136,220 people in Barbados. Appendix
22b of the Funding proposal breaks down the project beneficiaries and identifies that
66,748 (49%) men and 69,472 (51%) women are likely to be direct beneficiaries from
the implementation of this Project because those who stand to benefit directly include
users of water wastewater services, which include the entire country. There is a similar
distribution of indirect beneficiaries Important to note is that this is reflective of the
overall population of Barbados. A more detailed look at the beneficiaries of the Project
by component suggest that the project is taking an approach of leave no one behind.
More specifically, the Project positions that 100% of female headed households and
100% of male headed householder respectively will benefit from the installation of
decentralized wastewater management systems in zone A. It is however important to
identify the recurrent costs that are associated with the connection to improved
wastewater services. Given that women do most of the domestic and care work, they
are greater users of water and wastewater services and will benefit more than men from
the implementation of the project at the domestic level. On the other hand, a key
beneficiary group identified by the Project are farmers, in this regard, there will be
higher numbers of male beneficiaries than male beneficiaries given the share
participation of male to female in Agriculture. The Tariff structure for water used for
irrigation should be mindful of the often-small scale agricultural activities performed
by women vis-a vis larger commercialised agriculture often headed by men. Important
is that the Project works along with the Association of Women in Agriculture to ensure
that women farmers (including for subsistence) receive information on the benefits of
the used of reclaimed water and are also supported with access to reclaimed water
services and other by-products of treated waste water.
 The GOB will also benefit directly from the project because it will bring about long-
term savings in energy cost (through the implementation of a possible related
biogas facility) and would be able to take credit for improving the lives of citizens.
Though not a direct benefit, savings may translate to improvement of services for
customers of the BWA.
 As the people/customers connected to the BWA wastewater collection system benefit
from the improved quality of wastewater services delivered to them, so should the
BWA, considering they will have a more satisfied customer base. This should also
lead to more customers paying their utility bills consistently. The BWA Wastewater
Division should also handle fewer breakdowns in the infrastructure (if the
67

=== PAGE 246 ===
recommendations for an improved operation and maintenance programme that
involves a more proactive approach is initiated, as outlined in the Conceptual Design
report) and should receive fewer complaints from customers.
 Several institutions from public, private, and civil society sectors, such as the Bureau
of Gender Affairs, the Office of Poverty Alleviation, the UWI-IGDS, the Barbados
Union of Teachers Union, and the Barbados National Women’s Organization, with
mandates to address gender-equality issues should benefit indirectly from
implementation of this Project. These institutions will benefit from participation in
stakeholder consultations, information sharing, improved wastewater services and
greater organizational productivity. Conversely the Project should facilitate the
advancement of the mandates of these institutions by ensuring their input into project
activities for the benefit of vulnerable groups, including women.
68

=== PAGE 247 ===
MAINSTREAMING GENDER INTO THE PROJECT CYCLE
In keeping with the requirements of the Gender Analysis Process Model, part four will
focus on mainstreaming gender into this Project cycle and giving a gender perspective
to the activities highlighted at the initiation, formulation, implementation, monitoring
and evaluation and closure stages of the project. This exercise entails clarifying the
Project goals and activities planned to be implemented at the different stages of the
project, examining the level of access/control that women, men and LGBTQIA
persons have over Project resources, examining the distribution of Project benefits to
ensure that is equity and equality among women, men and LGBTQIA persons, and
their level of participation in making important Project decisions.
5.1 Project Initiation Stage
 At the initiation stage, the focus of mainstreaming gender in this Project cycle Is to
clarify the main goals, assumptions, priorities, roles and responsibilities, schedule,
deadlines, and risks of the Project. This should make sure that the Project team has
made every effort to review and revise where necessary, the stakeholder engagement
plan for the project to ensure that key stakeholders, including representative groups of
vulnerable people, and women are engaged on wastewater services and gender
equality issues.
 In terms of priorities, it is noted that the Project comprises of several components, as
outlined in the Logical Framework. With respect to the Project governance function,
the BWA should pay attention to the establishment of a PSC that is gender-balanced
and the appointment of members to it who are gender sensitive. Similarly, the BWA
should apply the principles of gender-balance and gender sensitivity when
considering appointments to the positions of Project Manager and
technical/administrative support staff.
5.2 Implementation Stage
Project management should entail executing activities in accordance with the Project
Planning Frameworks. The implementation of the actions in the Gender Actions of the
projects are to be systematically mainstreamed into project activities to ensure meaningful
implementation. This stage also requires the Project Manager to hold status review meetings
to ensure that the Project is on schedule, and to document all changes to the Project plan.
It is also significant to undertake Project research to gather empirical data for the purpose
of making evidence-based decisions on matters relating to planning, budgeting, staffing, and
coordinating the implementation of Project activities. Additionally, empirical data also
provides the basis to evaluate the gender sensitivity practices of Project officials and
advocating for changes in gender equality policies and laws.
69

=== PAGE 248 ===
The 3R-CReWS Project has by design set the foundation for implementation of gender
responsive actions and ultimately gender mainstreaming. Gender Considerations are
mainstreamed across all four components of the project, but are more strongly visible in
Components 1, 3 and 4. These considerations have informed the Gender Action Plan
(Appendix 3).
The Project’s proposal puts forward that “the intended impact of the gender mainstreaming
action plan is to (i) increase the participation of women and LGBTQIA persons in decision
making and raise the awareness of men, women and vulnerable LGBTQIA communities
on gender issues to minimize discrimination against vulnerable groups including LBTQIA;
and (ii) improve the quality of life for vulnerable residents, especially women, and children
of Barbados in the areas of health, agriculture, and employment”.
The following outputs and activities have been included in the project to advance these
gender mainstreaming goals74:
Output 1.4: Decentralized treatment plants or cluster treatment facilities installed
Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small (cluster) decentralized wastewater collection and
treatment demonstration systems in Zone A locations to produce reuse quality water for
domestic/commercial non-potable water applications. This activity will ensure that
consultative processes capture the views of both male and female headed households in a
manner that informs the roll out and connection of services to these two communities.
Mixed methods of engagement will be employed, including focused conversations with
women’s groups and female farmers. Additionally, in the implementation of this activity
the project will ensure that communities are protected from sexual and gender-based
violence and gender-based discrimination. The Project will therefore set up mechanisms to
capture community concerns in a gender sensitive manner and that will prohibit
exploitative, abusive and harassing conduct by workers of the BWA, contractors and
subcontractors. Under this activity, the project will ensure that a code of conduct that
includes prohibitions for SEAH and SGBV is developed. This will apply to design
consultants’ staff, BWA staff, as well as contractors and their staff. Under this activity,
there is opportunity to open spaces for female employment in traditionally
underrepresented areas. The Project should ensure therefore, that hiring practices in
decentralized treatment facilities include non-discriminatory actions and promotes female
employment.
Output 3.1: Improved capabilities of water technical personnel to operate, maintain
and monitor and implement climate change adaptation planning strategies for
wastewater management
Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide specialized and customized training to support the
74 Sourced Directly from Project Funding Proposal
70

=== PAGE 249 ===
operations and maintenance of wastewater collection and treatment facilities including
photovoltaic equipment. This activity will include gender sensitivity and climate change
training for BWA employees and private sector
Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Operational Manual that
addresses the requirements of the upgrades, preventative maintenance, operator safety, and
environmental monitoring, including risks posed by climate change and gender and social
inclusion considerations.
Output 4.1: Governance and planning roadmaps enhanced to enable use of reclaimed
water in a controlled and regulated manner.
Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative review to promote the Planning and Development
Act, Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related legislations for enhancing wastewater
effluent quality, treatment options and re-use requirements and applications. The review
will also include recommendations for strengthening - private sector engagement, public-
private partnerships, building codes, resiliency to climate change and equal opportunities
and access to males and females.
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation master plan that includes an optimal
combination of decentralized, cluster and centralized water reclamation and reuse
applications, with the centralized reclaimed water being transmitted and used for
agricultural irrigation and/or industrial use (such as lower cost of reclaimed water
transmission). This strategy will also take into consideration the social, gender-related and
climate risks in the design and prioritization of water reuse strategies.
Output 4.2: Mechanisms developed/expanded to encourage the adoption of
wastewater treatment and reuse applications by private individuals and businesses.
Activity 4.2.1: Develop a strategy and action plan to engage the private sector in the
provision and adoption of wastewater treatment technology and the utilization of
wastewater by-products such as activated sludge. This includes conducting an assessment
to identify opportunities for public-private partnership in the water and wastewater sector,
especially for the expansion of the decentralized onsite cluster wastewater systems. The
strategy will also promote gender equality and women empowerment
Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and identify recommendations for a gender sensitive
and socially inclusive incentive programme to encourage conservation, recycle, re-use.
Activity 4.2.3: Expand the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to provide
resources for the adoption of decentralized onsite wastewater systems. The management of
the expanded RAFF will ensure to promote gender equality and social inclusion as a
requirement.
Output 4.3: Gender Sensitive Public Education and Awareness Campaign
Implemented.
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a Gender Sensitive Public Awareness Campaign
71

=== PAGE 250 ===
for community and visitors (tourists) through workshops, videos, community town hall
meetings, site tours (demonstration of the plant technology and by-product reuse) and
consultations. Consultations will include, but will not be limited to representative groups
of vulnerable communities, including with the Association of Women in Agriculture.
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Project Web Page and social media accounts, which
is dedicated to transparent measures of reporting, knowledge products, identify/host a link
to the Redress Mechanism and provide update to all stakeholders on the project activities.
This page will include, to the best extent possible, functions such as audio, sub-titles and/or
sign language to encourage social inclusion from disabled population. The project’s
webpage will also ensure to report project results disaggregated by gender, where possible.
The Project’s Implementation arrangements will promote gender mainstreaming in the
management and governance structures.
In addition to the gender sensitive results and activities flagged above, the following
implementation strategies will be utilized by the project implementation unit to further
strengthen gender considerations in the day-to-day operations of the project:
1. There will be gender sensitive stakeholder consultations throughout the lifetime of
the project that will aim to engage women’s groups and other vulnerable groupings
(all Components)
2. CCCCC Procurement policies, which promote adherence to the Centre’ Gender
Policy and Action Plan
3. Monitoring of indicators will disaggregate information by sex, where possible
4. The AE’s gender specialist will be available to provide technical advice and quality
control for the mainstreaming of gender in the results and activities identified above,
as well as to support the analysis of the sex disaggregated monitoring and evaluation
information collected routinely to inform planning and decision making on gender
mainstreaming, including the early identification of possible unplanned negative
gender issues emerging because of the project’s activities.
5. The Project PSC will strive to ensure gender balance and will include a
representative from the Barbados Bureau of Gender Affairs. The Project Manager
will present to the PSC a report on the Project’s Gender Action Plan annually.
6. All members of the Project Management Team will receive gender sensitivity
training at the inception of the project and thereafter mandatorily participate in
Gender Sensitivity training sessions.
72

=== PAGE 251 ===
Table J Gender Implications of Project Component Activities
Components and Activities Gender Considerations
Outputs
Component 1: Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse - This will enhance the capacity of persons who are the greatest
victims of climate change. Many more women stand to benefit from
Outcome 1: To enhance availability, management and use of tertiary any increased resilience of infrastructure in the wastewater sector.
level reclaimed water to improve the water sector’s resilience to
climate change. The BSTP will be upgraded from a CAS to a CAS-
4Stage Bardenpho system and 2 onsite decentralized treatment plants
(cluster) will be installed in 2 communities in Zone A locations to
produce a high-quality effluent that is biologically and chemically safe.
The effluent from the upgraded plants will be utilized for non-potable
water applications including irrigation and aquifer recharge. This is
expected to reduce the extraction of groundwater leading to reduced
aquifer saltwater intrusion, and increased availability of groundwater
during dry periods.
Output 1.1: The Activity 1.1.1: Design, procure and - Efforts to reduce energy cost and conserve wastewater treatment
Bridgetown Sewage convert/upgrade the existing conventional capacity for sanitary sewage will enhance the conditions of
Treatment Plant is activated sludge (CAS) biological treatment vulnerable persons particularly households headed by women and
upgraded to treat process at the Bridgetown Sewage Treatment those in poverty. This is best done by ensuring that these persons
wastewater to a tertiary Plant to tertiary filtration and disinfection for are engaged and that costing structure allows for continued access
water-quality standard. achieving national reclaimed water-quality to services by vulnerable people.
standards. - Ensure that a code of conduct that includes prohibitions for SEAH
Output 1.2: Tertiary Activity 1.2.1: Install reverse osmosis (RO) and SGBV is developed. This will apply to design consultants’
treated reclaimed water membrane filtration systems to reduce the total staff, BWA staff, as well as contractors and their staff.
is available to dissolved solids concentration of the reclaimed - Ensure that hiring practices in decentralized treatment facilities
supplement non-potable water produced at the BSTP include non-discriminatory actions and promotes female
use employment.
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline and 6 - Ensure that small farmers and female farmers have equitable access
aquifer recharge wells (injection wells) going to water for irrigation and are informed of opportunities for access.
from the BSTP for irrigation and aquifer
- Ensure that 2 communities in zone A are consulted appropriately
recharge.
and that they are aware of redress options if affected by the project.
Output 1.3: Decision- Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring This includes redress options for victims of SGBV.
support tools and programme that will include the installation of
73

--- Table 1 on Page 251 ---
Components and
Outputs | Activities | Gender Considerations
Component 1: Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse
Outcome 1: To enhance availability, management and use of tertiary
level reclaimed water to improve the water sector’s resilience to
climate change. The BSTP will be upgraded from a CAS to a CAS-
4Stage Bardenpho system and 2 onsite decentralized treatment plants
(cluster) will be installed in 2 communities in Zone A locations to
produce a high-quality effluent that is biologically and chemically safe.
The effluent from the upgraded plants will be utilized for non-potable
water applications including irrigation and aquifer recharge. This is
expected to reduce the extraction of groundwater leading to reduced
aquifer saltwater intrusion, and increased availability of groundwater
during dry periods. |  | - This will enhance the capacity of persons who are the greatest
victims of climate change. Many more women stand to benefit from
any increased resilience of infrastructure in the wastewater sector.
Output 1.1: The
Bridgetown Sewage
Treatment Plant is
upgraded to treat
wastewater to a tertiary
water-quality standard. | Activity 1.1.1: Design, procure and
convert/upgrade the existing conventional
activated sludge (CAS) biological treatment
process at the Bridgetown Sewage Treatment
Plant to tertiary filtration and disinfection for
achieving national reclaimed water-quality
standards. | - Efforts to reduce energy cost and conserve wastewater treatment
capacity for sanitary sewage will enhance the conditions of
vulnerable persons particularly households headed by women and
those in poverty. This is best done by ensuring that these persons
are engaged and that costing structure allows for continued access
to services by vulnerable people.
- Ensure that a code of conduct that includes prohibitions for SEAH
and SGBV is developed. This will apply to design consultants’
staff, BWA staff, as well as contractors and their staff.
- Ensure that hiring practices in decentralized treatment facilities
include non-discriminatory actions and promotes female
employment.
- Ensure that small farmers and female farmers have equitable access
to water for irrigation and are informed of opportunities for access.
- Ensure that 2 communities in zone A are consulted appropriately
and that they are aware of redress options if affected by the project.
This includes redress options for victims of SGBV.
Output 1.2: Tertiary
treated reclaimed water
is available to
supplement non-potable
use | Activity 1.2.1: Install reverse osmosis (RO)
membrane filtration systems to reduce the total
dissolved solids concentration of the reclaimed
water produced at the BSTP
Activity 1.2.2: Install a 9Km pipeline and 6
aquifer recharge wells (injection wells) going
from the BSTP for irrigation and aquifer
recharge. | 
Output 1.3: Decision-
support tools and | Activity 1.3.1: Implement a sewer monitoring
programme that will include the installation of | 

=== PAGE 252 ===
Components and Activities Gender Considerations
Outputs
infrastructure flow measurement and rain-gauging - Vulnerable women and girls in communities where decentralization
implemented to equipment at the BSTP to identify and address plants are to be installed should be protected from exploitation and
mitigate potential sources of inflow and infiltration to the sewer. violence.
climate change risks to Mechanisms that identify and reduce or - The low-income sector of the population stands to benefit from the
the wastewater mitigate vulnerabilities in the wastewater major outcomes of the project, and this will improve their quality of
collection and treatment collection systems will also be investigated. live and bridging the gap between high and low-income earners.
systems Many women living in poverty will benefit the most. This is done
Activity 1.3.2: Establish on-site laboratory where costs are kept minimal to ensure continued access to service.
facilities and personnel at the BSTP to - This will contribute to improvements in the quality of life for
generate influent and effluent water quality women and other vulnerable persons.
data to inform operations control strategies
- Women play a critical role in climate activities and additional
that optimize operations and reduce energy
knowledge and skills in this area will minimize risks in response to
consumption and GHG emissions.
adverse effects of climate change.
- A reduction in energy requirements will be of great benefit to
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Computerized
women who form the larger percentage of persons living in
Real-time Management System (CMMS) at
poverty.
the BSTP to inform decision making and
- A saving for men who are heads of their households.
climate resilient building
- Any increase in the water supply will enhance the quality of life for
Output 1.4: Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small (cluster)
more women in their domestic and care roles.
Decentralized treatment decentralized wastewater collection and
- Women spend a great deal of their time fetching water for domestic
systems or cluster treatment demonstration systems in Zone A
use and use large quantities in the field of work.
treatment systems locations to produce reuse quality water for
- Ensure increased participation of women in the production and use
installed domestic/commercial non-potable water
of reclaimed water, Women should benefit from any improvement
applications.
in the efforts by BWA to collect and measure wastewater influent
and effluent water samples to implement control strategies as these
efforts could improve the quality of wastewater service
- Women have been experiencing great challenges to maintain a
clean environment in the home and the workplace. An
improvement in the quality of life and reduce time lost to collect
and store water for use.
- Drought conditions resulting from climate change are likely to
cause serious water shortages in Barbados which can pose great
74

--- Table 1 on Page 252 ---
Components and
Outputs | Activities | Gender Considerations
infrastructure
implemented to
mitigate potential
climate change risks to
the wastewater
collection and treatment
systems | flow measurement and rain-gauging
equipment at the BSTP to identify and address
sources of inflow and infiltration to the sewer.
Mechanisms that identify and reduce or
mitigate vulnerabilities in the wastewater
collection systems will also be investigated.
Activity 1.3.2: Establish on-site laboratory
facilities and personnel at the BSTP to
generate influent and effluent water quality
data to inform operations control strategies
that optimize operations and reduce energy
consumption and GHG emissions.
Activity 1.3.3: Implement a Computerized
Real-time Management System (CMMS) at
the BSTP to inform decision making and
climate resilient building | - Vulnerable women and girls in communities where decentralization
plants are to be installed should be protected from exploitation and
violence.
- The low-income sector of the population stands to benefit from the
major outcomes of the project, and this will improve their quality of
live and bridging the gap between high and low-income earners.
Many women living in poverty will benefit the most. This is done
where costs are kept minimal to ensure continued access to service.
- This will contribute to improvements in the quality of life for
women and other vulnerable persons.
- Women play a critical role in climate activities and additional
knowledge and skills in this area will minimize risks in response to
adverse effects of climate change.
- A reduction in energy requirements will be of great benefit to
women who form the larger percentage of persons living in
poverty.
- A saving for men who are heads of their households.
- Any increase in the water supply will enhance the quality of life for
more women in their domestic and care roles.
- Women spend a great deal of their time fetching water for domestic
use and use large quantities in the field of work.
- Ensure increased participation of women in the production and use
of reclaimed water, Women should benefit from any improvement
in the efforts by BWA to collect and measure wastewater influent
and effluent water samples to implement control strategies as these
efforts could improve the quality of wastewater service
- Women have been experiencing great challenges to maintain a
clean environment in the home and the workplace. An
improvement in the quality of life and reduce time lost to collect
and store water for use.
- Drought conditions resulting from climate change are likely to
cause serious water shortages in Barbados which can pose great
Output 1.4:
Decentralized treatment
systems or cluster
treatment systems
installed | Activity 1.4.1: Construct two small (cluster)
decentralized wastewater collection and
treatment demonstration systems in Zone A
locations to produce reuse quality water for
domestic/commercial non-potable water
applications. | 

=== PAGE 253 ===
Components and Activities Gender Considerations
Outputs
challenges for women who are primarily care givers for children
and the elderly.
Component 2: Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency in Wastewater - Women are very vulnerable in the time of disaster. However, any
Treatment effort to reduce exposure to climate risk to allow speedier
adaptation by victims.
Outcome 2: Climate resilient low carbon operations achieved at - Regular power outages could disrupt water supplies at critical
BSTP. This will be realized by: 1)installing grid-tied Photovoltaic (PV) moments which could negatively affect the quality of life for
Renewable Energy Systems to offset increased power consumption women consumers who rely on the service for sanitation and
associated with the centralized treatment plant process upgrades using consumption.
Category 3 hurricane resistant solar panels; 2) implementing automated - Potential lowered energy requirements, that could result in lower
controls and energy efficiency measured within the upgraded centralized customer fees, will be of great benefits to persons who have
treatment processes to reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce challenges with paying utility bills. Even if utility fees are not
GHG emissions; and 3) installing sludge dewatering equipment to lowered for most customers, considerations should be made to
improve energy efficiency and reduce the overall GHG and CO2 lower utility costs to vulnerable communities. Lower operational
emissions associated with the biosolids. costs for the BWA, through means such as biogas and more solar,
will certainly provide service to accelerate recovery from these
disasters.
Output 2.1: Energy Activity 2.1.1: Install a grid-tied Photovoltaic - An increase in water supply will improve productivity in
efficiency and (PV) Renewable Energy Systems to offset agriculture by having access to adequate water for irrigation.
renewable energy increased power consumption associated with - Preventing the contamination of ground water will make it possible
technologies are the centralized treatment plant process to increase the supply of water and generate economic activities
implemented upgrades using Category 3 hurricane resistant among the more vulnerable persons like women headed poor
solar panels households.
- Energy efficiency if translated to cost savings may have positive
Activity 2.1.2: Implement automated controls impacts on the cost of wastewater and water service provision,
and energy efficiency measures within the therefore having positive benefits for poor households (the majority
upgraded centralized treatment processes to of which are female headed)
reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce
GHG emissions.
Activity 2.1.3: Install sludge dewatering
equipment to improve energy efficiency and
75

--- Table 1 on Page 253 ---
Components and
Outputs | Activities | Gender Considerations
 |  | challenges for women who are primarily care givers for children
and the elderly.
Component 2: Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency in Wastewater
Treatment
Outcome 2: Climate resilient low carbon operations achieved at
BSTP. This will be realized by: 1)installing grid-tied Photovoltaic (PV)
Renewable Energy Systems to offset increased power consumption
associated with the centralized treatment plant process upgrades using
Category 3 hurricane resistant solar panels; 2) implementing automated
controls and energy efficiency measured within the upgraded centralized
treatment processes to reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce
GHG emissions; and 3) installing sludge dewatering equipment to
improve energy efficiency and reduce the overall GHG and CO2
emissions associated with the biosolids. |  | - Women are very vulnerable in the time of disaster. However, any
effort to reduce exposure to climate risk to allow speedier
adaptation by victims.
- Regular power outages could disrupt water supplies at critical
moments which could negatively affect the quality of life for
women consumers who rely on the service for sanitation and
consumption.
- Potential lowered energy requirements, that could result in lower
customer fees, will be of great benefits to persons who have
challenges with paying utility bills. Even if utility fees are not
lowered for most customers, considerations should be made to
lower utility costs to vulnerable communities. Lower operational
costs for the BWA, through means such as biogas and more solar,
will certainly provide service to accelerate recovery from these
disasters.
Output 2.1: Energy
efficiency and
renewable energy
technologies are
implemented | Activity 2.1.1: Install a grid-tied Photovoltaic
(PV) Renewable Energy Systems to offset
increased power consumption associated with
the centralized treatment plant process
upgrades using Category 3 hurricane resistant
solar panels
Activity 2.1.2: Implement automated controls
and energy efficiency measures within the
upgraded centralized treatment processes to
reduce the overall energy footprint and reduce
GHG emissions.
Activity 2.1.3: Install sludge dewatering
equipment to improve energy efficiency and | - An increase in water supply will improve productivity in
agriculture by having access to adequate water for irrigation.
- Preventing the contamination of ground water will make it possible
to increase the supply of water and generate economic activities
among the more vulnerable persons like women headed poor
households.
- Energy efficiency if translated to cost savings may have positive
impacts on the cost of wastewater and water service provision,
therefore having positive benefits for poor households (the majority
of which are female headed)

=== PAGE 254 ===
Components and Activities Gender Considerations
Outputs
reduce the overall GHG and CO2 emissions
associated with the biosolids.
Component 3: Capabilities to operate, maintain, expand and monitor - Increases in women’s participation in the sector at technical levels
wastewater and related renewable energy technologies and managerial levels may help advance policy options that are
more favorable to vulnerable households and small enterprises
Outcome 3: Enhanced capacity and capability to support the
preventative maintenance and climate resiliency programmes.
Output 3.1: Improved Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide - Develop a specialsied Women in STEM Internship programme
capabilities of specialized and customized training to support relative to the 3R-CReWS Project.
wastewater technical the operations and maintenance of wastewater - SOPs should ensure that it is reflective of the needs of vulnerable
personnel to operate, collection and treatment facilities including people and underrepresented groups within and outside of the
maintain and monitor photovoltaic equipment BWA.
and implement climate - Strategic engagement with community groups, including women’s
change adaptation Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard Operating groups and LGBTQIA groups to ensure that Strategic and
planning strategies for Procedures (SOP) and Operational Manual that Operational plans consider the needs of women and vulnerable
wastewater addresses the requirements of the upgrades, groups a gender-responsive approach and that there is community-
management preventative maintenance, operator safety, and wide buy-in.
environmental monitoring, including risks
- The low energy requirements will be of great benefits to persons
posed by climate change and gender and social
who have challenges with paying utility bills.
inclusion considerations.
- Risk management framework for the BWA should include risks of
gender-based violence, as well as other social and gender related
Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement a risk
risks.
management framework to support the
- Women should be exposed to the benefits to be derived by the
sustainable management of BWA’s operations.
initiatives in the wastewater so they can have a greater awareness
and appreciation of this project.
- There will be the need for greater involvement of women in the
wastewater for them to make meaningful contributions and help
expedite the process by lobbying for changes in the sector.
- Where possible, the Project will aim for parity in the number of
individuals trained, nevertheless, women will be strongly
encouraged to participate in the technical training programs thereby
addressing the decision-making gap for women in technical
thematic areas.
76

--- Table 1 on Page 254 ---
Components and
Outputs | Activities | Gender Considerations
 | reduce the overall GHG and CO2 emissions
associated with the biosolids. | 
Component 3: Capabilities to operate, maintain, expand and monitor
wastewater and related renewable energy technologies
Outcome 3: Enhanced capacity and capability to support the
preventative maintenance and climate resiliency programmes. |  | - Increases in women’s participation in the sector at technical levels
and managerial levels may help advance policy options that are
more favorable to vulnerable households and small enterprises
Output 3.1: Improved
capabilities of
wastewater technical
personnel to operate,
maintain and monitor
and implement climate
change adaptation
planning strategies for
wastewater
management | Activity 3.1.1: Develop and provide
specialized and customized training to support
the operations and maintenance of wastewater
collection and treatment facilities including
photovoltaic equipment
Activity 3.1.2: Update Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) and Operational Manual that
addresses the requirements of the upgrades,
preventative maintenance, operator safety, and
environmental monitoring, including risks
posed by climate change and gender and social
inclusion considerations.
Activity 3.1.3: Develop and implement a risk
management framework to support the
sustainable management of BWA’s operations. | - Develop a specialsied Women in STEM Internship programme
relative to the 3R-CReWS Project.
- SOPs should ensure that it is reflective of the needs of vulnerable
people and underrepresented groups within and outside of the
BWA.
- Strategic engagement with community groups, including women’s
groups and LGBTQIA groups to ensure that Strategic and
Operational plans consider the needs of women and vulnerable
groups a gender-responsive approach and that there is community-
wide buy-in.
- The low energy requirements will be of great benefits to persons
who have challenges with paying utility bills.
- Risk management framework for the BWA should include risks of
gender-based violence, as well as other social and gender related
risks.
- Women should be exposed to the benefits to be derived by the
initiatives in the wastewater so they can have a greater awareness
and appreciation of this project.
- There will be the need for greater involvement of women in the
wastewater for them to make meaningful contributions and help
expedite the process by lobbying for changes in the sector.
- Where possible, the Project will aim for parity in the number of
individuals trained, nevertheless, women will be strongly
encouraged to participate in the technical training programs thereby
addressing the decision-making gap for women in technical
thematic areas.

=== PAGE 255 ===
Components and Activities Gender Considerations
Outputs
- The education materials should be designed with gender sensitivity
in mind so all persons will be made aware of the groups which
should be given priority.
- The staff in the sector should be trained with a focus on gender
equality to minimize the level of resistance that could hamper the
progress of the project.
- those directly affected.
- The Wastewater sector will need to continue its gender sensitivity
training to ensure that there is gender balance in the content and
application of the policies and legislation.
- Efforts should be made to secure the financial and human resource
with gender balance as part of its focus to enhance the skills of
technical professionals in combating climate change.
- Data collection should be disaggregated for easy access and use in
ongoing works in the project.
Output 3.2: A strategic Activity 3.2.1: Investigate and develop a - Develop a specialsied Women in STEM Internship programme
plan is developed to strategic plan for the installation of water relative to the 3R-CReWS Project.
guide the replication of treatment facilities along the west coast - SOPs should ensure that it is reflective of the needs of vulnerable
water treatment corridor for augmenting water supply and people and underrepresented groups within and outside of the
facilities along the west protecting the west coast ecosystem. BWA.
coast - Strategic engagement with community groups, including women’s
groups and LGBTQIA groups to ensure that Strategic and
Operational plans consider the needs of women and vulnerable
groups a gender-responsive approach and that there is community-
wide buy-in.
- The low energy requirements will be of great benefits to persons
who have challenges with paying utility bills.
- Risk management framework for the BWA should include risks of
gender-based violence, as well as other social and gender related
risks.
77

--- Table 1 on Page 255 ---
Components and
Outputs | Activities | Gender Considerations
 |  | - The education materials should be designed with gender sensitivity
in mind so all persons will be made aware of the groups which
should be given priority.
- The staff in the sector should be trained with a focus on gender
equality to minimize the level of resistance that could hamper the
progress of the project.
- those directly affected.
- The Wastewater sector will need to continue its gender sensitivity
training to ensure that there is gender balance in the content and
application of the policies and legislation.
- Efforts should be made to secure the financial and human resource
with gender balance as part of its focus to enhance the skills of
technical professionals in combating climate change.
- Data collection should be disaggregated for easy access and use in
ongoing works in the project.
Output 3.2: A strategic
plan is developed to
guide the replication of
water treatment
facilities along the west
coast | Activity 3.2.1: Investigate and develop a
strategic plan for the installation of water
treatment facilities along the west coast
corridor for augmenting water supply and
protecting the west coast ecosystem. | - Develop a specialsied Women in STEM Internship programme
relative to the 3R-CReWS Project.
- SOPs should ensure that it is reflective of the needs of vulnerable
people and underrepresented groups within and outside of the
BWA.
- Strategic engagement with community groups, including women’s
groups and LGBTQIA groups to ensure that Strategic and
Operational plans consider the needs of women and vulnerable
groups a gender-responsive approach and that there is community-
wide buy-in.
- The low energy requirements will be of great benefits to persons
who have challenges with paying utility bills.
- Risk management framework for the BWA should include risks of
gender-based violence, as well as other social and gender related
risks.

=== PAGE 256 ===
Components and Activities Gender Considerations
Outputs
- Women should be exposed to the benefits to be derived by the
initiatives in the wastewater so they can have a greater awareness
and appreciation of this project.
- There will be the need for greater involvement of women in the
wastewater for them to make meaningful contributions and help
expedite the process by lobbying for changes in the sector.
- Where possible, the Project will aim for parity in the number of
individuals trained, nevertheless, women will be strongly
encouraged to participate in the technical training programs thereby
addressing the decision-making gap for women in technical
thematic areas.
- The education materials should be designed with gender sensitivity
in mind so all persons will be made aware of the groups which
should be given priority.
- The staff in the sector should be trained with a focus on gender
equality to minimize the level of resistance that could hamper the
progress of the project.
- those directly affected.
- The Wastewater sector will need to continue its gender sensitivity
training to ensure that there is gender balance in the content and
application of the policies and legislation.
- Efforts should be made to secure the financial and human resource
with gender balance as part of its focus to enhance the skills of
technical professionals in combating climate change.
Data collection should be disaggregated for easy access and use in
ongoing works in the project.
Component 4: Capacities (regulatory, governance, awareness), buy-in and Enabling Environment:
ownership within the private and public sectors are improved for climate - The absence of legislation that make provision for standards to
resilient development planning for the water sector. regulate the discharge of effluent in marine water poses a health
risk for women who are the ones most likely to care for the sick.
Outcome 4: An enabling environment is created for wastewater
technologies and use of reclaimed water. The enabling environment
speaks to the legislation, organizational structures and competency and
78

--- Table 1 on Page 256 ---
Components and
Outputs | Activities | Gender Considerations
 |  | - Women should be exposed to the benefits to be derived by the
initiatives in the wastewater so they can have a greater awareness
and appreciation of this project.
- There will be the need for greater involvement of women in the
wastewater for them to make meaningful contributions and help
expedite the process by lobbying for changes in the sector.
- Where possible, the Project will aim for parity in the number of
individuals trained, nevertheless, women will be strongly
encouraged to participate in the technical training programs thereby
addressing the decision-making gap for women in technical
thematic areas.
- The education materials should be designed with gender sensitivity
in mind so all persons will be made aware of the groups which
should be given priority.
- The staff in the sector should be trained with a focus on gender
equality to minimize the level of resistance that could hamper the
progress of the project.
- those directly affected.
- The Wastewater sector will need to continue its gender sensitivity
training to ensure that there is gender balance in the content and
application of the policies and legislation.
- Efforts should be made to secure the financial and human resource
with gender balance as part of its focus to enhance the skills of
technical professionals in combating climate change.
Data collection should be disaggregated for easy access and use in
ongoing works in the project.
Component 4: Capacities (regulatory, governance, awareness), buy-in and
ownership within the private and public sectors are improved for climate
resilient development planning for the water sector.
Outcome 4: An enabling environment is created for wastewater
technologies and use of reclaimed water. The enabling environment
speaks to the legislation, organizational structures and competency and |  | Enabling Environment:
- The absence of legislation that make provision for standards to
regulate the discharge of effluent in marine water poses a health
risk for women who are the ones most likely to care for the sick.

=== PAGE 257 ===
Components and Activities Gender Considerations
Outputs
strategies that need to be put in place. Achieving this outcome will - It also creates a unique opportunity for the GOB to introduce
significantly change the culture of the water sector in Barbados, building appropriate water reuse policies and to enact legislation that make
a level of partnership and professionalism that is needed to continually provision for gender equality in their contents.
innovate and adapt to climate change, which in turn promotes - Mechanisms should be put in place to improve regulatory systems
sustainability for this project. to respond to climate change in a timely manner. These
mechanisms must have gender balance in its composition. Public
education must play a central role in the awareness building across
sectors and government agencies.
Awareness Raising and Capacity Development
- BWA should design and implement an ongoing public education
program to create awareness of wastewater issues. The unique
issues for men and women should be highlighted. The BWA should
continue with presentations by participants in Gender Sensitivity
training.
- Communication campaign should include varied strategies that
appeal to demographic differences of the population.
Output 4.1: Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative review - A strategic awareness campaign on climate change and its impact
Governance and to promote the Planning and Development Act, on vulnerable persons is critical. Policies which will empower
planning roadmaps Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related persons in authority in the sector to take the necessary actions to
enhanced to enable use legislations for enhancing wastewater effluent promote gender equality in the wastewater sector and climate
of reclaimed water in a quality, treatment options and re-use change issues.
controlled and regulated requirements and applications - Ensure that campaign to gather acceptance on use of treated
manner. wastewater for non-potable purposes will need gender sensitive
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation messages and targeting approaches.
master plan - The government Ministers need to be sensitized to be made aware
Output 4.2: Activity 4.2.1: Develop a strategy and action of the importance of the legislation and how the project could
Mechanisms plan to engage the private sector in the positively impact the lives of women and the vulnerable in the
developed/expanded to provision and adoption of wastewater society.
encourage the adoption treatment technology and the utilization of - The education materials should be designed with gender sensitivity
of wastewater treatment wastewater by-products such as activated in mind so all persons will be made aware of the groups which
and reuse applications sludge. should be given priority.
by private individuals
79

--- Table 1 on Page 257 ---
Components and
Outputs | Activities | Gender Considerations
strategies that need to be put in place. Achieving this outcome will
significantly change the culture of the water sector in Barbados, building
a level of partnership and professionalism that is needed to continually
innovate and adapt to climate change, which in turn promotes
sustainability for this project. |  | - It also creates a unique opportunity for the GOB to introduce
appropriate water reuse policies and to enact legislation that make
provision for gender equality in their contents.
- Mechanisms should be put in place to improve regulatory systems
to respond to climate change in a timely manner. These
mechanisms must have gender balance in its composition. Public
education must play a central role in the awareness building across
sectors and government agencies.
Awareness Raising and Capacity Development
- BWA should design and implement an ongoing public education
program to create awareness of wastewater issues. The unique
issues for men and women should be highlighted. The BWA should
continue with presentations by participants in Gender Sensitivity
training.
- Communication campaign should include varied strategies that
appeal to demographic differences of the population.
Output 4.1:
Governance and
planning roadmaps
enhanced to enable use
of reclaimed water in a
controlled and regulated
manner. | Activity 4.1.1: Undertake a legislative review
to promote the Planning and Development Act,
Wastewater Reuse Bill and other related
legislations for enhancing wastewater effluent
quality, treatment options and re-use
requirements and applications
Activity 4.1.2: Develop a water and sanitation
master plan | - A strategic awareness campaign on climate change and its impact
on vulnerable persons is critical. Policies which will empower
persons in authority in the sector to take the necessary actions to
promote gender equality in the wastewater sector and climate
change issues.
- Ensure that campaign to gather acceptance on use of treated
wastewater for non-potable purposes will need gender sensitive
messages and targeting approaches.
- The government Ministers need to be sensitized to be made aware
of the importance of the legislation and how the project could
positively impact the lives of women and the vulnerable in the
society.
- The education materials should be designed with gender sensitivity
in mind so all persons will be made aware of the groups which
should be given priority.
Output 4.2:
Mechanisms
developed/expanded to
encourage the adoption
of wastewater treatment
and reuse applications
by private individuals | Activity 4.2.1: Develop a strategy and action
plan to engage the private sector in the
provision and adoption of wastewater
treatment technology and the utilization of
wastewater by-products such as activated
sludge. | 

=== PAGE 258 ===
Components and Activities Gender Considerations
Outputs
and businesses. Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and - The staff in the sector should be trained with a focus on gender
identify recommendations for a gender equality to minimize the level of resistance that could hamper the
sensitive and socially inclusive incentive progress of the project.
programme to encourage conservation, - Policy makers need to be made aware of the importance of the
recycle, re-use. project and this should be driven from community-based groups
and those directly affected.
Activity 4.2.3: Expand and promote the - The Wastewater sector will need to continue its gender sensitivity
Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to training to ensure that there is gender balance in the content and
provide resources for the adoption of application of the policies and legislation.
decentralized onsite wastewater systems.
- Data collection should be disaggregated for easy access and use in
ongoing works in the project.
- Ensure that the update of the governing instruments of the RAFF is
done through a gender informed consultative process.
- Ensure that updates to the governing instrument continue to
promote the needs of vulnerable groups including persons living in
poverty. the adjustments to RAFF should ensure that women’s
needs and those of the vulnerable to inform rearticulation of the
RAFF.
- Efforts at engaging the private sector as partners and as potential
beneficiaries of RAFF resources need to consider the needs of
small-scale farmers.
Output 4.3: Gender Activity 4.3.1: Re-educate communities, - Greater awareness of climate threats and risk reduction will impact
Sensitive Public teachers, students, farmers and businesses positively on women who carry the bulk of the burdens of the
Education and about the impact of climate change on water negative effects of natural disasters.
Awareness Campaign resources and their impact on water quality - Raising awareness among consumers should contribute in bridging
Implemented. and quantity (availability as well as the the gender divide and equality in the society. Women are very
importance of water reuse activities and sensitive to the issues of wastewater reuse and careful consideration
indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to building should be given on the advantages to national development and
climate resilience in the Water Sector. advancement.
- The re-education program should target all sectors in the society
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a especially those who are not in the traditional line of
Gender Sensitive Public Awareness Campaign
for community and visitors (tourists)
80

--- Table 1 on Page 258 ---
Components and
Outputs | Activities | Gender Considerations
and businesses. | Activity 4.2.2: Undertake a review and
identify recommendations for a gender
sensitive and socially inclusive incentive
programme to encourage conservation,
recycle, re-use.
Activity 4.2.3: Expand and promote the
Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility (RAFF) to
provide resources for the adoption of
decentralized onsite wastewater systems. | - The staff in the sector should be trained with a focus on gender
equality to minimize the level of resistance that could hamper the
progress of the project.
- Policy makers need to be made aware of the importance of the
project and this should be driven from community-based groups
and those directly affected.
- The Wastewater sector will need to continue its gender sensitivity
training to ensure that there is gender balance in the content and
application of the policies and legislation.
- Data collection should be disaggregated for easy access and use in
ongoing works in the project.
- Ensure that the update of the governing instruments of the RAFF is
done through a gender informed consultative process.
- Ensure that updates to the governing instrument continue to
promote the needs of vulnerable groups including persons living in
poverty. the adjustments to RAFF should ensure that women’s
needs and those of the vulnerable to inform rearticulation of the
RAFF.
- Efforts at engaging the private sector as partners and as potential
beneficiaries of RAFF resources need to consider the needs of
small-scale farmers.
Output 4.3: Gender
Sensitive Public
Education and
Awareness Campaign
Implemented. | Activity 4.3.1: Re-educate communities,
teachers, students, farmers and businesses
about the impact of climate change on water
resources and their impact on water quality
and quantity (availability as well as the
importance of water reuse activities and
indirect potable reuse (IPR)) to building
climate resilience in the Water Sector.
Activity 4.3.2: Develop and implement a
Gender Sensitive Public Awareness Campaign
for community and visitors (tourists) | - Greater awareness of climate threats and risk reduction will impact
positively on women who carry the bulk of the burdens of the
negative effects of natural disasters.
- Raising awareness among consumers should contribute in bridging
the gender divide and equality in the society. Women are very
sensitive to the issues of wastewater reuse and careful consideration
should be given on the advantages to national development and
advancement.
- The re-education program should target all sectors in the society
especially those who are not in the traditional line of

=== PAGE 259 ===
Components and Activities Gender Considerations
Outputs
communication. Those with lower levels of literacy, limited access
Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Project to ICT and low income and classified as poor will benefit the most.
Web Page and social media accounts - The materials prepared must be gender sensitive and cater for
inclusion of a cross section of the society also aiming at visitors.
- All mediums should be used especially electronic, social and print.
Persons who are differently able need to be catered for and this will
ensure that the vulnerable persons are considered. The emphasis on
educating the youthful population for futuristic development and
the older population to break from tradition is critical in the re-
education campaign.
- Ensure focus on unique gender issues on webpage.
- Ensure results presented on webpage are disaggregated by sex.
81

--- Table 1 on Page 259 ---
Components and
Outputs | Activities | Gender Considerations
 | Activity 4.3.3: Develop a 3R-CReWS Project
Web Page and social media accounts | communication. Those with lower levels of literacy, limited access
to ICT and low income and classified as poor will benefit the most.
- The materials prepared must be gender sensitive and cater for
inclusion of a cross section of the society also aiming at visitors.
- All mediums should be used especially electronic, social and print.
Persons who are differently able need to be catered for and this will
ensure that the vulnerable persons are considered. The emphasis on
educating the youthful population for futuristic development and
the older population to break from tradition is critical in the re-
education campaign.
- Ensure focus on unique gender issues on webpage.
- Ensure results presented on webpage are disaggregated by sex.

=== PAGE 260 ===
5.3 Monitoring and Evaluation Stage
At this stage of the Project, the focus of mainstreaming gender equality should be to
involve stakeholders on observing and documenting the status of Project procurement
services and control quality activities as they are being carried out and providing
feedback to maintain the desired standards and to ensure that gender equality issues are
not compromised. Stakeholders are expected to comment on the outcome of milestone
reviews conduct periodically on the Project. Monitoring should ensure that Project
deliverables bear demonstration of gender mainstreaming and that all relevant data
produced by the project is gender sensitive.
5.4 Project Accountability Stage
During the multi-year life of the Project, it is expected that at the end of each Project
year, stakeholders provide feedback on the Draft Annual Progress and Financial Report
which gives an update on the status of the Project activities as they are being carried out.
The stakeholder team should focus on disaggregated data on the gender categories, an
assessment of the distribution of resources relative to men, women and LGBTQIA
persons and any actions required to improve gender equality and equity. Such feedback
should be incorporated in the final Annual Report before it is submitted to the PSC for
initial endorsement and then to the BWA for consideration and approval.
5.5 Project Closure Stage
At the Project closure stage, the Project Management team is also expected to provide
feedback on the Draft Project Completion Report on whether the Project achieved its
and confirm whether the activities were carried out in accordance with the requirements
of the Gender Action Plan, in addition to the Log frame. Results presented should show
disaggregated data, assessment of the distribution of resources relative to men, women
and LGBTQIA persons and any actions taken to improve gender equality and equity
encountered.
5.6 Project Organizational Structure
The Project should have an organizational structure that incorporates both the project
governance, and the project management functions.
The PSC should be trained in gender sensitivity issues at the project initiation stage.
It is important to ensure that the board has equitable representation of male and
female members. The aim is to have representatives who are empowered make
decisions for the benefit of all. The PSC should have specific representation from
the Barbados Bureau of Gender Affairs. This representative is important to ensure
that the needs of vulnerable populations, including women are fore fronted for
consideration.
82

=== PAGE 261 ===
A suitable structure for project management should include and Social and Gender
Specialist to champion the Project’s gender sensitive stakeholder engagement exercises
and to ensure that identified activities of the project is meaningfully mainstreaming
gender in the implementation. The Specialist will also support in gender-based budgeting,
monitoring and evaluation and reporting. This approach will assist the PSC in ensuring
gender equality in the composition of each of these mechanisms and in demonstrating
gender sensitivity when handling complaints lodged against the Project team. The Project
Management Team should all mandatorily be trained in Gender mainstreaming at the
initiation stage of the Project. The team should also participate in gender sensitivity
trainings for BWA employees throughout the life of the Project.
5.7 Project Plans, Budgets, Reports
A prerequisite for ensuring effective gender mainstreaming in this Project cycle is the
preparation of a Gender Action Plan (GAP). The actions recommended to mainstream
gender equality are outlined in the (GAP) annexed to this Analysis. Complementarily,
the Project should include provisions for clear identification of gender actions in the
preparation of annual project plans and budgets to support the execution of approved
gender-related activities each year. Additionally, the Project Manager should ensure
budgetary allocations to support the execution of approved gender-related
activities are in keeping with the GAP.
The Project’s PSC should set guidelines for the Project Manager to prepare Annual
reports on the progress of implementation of the Gender Action Plan in keeping
with the approved scope, goals, specific objectives, and deliverables. They should
include statements on gender sensitivity issues and provide dis-aggregated data on
changes in project personnel, wastewater service users and external stakeholder
participation.
5.8 Project Data Management
Members of the PSC the Project Manager and other project personnel require
technical and general data on a continuous basis to make evidence-based decisions.
The Project officials should therefore collect, store, and retrieve the data for analysis
and manage data throughout the Project lifecycle. They should ensure that key
stakeholders have the right data at the right time and are able to gain access to accurate
and reliable Project information on a timely and consistent basis. With respect to
Project personnel, it is necessary for the data to be disaggregated or broken down into
gender categories relative to men, and women. Such data helps to ensure that project
resources are used where they are needed most and to measure issues of gender
equality and equity.
Limited disaggregated data, related to gender and wastewater currently available in
Barbados hindered the process of conducting a comprehensive gender sensitivity
83

=== PAGE 262 ===
analysis for this Project. There is need for the BWA, and other relevant government
agencies like the Barbados Statistics Department and Bureau of Gender Affairs, to put
systems in place to collect, store and retrieve disaggregated data for use in planning
and decision making throughout the Project cycle.
5.9 Building Gender Sensitivity Capacity
In recent years, the BWA has collaborated with the UWI IGDS on gender sensitivity training
for its staff. There are also opportunities for the two institutions to work together on
capacity building activities to address climate change adaptation and mitigation in the
future. Specific tasks and activities that the UWI IGDS should undertake to build capacity
to address climate change adaptation and mitigation are as follows:
 Engage regional climate change experts to undertake research with a focus
on the impact of climate change on gender and wastewater;
 Collaborate with the BWA to assist with the collection of disaggregated data on
climate change and wastewater management and publish online annual
reports for wider circulation;
 Continue to collaborate with the BWA to deliver an expanded gender training,
including on sexual and gender-based violence for employees of the Authority;
 Collaborate with the BWA to engage in outreach and advocacy activities using
multi- media approach to reach a wide cross section of individuals at the
national level.
 Collaborate with the BWA to engage in gender responsive stakeholder
consultations.
Given the nature of this Project, the BWA Board and staff, particularly those from the
Wastewater Division, should be made aware of how gender plays a role in the way
they treat Project personnel and beneficiaries throughout the life of the Project. Gender
relations are present in participating public, private and civil society institutions that
are involved in this Project. Members of the BWA Board, and BWA staff, require
continued training and awareness of gender sensitivity especially so that they can
recognize privileges and discrimination around gender.
The BWA should continue to collaborate with the UWI IGDS to train and educate
persons serving on the PSC, in project management and as support personnel to
become more aware of and sensitive to gender issues arising from Project activities.
Training for Project Staff and for identified staff of the BWA should be mandatory.
84

=== PAGE 263 ===
CLOSURE
Integrated Sustainability would like to thank the Caribbean Community Climate Change
Centre for your support in developing this document. We trust that this report meets
your needs and expectations. If you have any questions, please contact the undersigned
at any time.
Sincerely,
Dr. Virginia Albert Poyotte
85

=== PAGE 264 ===
REFERENCES
 Allen, C. F & Maughan, J. & Baksh, J & Associates, January (2016). Gender Situation
in Barbados CDB Country Assessment (CGA).
 Baksh & Associates, R. (2016). Country Gender Assessment Synthesis Report, CDB.
 Beuermann, D., (2017). Methodological Report on the consumption Aggregate and
Poverty Lines based on the Barbados Survey of Living Conditions
 Bobb, D., (2019), Understanding Unequal Relations of Gender in the Caribbean, Wendy
Water Woes: A Barbados Case Study, UWI-IGDS, BWA, GCF, CCCCC.
 CARICOM Gender Equality Indicators https://caribbean.unwomen.org/en/materials
 Consultations on CARICOM Gender Equality Strategy Begins in Antigua & Barbuda
retrieved from https://www.today.caricom.org/2019/02/07 consultation on CARICOM
Gender Equality
 Henry, A., (Jan 27, 2021). Barbadostoday.bb Boscobelle Residents want BWA to
address long standing water woes
 Husbands, C & K. Dey, P. (2002). Impact assessment of a sewerage project in
Barbados https://dol.org/10.3152/147154602781766708.
 Isaacs, W. (2017). Opportunities to Mainstream Gender in water and wastewater
Infrastructure Project: A Case Study in Barbados: University of South Florida, pg.
26
 Johnson, C.P.G, (2019). Better Together: A Model for Women & LGBTQIA Equality.
 Schuhmann, et al, (2019) Visitors’ Willingness to Pay Conservation Fee in Barbados,
tourism Management, 71,315-326
 Suchorski, A., (2009). Socio-economic and Physical Development Influence on water use
in Barbados, Caribbean Water Initiative (CARWIN) McGill University Document CARWIN,
retrieved from https://www.mcgill/carwin/saw 09 Scuchorski pdf.
 Tortz, M. et al, (2018). Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados
WSRN- Barbados environmental and Social Assessment.
 UN-ECLAC& Cooperacion Espaniola (March 2017) Report. Gender Equality Plans in
Latin America & the Caribbean: Road Map to Development
86

=== PAGE 265 ===
 UN Partnerships for SDGs platform
https://www.sustainabledevelopment.un.org/ partnerships.
 UN-water Joint Statement https://www.womenforwater.org unwater-
joint_statement_covid- 19.pdf.
 Witmer, L. (2017). Women of water Partnership
https://www.womenforwater.org/waste- water-is-a she waste-water.
87

=== PAGE 266 ===
Appendix 1 - Results of Stakeholder Surveys and Interviews
Outcome of Zoom Interview with UWI Institute of Gender and Development Studies, Dr.
th
Tonya Haynes, October 25 , 2020
Question Response
Q-1: What is the nature of the It is a training programme customized for the BWA in October
joint training undertaken by the 2020 to help 500 employees to obtain a certificate in Gender
UWI Institute of Gender sensitization and infrastructure.
Development Studies and the
Q-2: W ho are the All five hundred (500) employees of the BWA are
participants enrolled in the expected participate in the training.
Q-3: What is the duration of The training is for 1-5 contact days over 6 workshops with
the training? 16-22 participants in each cohort.
Q-4: Who organized the training? The BWA HR Department is responsible for organizing and
scheduling the workers to undertake the training.
Question 5: What are the contents The course contains several modules of video presentations
of the course? and three case studies.
Question 6: What will be the Each successful employee will receive a Certificate in
benefits to the BWA employees? Gender Analysis.
Q-7: What has happened to With the advent of COVID-19 the training sessions
the training since the COVID- have been suspended.
19 Pandemic?
Q-8: What has been the Employees have responded positively to the training although
participants’ response or attitude initially there was some resistance by men who later realized
to the training? the gender equity meant equalization for women and men.
Q-9: Do you think the participants There is great demand for future training by the participants
would want to continue the many of whom have requested follow up workshops including
training? the month-long program offered by UWI which reflects a high
level of motivation on the part of the employees.
Q-10: Are there women The UWI Centre for Research and Management (CERMES)
participating in other gender- offers a six- month course on gender studies. Several women
sensitivity training? graduate from this programme and enter into the water and
Q-11: What are the challenges There was one case study which reveals the challenges of a
women experience in the woman whose entire day revolves around water. She lives in a
wastewater sector? community that does not have taps water and has no personal
storage tank. She has property which is not accessible to a
water truck so she has to walk to meet the truck. She has a
small farming income but had to abandon it due to lack of
t
Q-12: What is the economic The department confirms that single women head 57% of
status of women in Barbados? households of which 20% of the women are categorized as
poor. These include migrant women caring for critically ill
88

--- Table 1 on Page 266 ---
Question | Response
Q-1: What is the nature of the
joint training undertaken by the
UWI Institute of Gender
Development Studies and the | It is a training programme customized for the BWA in October
2020 to help 500 employees to obtain a certificate in Gender
sensitization and infrastructure.
Q-2: W ho are the
participants enrolled in the | All five hundred (500) employees of the BWA are
expected participate in the training.
Q-3: What is the duration of
the training? | The training is for 1-5 contact days over 6 workshops with
16-22 participants in each cohort.
Q-4: Who organized the training? | The BWA HR Department is responsible for organizing and
scheduling the workers to undertake the training.
Question 5: What are the contents
of the course? | The course contains several modules of video presentations
and three case studies.
Question 6: What will be the
benefits to the BWA employees? | Each successful employee will receive a Certificate in
Gender Analysis.
Q-7: What has happened to
the training since the COVID-
19 Pandemic? | With the advent of COVID-19 the training sessions
have been suspended.
Q-8: What has been the
participants’ response or attitude
to the training? | Employees have responded positively to the training although
initially there was some resistance by men who later realized
the gender equity meant equalization for women and men.
Q-9: Do you think the participants
would want to continue the
training? | There is great demand for future training by the participants
many of whom have requested follow up workshops including
the month-long program offered by UWI which reflects a high
level of motivation on the part of the employees.
Q-10: Are there women
participating in other gender-
sensitivity training? | The UWI Centre for Research and Management (CERMES)
offers a six- month course on gender studies. Several women
graduate from this programme and enter into the water and
Q-11: What are the challenges
women experience in the
wastewater sector? | There was one case study which reveals the challenges of a
woman whose entire day revolves around water. She lives in a
community that does not have taps water and has no personal
storage tank. She has property which is not accessible to a
water truck so she has to walk to meet the truck. She has a
small farming income but had to abandon it due to lack of
Q-12: What is the economic
status of women in Barbados? | t
The department confirms that single women head 57% of
households of which 20% of the women are categorized as
poor. These include migrant women caring for critically ill

=== PAGE 267 ===
Question 13: What has been the They revealed that due to a combination of drought and very,
experience of participants with very old infrastructure, many people have water shortages fairly
water supply? constantly especially during the dry season. This of course
affects the poor the most. Some of the highest poverty areas are
in Saint Joseph and St John but Saint Thomas and the north of
Barbados also experience problems which make it worse for
wastewater. It is not just a case of having a water connection,
but it is beyond the connection
i ll b d ’ i b d ff d i
Q-14: What are the challenges People cope by storing water in whatever containers they have
people experience is the such as bottles and saucepans. Some may have a tank, but it is
water/wastewater sector? often not adequate or safe. The dry season is now longer, and
the days are hotter which exacerbates the water shortages and
limits capacity to dispose of wastewater where health and
sanitation becomes a huge problem for the vulnerable.
Q-15: What are the current There are several households that do not have flushable toilets
water/wastewater treatment and some people are squatters where sanitation becomes a big
issues referenced by the issue. There are still several people who use pit latrines. The
participants? welfare department periodically makes provisions to supply
water to those who can’t afford to pay their water bills. The bills
have doubled recently as a Levy for wastewater. Management
is now included on the water and wastewater bill. It was
confirmed that the minimum charge is now ($37.5) United
S d ll h hi h i l d lid
Q-16: What was the level of The response to the level of acceptance if wastewater
acceptance of the use of becomes available for reuse for irrigation it was felt that this has
wastewater? been a difficult issue for the people to accept. It might be a hard
sell for many. Recently several blue pipes were replaced by
black pipes. Although the use factor was identical a lot of
people resisted because they thought the black pipes were
giving dirtier water. There is evidence that there has been poor
communication with the general public.
Question 17: What suggestions The curriculum and content of the training involves video
do you have to improve the presentations in 3 different case studies. One of the main
quality of water? outcomes of the training is that it will have a positive impact
on the future work of BWA.
89

--- Table 1 on Page 267 ---
Question 13: What has been the
experience of participants with
water supply? | They revealed that due to a combination of drought and very,
very old infrastructure, many people have water shortages fairly
constantly especially during the dry season. This of course
affects the poor the most. Some of the highest poverty areas are
in Saint Joseph and St John but Saint Thomas and the north of
Barbados also experience problems which make it worse for
wastewater. It is not just a case of having a water connection,
but it is beyond the connection
Q-14: What are the challenges
people experience is the
water/wastewater sector? | i ll b d ’ i b d ff d i
People cope by storing water in whatever containers they have
such as bottles and saucepans. Some may have a tank, but it is
often not adequate or safe. The dry season is now longer, and
the days are hotter which exacerbates the water shortages and
limits capacity to dispose of wastewater where health and
sanitation becomes a huge problem for the vulnerable.
Q-15: What are the current
water/wastewater treatment
issues referenced by the
participants? | There are several households that do not have flushable toilets
and some people are squatters where sanitation becomes a big
issue. There are still several people who use pit latrines. The
welfare department periodically makes provisions to supply
water to those who can’t afford to pay their water bills. The bills
have doubled recently as a Levy for wastewater. Management
is now included on the water and wastewater bill. It was
confirmed that the minimum charge is now ($37.5) United
Q-16: What was the level of
acceptance of the use of
wastewater? | S d ll h hi h i l d lid
The response to the level of acceptance if wastewater
becomes available for reuse for irrigation it was felt that this has
been a difficult issue for the people to accept. It might be a hard
sell for many. Recently several blue pipes were replaced by
black pipes. Although the use factor was identical a lot of
people resisted because they thought the black pipes were
giving dirtier water. There is evidence that there has been poor
communication with the general public.
Question 17: What suggestions
do you have to improve the
quality of water? | The curriculum and content of the training involves video
presentations in 3 different case studies. One of the main
outcomes of the training is that it will have a positive impact
on the future work of BWA.

=== PAGE 268 ===
Appendix 2 -Interview with Mrs. Shelley Parris, Senior Engineer, BWA (Feb
19, 2021)
Questions Responses
Q-1: How many men, women and There is an equal number of men and woman
LGBTQIA persons are at the managers at the BWA, although the women
management level in the BWA that are managers tend to have more
Wastewater Department? administrative roles, while men have more
technical roles. The Chairperson of the Board
of Management BWA is a woman. The
presence of the trade union representing the
employees of BWA there is no possibility to
Q-2: Is the level of pay for men There is equal pay for employees as agreed in
and women equal in BWA the collective agreement between BWA and
wastewater department? the union as the bargaining body for the
workers
Q-3: What legislations in Barbados Women have equal opportunities to participate
are used by BWA to protect in any activity of their choice. For example,
women and their employment? there are woman in parliament including a
woman as the first Prime Minister.
Q-4: Has BWA developed specific There are no specific strategies developed as
strategies in its programme all the employees are treated equally. There
implementation to address the are some heavy- duty work to be done which
needs of men, women and could be strenuous for women. They are not
LGBTQIA persons in the assigned these responsibilities. A first-time
wastewater department? woman plumber is currently working with BWA.
Q-5: What challenges are the No major challenges are being experienced,
BWA facing in implementing aside from current challenges being faced
any gender sensitive because of this pandemic. However, the BWA
programmes in the wastewater has taken the initiative to introduce its
department? employees to gender sensitivity training, from
the UWI, to encourage gender equality relating
to co-workers, customers, and clients.
COVID19 has posed new challenges,
Q-6: Are there clear policies for There are general documented policies but
the recruitment of women, men none relating specifically to women and
and LGBTQIA persons and LGBTQIA persons. However, the BWA has
mentoring programs for recruits taken the initiative to introduce its employees to
in BWA? gender sensitivity training to encourage gender
equality relating to co workers customers and
Q-7: What are the specific Gender sensitivity issues and the infrastructural
focused areas in the BWA gender needs of the BWA. There attendees of this
training for employees at UWI? course will be awarded with a certificate at the
end of the training programme.
90

--- Table 1 on Page 268 ---
Questions | Responses
Q-1: How many men, women and
LGBTQIA persons are at the
management level in the BWA
Wastewater Department? | There is an equal number of men and woman
managers at the BWA, although the women
that are managers tend to have more
administrative roles, while men have more
technical roles. The Chairperson of the Board
of Management BWA is a woman. The
presence of the trade union representing the
employees of BWA there is no possibility to
Q-2: Is the level of pay for men
and women equal in BWA
wastewater department? | There is equal pay for employees as agreed in
the collective agreement between BWA and
the union as the bargaining body for the
Q-3: What legislations in Barbados
are used by BWA to protect
women and their employment? | workers
Women have equal opportunities to participate
in any activity of their choice. For example,
there are woman in parliament including a
woman as the first Prime Minister.
Q-4: Has BWA developed specific
strategies in its programme
implementation to address the
needs of men, women and
LGBTQIA persons in the
wastewater department? | There are no specific strategies developed as
all the employees are treated equally. There
are some heavy- duty work to be done which
could be strenuous for women. They are not
assigned these responsibilities. A first-time
woman plumber is currently working with BWA.
Q-5: What challenges are the
BWA facing in implementing
any gender sensitive
programmes in the wastewater
department? | No major challenges are being experienced,
aside from current challenges being faced
because of this pandemic. However, the BWA
has taken the initiative to introduce its
employees to gender sensitivity training, from
the UWI, to encourage gender equality relating
to co-workers, customers, and clients.
COVID19 has posed new challenges,
Q-6: Are there clear policies for
the recruitment of women, men
and LGBTQIA persons and
mentoring programs for recruits
in BWA? | There are general documented policies but
none relating specifically to women and
LGBTQIA persons. However, the BWA has
taken the initiative to introduce its employees to
gender sensitivity training to encourage gender
Q-7: What are the specific
focused areas in the BWA gender
training for employees at UWI? | equality relating to co workers customers and
Gender sensitivity issues and the infrastructural
needs of the BWA. There attendees of this
course will be awarded with a certificate at the
end of the training programme.

=== PAGE 269 ===
Appendix 3 - 3R-CReWS Project Gender Risk Matrix
Gender Risk Probability75 Impact76 Mitigating Action
From 1 From 1
(Low)- 5 (Low)- 5
(High) (High)
1. Limited will at the 3 5 i. Ensure Gender Sensitivity training
Project Governance for Project Steering Committee
and Management (PSC) and Project Management
level to mainstream (PM) team.
gender into project ii. CCCCC Project Development and
activities. Management Unit as AE closely
monitor Gender Action Plan (GAP)
and provide guidance and
instruction to PM team on
mainstreaming, where activities are
implemented using a gender-blind
approach.
iii. Ensure annual reporting on GAP to
the PSC.
iv. Ensure annual budgetary process
cost GAP actions to be undertaken
annually.
2. Increased 2 3 v. Ensure that the review of Water and
connections to Sanitation Master Plan consider
decentralized cost implications/price structure
systems lead to that does not create economic
increased financial hardship for vulnerable groups.
burdens, on
vulnerable people,
including Female
Headed Households
to cover sewage costs
treatment.
3. Incentive 3 4 i. Develop recommendations for
programme does not incentive programme that identifies
benefit small female opportunities that will benefit
owned business, female headed households and
including female socio-economically deprived
farmers who may not households.
have infrastructural
or financial inputs
compared to large
businesses, who are
predominantly male
owned.
4. Small female owned 3 3 i. Ensure gender inclusive
business, including consultations in reformulating
female farmers and RAFF and provide windows, where
75 Probability (how likely the risk is to occur)
76 Impact (if the risk takes place, how seriously will it impact your project)
91

--- Table 1 on Page 269 ---
Gender Risk |  |  | Probability75
From 1
(Low)- 5
(High) | Impact76
From 1
(Low)- 5
(High) | Mitigating Action |  | 
1. Limited will at the
Project Governance
and Management
level to mainstream
gender into project
activities. |  |  | 3 | 5 |  | i. Ensure Gender Sensitivity training | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | for Project Steering Committee | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | (PSC) and Project Management | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | (PM) team. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | ii. CCCCC Project Development and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Management Unit as AE closely | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | monitor Gender Action Plan (GAP) | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | and provide guidance and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | instruction to PM team on | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | mainstreaming, where activities are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | implemented using a gender-blind | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | approach. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | iii. Ensure annual reporting on GAP to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | the PSC. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | iv. Ensure annual budgetary process | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | cost GAP actions to be undertaken | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | annually. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
2. Increased
connections to
decentralized
systems lead to
increased financial
burdens, on
vulnerable people,
including Female
Headed Households
to cover sewage costs
treatment. |  |  | 2 | 3 | v. Ensure that the review of Water and
Sanitation Master Plan consider
cost implications/price structure
that does not create economic
hardship for vulnerable groups. |  | 
 | 3. Incentive |  | 3 | 4 | i. Develop recommendations for
incentive programme that identifies
opportunities that will benefit
female headed households and
socio-economically deprived
households. |  | 
 | programme does not |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | benefit small female |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | owned business, |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | including female |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | farmers who may not |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | have infrastructural |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | or financial inputs |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | compared to large |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | businesses, who are |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | predominantly male |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | owned. |  |  |  |  |  | 
4. Small female owned
business, including
female farmers and |  |  | 3 | 3 | i. Ensure gender inclusive
consultations in reformulating
RAFF and provide windows, where |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 269 ---
1. Limited will at the
Project Governance
and Management
level to mainstream
gender into project
activities.

--- Table 3 on Page 269 ---
i. Develop recommendations for
incentive programme that identifies
opportunities that will benefit
female headed households and
socio-economically deprived
households.


=== PAGE 270 ===
female headed possible, for access to support for to
households are small business owners, (including
excluded from those that are female led), small
benefiting from the scaled farmers and female heads of
Revolving households.
Adaptation Fund
Facility (RAFF)
Charter after its
update.
5. Discrimination 3 3 i. Ensure development of Project
against women and Code of Conduct that applies to
LGBTQI+ project Staff, Consultants,
populations who Contractors, BWA employees who
work, or are are interacting with communities
interested in working under the framework of this project.
in the wastewater
sector. ii. Ensure continuous training and
reminders on Discrimination and its
impacts.
iii. Ensure relevant staff participate in
Gender Sensitivity Training.
iv. Ensure frequent check in with
Interns (Women in STEM) with
BWA Human Resource Department
and Project Social and Gender
Specialist.
6. Gender Base 3 4 i. Ensure development of Project
Violence (GBV) and Code of Conduct that applies to
Sexual Exploitation project Staff, Consultants,
and Harassment Contractors, BWA employees who
(SEAH) against are interacting with communities
workers, interns, and under the framework of this project.
community members ii. Ensure that the GRMs designated to
under the framework receive complaints for this project
of this project. are able to effectively receive
complaints and provide redress to
victims.
iii. Ensure frequent check in with
Interns (Women in STEM) with
BWA Human Resource Department
and Project Social and Gender
Specialist.
iv. Ensure Procurement Documents
and contracts explicitly prohibit
practices of GBV and SEAH
consistent with AE’s Policies,
including Gender Policy 2021-
2026.
92

--- Table 1 on Page 270 ---
female headed
households are
excluded from
benefiting from the
Revolving
Adaptation Fund
Facility (RAFF)
Charter after its
update. |  |  | possible, for access to support for to
small business owners, (including
those that are female led), small
scaled farmers and female heads of
households. |  | 
5. Discrimination
against women and
LGBTQI+
populations who
work, or are
interested in working
in the wastewater
sector. | 3 | 3 |  | i. Ensure development of Project | 
 |  |  |  | Code of Conduct that applies to | 
 |  |  |  | project Staff, Consultants, | 
 |  |  |  | Contractors, BWA employees who | 
 |  |  |  | are interacting with communities | 
 |  |  |  | under the framework of this project. | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | ii. Ensure continuous training and | 
 |  |  |  | reminders on Discrimination and its | 
 |  |  |  | impacts. | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | iii. Ensure relevant staff participate in | 
 |  |  |  | Gender Sensitivity Training. | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | iv. Ensure frequent check in with | 
 |  |  |  | Interns (Women in STEM) with | 
 |  |  |  | BWA Human Resource Department | 
 |  |  |  | and Project Social and Gender | 
 |  |  |  | Specialist. | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
6. Gender Base
Violence (GBV) and
Sexual Exploitation
and Harassment
(SEAH) against
workers, interns, and
community members
under the framework
of this project. | 3 | 4 | i. Ensure development of Project
Code of Conduct that applies to
project Staff, Consultants,
Contractors, BWA employees who
are interacting with communities
under the framework of this project.
ii. Ensure that the GRMs designated to
receive complaints for this project
are able to effectively receive
complaints and provide redress to
victims.
iii. Ensure frequent check in with
Interns (Women in STEM) with
BWA Human Resource Department
and Project Social and Gender
Specialist.
iv. Ensure Procurement Documents
and contracts explicitly prohibit
practices of GBV and SEAH
consistent with AE’s Policies,
including Gender Policy 2021-
2026. |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 270 ---
5. Discrimination
against women and
LGBTQI+
populations who
work, or are
interested in working
in the wastewater
sector.

=== PAGE 271 ===
Appendix 4 - Gender Action Plan
Impact:
 Improved resilience of male and female headed households, small farmers, small business owners and vulnerable populations to the
impacts of climate change on water supply.
Outcome:
 Waste Water sector improves it capacity to respond to gender issues by implementing at least four (4) gender-responsive interventions by
the end of the Project (Outputs 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7)
 50% increase in the use of reclaimed water for non-potable uses by male and female heads of households, small farmers and small business
owners in two low-income communities (Belle Tenantry , and Bellevue Gap) by end of Project. (Outputs 4 & 6)
Focus Area/Activity Indicators/Targets77 Timeline Responsibilities Estimated Cost (in USD)
Output 1: Gender specific gaps and requirements are identified and incorporated in legislative and planning frameworks for wastewater
management.
1.1 Hire a Gender Expert to Legislative review notes Complete by year 3 -the BWA Board $6,000.00 (Gender Expert
conduct a Gender Gap include gender specific gaps -3R-CReWS PSC as part of legal review
Assessment, including and recommendations. -Project Manager team
consultations with key (Yes/No) - Project Social and
stakeholders as part of the Gender Specialist
Review of Wastewater Reuse
Bill, Planning and
Development Act, and other
related legislations for
enhancing wastewater
effluent quality, treatment
options and re-use
requirements and
applications
1.2 Ensure findings of gap
assessment are captured in
overarching legislative
review.
77 Targets are reflected in Brackets.
93

--- Table 1 on Page 271 ---
 | Focus Area/Activity |  |  | Indicators/Targets77 |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities |  |  | Estimated Cost (in USD) | 
 | Output 1: Gender specific gaps and requirements are identified and incorporated in legislative and planning frameworks for wastewater |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | management. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 271 ---
Legislative review notes
include gender specific gaps
and recommendations.
(Yes/No) | Complete by year 3 | -the BWA Board
-3R-CReWS PSC
-Project Manager
- Project Social and
Gender Specialist

=== PAGE 272 ===
Focus Area/Activity Indicators/Targets77 Timeline Responsibilities Estimated Cost (in USD)
1.3 Ensure that water and Number of specific actions Complete by year 2 -The BWA Board $5,000.00 (Gender Expert
sanitation master plan promote targeting gender equality -3R- CReWS PSC to review and provide
gender sensitive actions as it and inclusion of vulnerable - Project Social and recommendations as
relates to the water and people in Water and Gender Specialist well as participate in
wastewater sector. Sanitation Master Plan (3) consultations)
Number of Women’s Groups,
consulted in development of
Water and Sanitation Action
Plan (10)
Number of groups
representing vulnerable
populations consulted in
development of Water and
Sanitation Action Plan (10)
1.4 Ensure update to Standard Number of BWA SOPS and Completed by year 3 -3R- CReWS PSC $10,000.00 (Gender
Operating Procedures (SOP) and manuals developed to - Project Manager Expert as part of Team
Operational Manuals of the BWA include gender needs of - Project Social and updating Documents)
address the requirements of wastewater section (3 Gender Specialist
gender and SGBV. -BWA Wastewater
(1 updated set of SOPs Manager
1 updated O&M manual
1 risk management
framework))
Output 2: Improved capacity of BWA staff to integrate gender considerations into their provision of wastewater services
2.1 Roll out UWI/BWA Gender Number (disaggregated by Completed by end of BWA Human $45,000.00 (Trainers,
Sensitivity Training programme sex) of BWA staff members project Resource developers for online
#2 for existing BWA employees. participating in the UWI/BWA Department training and Logistics)
Gender Sensitivity Training - Project Social and
program (300) (150 M, 150F) Gender Specialist
2.2 Develop online self-paced -Project Manager
mandatory SGBV training for all
BWA employees # Of SGBV Trainings
Developed (2)
% of BWA employees by sex
who have taken SGBV training
(80%M, 80%F)
94

--- Table 1 on Page 272 ---
 | Focus Area/Activity |  |  | Indicators/Targets77 |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities |  |  | Estimated Cost (in USD) | 
 |  |  | Number of specific actions
targeting gender equality
and inclusion of vulnerable
people in Water and
Sanitation Master Plan (3)
Number of Women’s Groups,
consulted in development of
Water and Sanitation Action
Plan (10)
Number of groups
representing vulnerable
populations consulted in
development of Water and
Sanitation Action Plan (10) |  |  | Complete by year 2 |  |  | -The BWA Board
-3R- CReWS PSC
- Project Social and
Gender Specialist |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Number of BWA SOPS and
manuals developed to
include gender needs of
wastewater section (3
(1 updated set of SOPs
1 updated O&M manual
1 risk management
framework)) |  |  | Completed by year 3 |  |  | -3R- CReWS PSC
- Project Manager
- Project Social and
Gender Specialist
-BWA Wastewater
Manager |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 272 ---
 | Output 2: Improved capacity of BWA staff to integrate gender considerations into their provision of wastewater services | 

--- Table 3 on Page 272 ---
Number (disaggregated by
sex) of BWA staff members
participating in the UWI/BWA
Gender Sensitivity Training
program (300) (150 M, 150F)
# Of SGBV Trainings
Developed (2)
% of BWA employees by sex
who have taken SGBV training
(80%M, 80%F) | Completed by end of
project | BWA Human
Resource
Department
- Project Social and
Gender Specialist
-Project Manager

=== PAGE 273 ===
Focus Area/Activity Indicators/Targets77 Timeline Responsibilities Estimated Cost (in USD)
2.3 Conduct training for BWA
staff on the updated SOPs and
# Of operators
OM that include gender
(disaggregated by sex)
considerations.
exposed to the training on the
SOPs and OM (70)
Output 3: Increased participation
of women performing technical
roles in waste water sector
3.1 Develop in collaboration with # of Women in STEM Internship End of Project -Project Manager $ 10,000 (stipend co-
relevant training institutions Programme developed (1) -BWA HR financing)
Women in STEM Internship Department
Programmes at Wastewater -BWA Wastewater
division. # of female interns Department
participating in Women in - Project Social and
3.2 Implement in collaboration STEM internship programme Gender Specialist
with relevant training institutions (8)
a Women in STEM Internship
Programme at Wastewater
division, including the # of reports including
recommendations from interns recommendations for
on potential measures to improvement of gender
increase participation of women equality within wastewater
in STEM and to increase equality sector (8)
for women in waste water
# of recommendations
management.
implemented (4 )
3.3 Ensure equal participation of Ratio of Males and females Throughout the -Project Manager Cost subsumed under
men and women in Ratio of participating in CVQ/NVQ Project -BWA HR technical training line.
Males and females participating programmes offered from 3R- Department
in Caribbean Vocational CREWS (1:1) -BWA Wastewater
Qualification (CVQ)/ National Department
Vocational Qualification (NVQ) Project Social and
courses offered under the Gender Specialist
Project.
Throughout the -BWA Public $5,000.00 ($1,000.00 per
3.4 BWA female staff to # Of targeted outreach by project Relations outreach session)
participate in public education BWA female Managers, Department
campaigns encouraging girls Technicians and Engineers to -Project Social and
95

--- Table 1 on Page 273 ---
 | Focus Area/Activity |  |  | Indicators/Targets77 |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities |  |  | Estimated Cost (in USD) | 
 |  |  | # Of operators
(disaggregated by sex)
exposed to the training on the
SOPs and OM (70) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 3: Increased participation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of women performing technical |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | roles in waste water sector |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | # of Women in STEM Internship
Programme developed (1)
# of female interns
participating in Women in
STEM internship programme
(8)
# of reports including
recommendations for
improvement of gender
equality within wastewater
sector (8)
# of recommendations
implemented (4 ) |  |  | End of Project |  |  | -Project Manager
-BWA HR
Department
-BWA Wastewater
Department
- Project Social and
Gender Specialist |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Ratio of Males and females
participating in CVQ/NVQ
programmes offered from 3R-
CREWS (1:1) |  |  | Throughout the
Project |  |  | -Project Manager
-BWA HR
Department
-BWA Wastewater
Department
Project Social and
Gender Specialist |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | # Of targeted outreach by
BWA female Managers,
Technicians and Engineers to |  |  | Throughout the
project |  |  | -BWA Public
Relations
Department
-Project Social and |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 274 ===
Focus Area/Activity Indicators/Targets77 Timeline Responsibilities Estimated Cost (in USD)
and young women to aspire to spaces with girls and young Gender Specialist
leadership and technical roles in women, including schools (5). -Project Manager
the waste water sector
Output 4: Gender sensitive stakeholder consultations and awareness programmes instituted to ensure public knowledge and buy-in on the
use of wastewater services and potential impacts.
4.1 Convene gender informed # of consultations held with At least quarterly until BWA Public Relations Cost subsumed under
stakeholder consultations to community members (heads end of Project Department stakeholder
inform and solicit input from of households, small farmers, Project Manager engagement lines
community members (heads of small business owners and Social and Gender
households, small farmers, small vulnerable populations) who Specialist
business owners and vulnerable offer inputs and receive PSC
populations) into the design, information on the project BWA Wastewater
implementation and monitoring from design to M&E Division
phases of the Project,
4-8 community consultations
(Town halls, outreach, walk
through etc) per year = 8-16
communities over 2 years x 75
persons per community = 600-
1200 community persons (50%
males and 50% females.
4.2 Develop communication % of women and men Year 1 of the Project Project Manager No Additional Cost (SGS
strategy that is informed by administered KAP instruments Project Social and salary to review KAP TOR
Gender sensitive KAP Survey. (51%, 49% respectively) Gender Specialist and documents for
KAP Survey must therefore BWA Public Relations gender analysis)
ensure that results are easily KAP Study reveals gender Department
disaggregated by sex and that differences in analysis 3R-CReWs PSC
analysis of knowledge, attitudes (Yes/No)
and practice is gender Communication strategy
responsive. tailors messaging and
channels to men and women
based on feedback from KAP
surveys (Yes/No)
96

--- Table 1 on Page 274 ---
 | Focus Area/Activity |  |  | Indicators/Targets77 |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities |  |  | Estimated Cost (in USD) | 
 |  |  | spaces with girls and young
women, including schools (5). |  |  |  |  |  | Gender Specialist
-Project Manager |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 274 ---
 | Output 4: Gender sensitive stakeholder consultations and awareness programmes instituted to ensure public knowledge and buy-in on the | 
 | use of wastewater services and potential impacts. | 
 |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 274 ---
# of consultations held with
community members (heads
of households, small farmers,
small business owners and
vulnerable populations) who
offer inputs and receive
information on the project
from design to M&E
4-8 community consultations
(Town halls, outreach, walk
through etc) per year = 8-16
communities over 2 years x 75
persons per community = 600-
1200 community persons (50%
males and 50% females. | At least quarterly until
end of Project | BWA Public Relations
Department
Project Manager
Social and Gender
Specialist
PSC
BWA Wastewater
Division
% of women and men
administered KAP instruments
(51%, 49% respectively)
KAP Study reveals gender
differences in analysis
(Yes/No)
Communication strategy
tailors messaging and
channels to men and women
based on feedback from KAP
surveys (Yes/No) | Year 1 of the Project | Project Manager
Project Social and
Gender Specialist
BWA Public Relations
Department
3R-CReWs PSC

=== PAGE 275 ===
Focus Area/Activity Indicators/Targets77 Timeline Responsibilities Estimated Cost (in USD)
# Of persons benefitting from
education activities
(Disaggregated by
sex) (10000 (4,900M, 5,100F))
4.2 3R-CReWS Project webpage Throughout the -BWA Public $50,000.00 (webpage
will report on project results % of applicable project results project Relations consultancy design and
disaggregated by sex where based on Project Log frame Department establishment as well as
possible. Webpage will include disaggregated by sex on -Project Social and communication
communication messaging Project website (100%) Gender Specialist messages))
including of gendered impacts -Project Manager
of climate change on water Number of stories
supply and messaging communicating gendered
encouraging use of reclaimed impact of climate change on
water targeting female farmers, water supply and access (4)
heads of households, small
business owners and small Number of Communication
business owners. messages messaging
encouraging use of
reclaimed water targeting
female farmers, heads of
households, small business
owners and small business
owners (4)
Output 5. Increased capacity of BWA to respond to SEAH complaints from community and staff members
5.1 Update the Wastewater Existence of mechanism for Within 6 months of BWA Human $6,,000.00 (update and
Division Complaints reporting on SGBV as part of project inception Resource publicity of Complaints
Management System to ensure Wastewater Management Department. system)
complaints system is capable of Division Complaints Project Social and
capturing SGBV complaints, Management System Gender Specialist
publicized (including on Project (Yes/No)
webpage), accessible for
directly impacted communities % of stakeholder engagement
and has mechanism s for community events that
external referral, including the publicises the SEAH /SGBV
CCCCC GRM. complaints process (100%)
Complaints systems accessible
97

--- Table 1 on Page 275 ---
 | Focus Area/Activity |  |  | Indicators/Targets77 |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities |  |  | Estimated Cost (in USD) | 
 |  |  | # Of persons benefitting from
education activities
(Disaggregated by
sex) (10000 (4,900M, 5,100F)) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | % of applicable project results
based on Project Log frame
disaggregated by sex on
Project website (100%)
Number of stories
communicating gendered
impact of climate change on
water supply and access (4)
Number of Communication
messages messaging
encouraging use of
reclaimed water targeting
female farmers, heads of
households, small business
owners and small business
owners (4) |  |  | Throughout the
project |  |  | -BWA Public
Relations
Department
-Project Social and
Gender Specialist
-Project Manager |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 275 ---
 | Output 5. Increased capacity of BWA to respond to SEAH complaints from community and staff members | 

--- Table 3 on Page 275 ---
Existence of mechanism for
reporting on SGBV as part of
Wastewater Management
Division Complaints
Management System
(Yes/No)
% of stakeholder engagement
community events that
publicises the SEAH /SGBV
complaints process (100%)
Complaints systems accessible | Within 6 months of
project inception | BWA Human
Resource
Department.
Project Social and
Gender Specialist

=== PAGE 276 ===
Focus Area/Activity Indicators/Targets77 Timeline Responsibilities Estimated Cost (in USD)
on Project webpage (Yes/no)
CCCCC GRM Publicized as
source for receiving SGBV
related complaints (Yes/No)
5.2 Develop and implement # of SEAH/SGBV complaints Within 6 months of BWA Human $7,000.00 ( Part of the
complaints procedure for procedures developed (1) project inception Resource consultancy to develop
addressing SEAH/SGBV Department. and support
complaints in waste water sector # of SEAH/SGBV complaints Project Social and implementation
procedures developed (1) Gender Specialist complaints procedure )
Output 6: Male and female heads of households, small farmers, small business owners and vulnerable populations have increased
opportunities to connect to wastewater treatment systems.
6.1 Update RAFF charter to Review of charter includes 6.1- 4.3- By end of Project Manager, 6.1-$5,000.00
include wastewater treatment assessment of needs of male year 3 Project Social and
and reuse options to promote and female business and Gender Specialist,
gender equality. households (Yes/No) 6.4- 6.7 By end of 3R-CReWS PSC
year 4 BWA Board of
6.2Develop recommendations Existence of report providing Directors
for incentive programme recommendations for a
provide opportunities that will gender sensitive incentive 6.2- $5,000.00 (consultant
benefit female headed programme to benefit FFH to develop
households and socio- and socio-economically recommendations
economically deprived disadvantaged households
households. (Yes/No)
# of recommendations for
incentive programme
implemented that benefit
female headed households
and socio-economically
deprived households. (4)
6.3Undertake re-education Number of sessions 6.3 No additional costs
programs targeting farmers (workshops, meetings, outside of BWA Co-
98

--- Table 1 on Page 276 ---
 | Focus Area/Activity |  |  | Indicators/Targets77 |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities |  |  | Estimated Cost (in USD) | 
 |  |  | on Project webpage (Yes/no)
CCCCC GRM Publicized as
source for receiving SGBV
related complaints (Yes/No) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | # of SEAH/SGBV complaints
procedures developed (1)
# of SEAH/SGBV complaints
procedures developed (1) |  |  | Within 6 months of
project inception |  |  | BWA Human
Resource
Department.
Project Social and
Gender Specialist |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 276 ---
 | Output 6: Male and female heads of households, small farmers, small business owners and vulnerable populations have increased | 
 | opportunities to connect to wastewater treatment systems. | 
 |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 276 ---
Review of charter includes
assessment of needs of male
and female business and
households (Yes/No)
Existence of report providing
recommendations for a
gender sensitive incentive
programme to benefit FFH
and socio-economically
disadvantaged households
(Yes/No)
# of recommendations for
incentive programme
implemented that benefit
female headed households
and socio-economically
deprived households. (4)
Number of sessions
(workshops, meetings, | 6.1- 4.3- By end of
year 3
6.4- 6.7 By end of
year 4 | Project Manager,
Project Social and
Gender Specialist,
3R-CReWS PSC
BWA Board of
Directors

=== PAGE 277 ===
Focus Area/Activity Indicators/Targets77 Timeline Responsibilities Estimated Cost (in USD)
particularly women, to enhance training) targeting farmers, finance and stakeholder
capabilities and leadership for especially female small engagement.
the adoption of wastewater farmers (8)
treatment technologies and
Ratio of Female to Male
reuse options in two communities
Farmers participating in re-
education programme (2:3)
% of small scale female farmers
participating in the re-
education programs that
adopt wastewater treatment
tec
% of small scale female farmers
who participate in re-
education programs receiving
subsidies to adopt waste
water treatment technologies
and reuse options in two
6.4 Small scale female farmers communities (50%)
who participate in re-education
[propgrammes receive subsidies
# Of Households with
to adopt waste water treatment
connections to waste water
technologies and reuse options 6.4Subsumed under
treatment system
in two communities existing Project costs
(Disaggregated by sex of
head of households). (225)
6.5 Male and Female headed
(115 FHH, 110 MHH)
households in Two communities
in Zone A provided with
connections to decentralized
Volume of reclaimed water is
waste water treatment systems.
available for non-potable use
disaggregated by
male/female HH. (2.25 million
m3) (1.114 m3 FHH) (1.113m3
MHH).
99

--- Table 1 on Page 277 ---
 | Focus Area/Activity |  |  | Indicators/Targets77 |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities |  |  | Estimated Cost (in USD) | 
 |  |  | training) targeting farmers,
especially female small
farmers (8)
Ratio of Female to Male
Farmers participating in re-
education programme (2:3)
% of small scale female farmers
participating in the re-
education programs that
adopt wastewater treatment
tec
% of small scale female farmers
who participate in re-
education programs receiving
subsidies to adopt waste
water treatment technologies
and reuse options in two
communities (50%)
# Of Households with
connections to waste water
treatment system
(Disaggregated by sex of
head of households). (225)
(115 FHH, 110 MHH)
Volume of reclaimed water is
available for non-potable use
disaggregated by
male/female HH. (2.25 million
m3) (1.114 m3 FHH) (1.113m3
MHH). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 278 ===
Focus Area/Activity Indicators/Targets77 Timeline Responsibilities Estimated Cost (in USD)
% of small and women owned
6.5 Workshop held to encourage businesses participating in
small and women owned workshop on leveraging the
businesses to leverage the mechanisms available
mechanisms available (incentives and RAFF) for 6.5 subsumed under
(incentives and RAFF) for access access to wastewater existing Project costs for
to wastewater services. services. (30%) stakeholder
engagement
% of small and women owned
businesses attending
workshop that use information
to access incentives/ RAFF in
order to access waste water
services (30%)
Output 7: Enabling a gender responsive project management and governance environment for the duration of the Project
7.1Ensure contractors, BWA Staff Existence of COC that Throughout the life BWA HR Department No additional cost (staff
and project staff interacting with prohibits SEAH/SGBV (Yes/No) cycle of the project BWA Procurement time)
community signs Code of Department
Conduct to be developed % Of Staff, consultants Project Social and
under this project. working in communities who Gender Specialist
have signed COC (100%) 3R-CReWS PSC
7.2 Select a gender balance Ratio of Male to Female Throughout the life BWA HR Department Advertise &Interview
Project Team Project Team (1:1) cycle of the Project. CCCCC applicants Applicant
Orientation. No
% of men on project team in standalone costs
female dominated roles (20%) identified.
% of women on project team
in male dominated roles
(20%)
100

--- Table 1 on Page 278 ---
 | Focus Area/Activity |  |  | Indicators/Targets77 |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities |  |  | Estimated Cost (in USD) | 
 |  |  | % of small and women owned
businesses participating in
workshop on leveraging the
mechanisms available
(incentives and RAFF) for
access to wastewater
services. (30%)
% of small and women owned
businesses attending
workshop that use information
to access incentives/ RAFF in
order to access waste water
services (30%) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 278 ---
 | Output 7: Enabling a gender responsive project management and governance environment for the duration of the Project | 

--- Table 3 on Page 278 ---
Existence of COC that
prohibits SEAH/SGBV (Yes/No)
% Of Staff, consultants
working in communities who
have signed COC (100%) | Throughout the life
cycle of the project | BWA HR Department
BWA Procurement
Department
Project Social and
Gender Specialist
3R-CReWS PSC
Ratio of Male to Female
Project Team (1:1)
% of men on project team in
female dominated roles (20%)
% of women on project team
in male dominated roles
(20%) | Throughout the life
cycle of the Project. | BWA HR Department
CCCCC

=== PAGE 279 ===
Focus Area/Activity Indicators/Targets77 Timeline Responsibilities Estimated Cost (in USD)
7.3Develop a gender balance Ratio of Male to Female on Throughout the life CCCCC No Standalone cost
PSC. PSC (1:1) cycle of the Project. BWA Board of identified (Staff time)
Directors
7.4Ensure representation of Existence of representative
Bureau of Gender Affairs on PSC. from Bureau of Gender Affairs
on PSC (yes/No)
7.5 Recruit and retain Social and # Of qualified Gender Throughout the -BWA Human $192,000.00
Gender Specialist for the Project. Specialist working on the Project Resource
The specialist will be responsible project. (1) Department
for stakeholder related activities - CCCCC
to ensure gender
mainstreaming, update of the
complaints system, gender
mainstreaming in all
components of the project and
reporting on gender progress.
7.6Present annually to PSC, # Of Reports on Gender Annually -Project Manager No Standalone cost
report on Progress of Progress of Project presented -CCCCC identified (Staff time)
implementation of GAP. to PSC (5) -Project Social and
Gender Specialist
# Of discussion on Gender
7.7Table annually, a discussion
report held at Project PSC (5)
on the Progress of GAP
Implementation as an agenda
item of the PSC.
7.8Ensure mandatory % Project staff participating in Annually BWA Human No Standalone cost
participation of Project staff in gender sensitivity training Resource identified (Staff time)
Gender Sensitivity and disaggregated by sex (100%) Department
SEAH/SGBV Training sessions Project Manager
% of Project staff participating
-CCCCC
in SEAH/SGBV training
-Project Social and
(disaggregated sex) (100%)
Gender Specialist
7.9 Collect, store, and retrieve % of applicable data First six BWA Wastewater No Standalone cost
data disaggregated by sex and collected, stored and is months of project Division identified (Staff time)
other vulnerability indicators for disaggregated by sex and Project Manager
planning and decision making other vulnerability (indicators Project Social and
throughout the Project cycle, (100%). Gender Specialist
including during stakeholder PSC
engagement.
101

--- Table 1 on Page 279 ---
 | Focus Area/Activity |  |  | Indicators/Targets77 |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities |  |  | Estimated Cost (in USD) | 
 |  |  | Ratio of Male to Female on
PSC (1:1)
Existence of representative
from Bureau of Gender Affairs
on PSC (yes/No) |  |  | Throughout the life
cycle of the Project. |  |  | CCCCC
BWA Board of
Directors |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | # Of qualified Gender
Specialist working on the
project. (1) |  |  | Throughout the
Project |  |  | -BWA Human
Resource
Department
- CCCCC |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | # Of Reports on Gender
Progress of Project presented
to PSC (5)
# Of discussion on Gender
report held at Project PSC (5) |  |  | Annually |  |  | -Project Manager
-CCCCC
-Project Social and
Gender Specialist |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | % Project staff participating in
gender sensitivity training
disaggregated by sex (100%)
% of Project staff participating
in SEAH/SGBV training
(disaggregated sex) (100%) |  |  | Annually |  |  | BWA Human
Resource
Department
Project Manager
-CCCCC
-Project Social and
Gender Specialist |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | % of applicable data
collected, stored and is
disaggregated by sex and
other vulnerability (indicators
(100%). |  |  | First six
months of project |  |  | BWA Wastewater
Division
Project Manager
Project Social and
Gender Specialist
PSC |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 280 ===
Focus Area/Activity Indicators/Targets77 Timeline Responsibilities Estimated Cost (in USD)
# of baseline report on sex
disaggregated data
produced (1)
__________
102

--- Table 1 on Page 280 ---
 | Focus Area/Activity |  |  | Indicators/Targets77 |  |  | Timeline |  |  | Responsibilities |  |  | Estimated Cost (in USD) | 
 |  |  | # of baseline report on sex
disaggregated data
produced (1) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 280 ---
 | 
 | 
