=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: hahn
CreationDate: D:20220302140343+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.11.20039
ModDate: D:20220306162225+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.11.20039
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
28 – 31 March 2022
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea
Provisional agenda item 13 11 March 2022
Consideration of funding proposals -
Addendum I
Funding proposal package for FP182
Summary
This addendum contains the following seven parts:
a) A funding proposal titled "Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation
and sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in Colombia
(CSICAP)";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 3
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 78
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 80
Secretariat’s assessment 82
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 97
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
109
assessment
Gender documentation 111

=== PAGE 3 ===
Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and
Project/Programme title: sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in
Colombia (CSICAP)
Country(ies): Colombia
Accredited Entity: Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)
Date of first submission: 2021/03/29
Date of current submission 14/01/2022
Version number V.012

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE b OF 75
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
 | Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template | 
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4. |  | 

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 3 OF 75
AA
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.1. Project or A.2. Public or private
Project Public
programme sector
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals,
A.3. Request for indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the
Proposals (RFP) Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.
Not applicable
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets.
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it.
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: GCF contribution:
Energy access and power generation: Enter number%
☐
Low-emission transport: Enter number%
☐
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances: Enter number%
A.4. Result area(s) ☒ Forestry and land use: 13%
Adaptation: Increased resilience of:
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions: 44%
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security: 43%
☐ Infrastructure and built environment: Enter number%
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services: Enter number%
619,691 direct
beneficiaries
347,996 indirect
beneficiaries.
The direct beneficiaries are
equivalent to 1.21% of total
A.5. Expected mitigation 9,152,034 tCO2eq over A.6. Expected adaptation population (7.2% of total
impact lifespan impact agricultural producers in
Colombia).
The indirect beneficiaries
represent 0.68% of total
population (4.1% of total
agricultural producers).
A.7. Total financing (GCF
99,910,201 USD
+ co-finance)
Medium (Upto USD 250
73,283,080 USD A.9. Project size
million)
A.8. Total GCF funding For multi-country
requested proposals, please fill out
annex 17.
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8.
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested ☒ Grant 48,283,080 ☐ Equity Enter number
for the GCF funding ☒ Loan 25,000,000 ☐ Results-based
☐ Guarantee Enter number payment Enter number
A.11. Implementation
5 years A.12. Total lifespan 25 years
period

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or
programme |  | Project | A.2. Public or private
sector | Public |  | 
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP) |  | If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals,
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.
Not applicable |  |  |  | 
A.4. Result area(s) |  | Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets.
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it.
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%. |  |  |  | 
 |  | Mitigation: Reduced emissions from:
Energy access and power generation:
☐
Low-emission transport:
☐
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:
☒ Forestry and land use:
Adaptation: Increased resilience of:
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security:
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services: |  |  | GCF contribution:
Enter number%
Enter number%
Enter number%
13%
44%
43%
Enter number%
Enter number% | 
A.5. Expected mitigation
impact |  | 9,152,034 tCO2eq over
lifespan | A.6. Expected adaptation
impact | 619,691 direct
beneficiaries
347,996 indirect
beneficiaries. |  | 
 |  |  |  | The direct beneficiaries are
equivalent to 1.21% of total
population (7.2% of total
agricultural producers in
Colombia).
The indirect beneficiaries
represent 0.68% of total
population (4.1% of total
agricultural producers). |  | 
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance) |  | 99,910,201 USD | A.9. Project size | Medium (Upto USD 250
million) |  | 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested |  | 73,283,080 USD
For multi-country
proposals, please fill out
annex 17. |  |  |  | 
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding |  | Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8.
☒ Grant 48,283,080 ☐ Equity Enter number
☒ Loan 25,000,000 ☐ Results-based
☐ Guarantee Enter number payment Enter number |  |  |  | 
A.11. Implementation
period |  | 5 years | A.12. Total lifespan | 25 years |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 5 ---
A.1. Project or
programme

--- Table 3 on Page 5 ---
A.2. Public or private
sector

--- Table 4 on Page 5 ---
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)

--- Table 5 on Page 5 ---
A.5. Expected mitigation
impact

--- Table 6 on Page 5 ---
A.6. Expected adaptation
impact

--- Table 7 on Page 5 ---
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance)

--- Table 8 on Page 5 ---
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested

--- Table 9 on Page 5 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding

--- Table 10 on Page 5 ---
A.11. Implementation
period

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 75
AA
This is the date that the
Refer to the AE’s safeguard
Accredited Entity obtained/will
policy and GCF ESS
A.13. Expected date of obtain its own approval to
A.14. ESS category Standards to assess your FP
AE internal approval implement the project/
category.
programme, if available.
B
7/31/2021
A.15. Has this FP been A.16. Has Readiness or
submitted as a CN Yes ☒ No PPF support been used Yes ☒ No
☐ ☐
before? to prepare this FP?
A.17. Is this FP included A.18. Is this FP included
in the entity work Yes ☒ No in the country Yes ☒ No
☐ ☐
programme? programme?
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF,
A.19. Complementarity
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
and coherence
Yes ☒ No ☐
The Government of Colombia through the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (MHCP)
will be the entity responsible for the project loan resources from the Green Climate Fund
(GCF) as well as the loan resources from CAF. For its part, the Ministry of Agriculture
and Rural Development (MADR) will be responsible for executing the resources and
technical implementation of the project through its Directorate of Innovation,
Technological Development and Sanitary Protection. The CSICAP Project is presented
as a national initiative under the leadership of the MADR, as executing entity (EE). MADR
will be responsible for providing technical guidance for project implementation and
A.20. Executing Entity supervising the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), as Procured Party,
information to ensure that all activities are executed on time and with the required quality to ensure
the achievement of project results. The MADR will receive technical support from the
Alliance between Bioversity International and CIAT (part of the CGIAR, an accredited
agency to the GCF), Agrosavia (the agricultural research institution in Colombia),
CIMMYT, CIPAV, and producer associations (gremios)1 (ASBAMA and AUGURA-
Cenibanano (banana), ASOHOFRUCOL (plantain), ASOCAÑA-CENICAÑA (sugar
cane), FEDEPANELA (panela cane), FEDECAFE - CENICAFE (coffee), FEDEPAPA
(potato), FEDEARROZ (rice), FENALCE (corn) and FEDEGAN (livestock)), following the
regulations and schemes defined and allowed under Colombian legislation.
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
1. The climate problem. Colombia is projected to be negatively impacted by climate change, with temperature rises,
changes in rainfall regimes, and greater frequency and intensity of weather and climate extremes (Fowler et al.,
2021; Kharin et al., 2018; Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012). Temperatures increased by 0.13 °C per decade in
Colombia during the period 1971-2000, reaching 3 to 5 °C by mid-XXI century (Arnell et al, 2004; IPCC, 2007;
IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017). Climatic variations relevant to agriculture occur at a range of
timescales (from days to multiple decades), and it is virtually certain that anthropogenically-driven climate change
will alter climatic patterns at all those timescales (Bindoff et al., 2013; Donat et al., 2013; Seneviratne et al., 2018
IPCC, 2021). More specifically, an amplification of ENSO-rainfall variability is projected by the new CMIP6 model
ensemble (Yun et al., 2021 IPCC, 2021). Likewise, the frequency of extreme El Niño events is expected to increase;
with warming (Cai et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2017). Ultimately, while robust projection of ENSO is not feasible with
the current generation of cl;i mate models, it is clear that ENSO-related climate variations will continue to challenge
agricultural production in all regions of Colombia. Strong ENSO events can severely impair agricultural productivity
in Colombia (Barrios-Perez et al., 2021).
2. According to the Third National Communication of Colombia, climate change is expected to have a major impact
on the Colombian agricultural sector (IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017), due to both the long-
term trends in climate with progressive increase in temperature and large anomalies in the timing of periods of
excessive rain and drought, as well as greatly increased variation in weather patterns with more frequent and
anomalous extreme weather events. The Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) of the IPCC (IPCC, 2021) Colombia is
likely to be most challenged by extreme heat (especially in the lowland northern regions) and heavy precipitation
events and flooding (across the Pacific and the inter-Andean Valleys). Unprecedented flooding events have been
1 Gremio (plural gremios) refers to crop-specific private sector organizations that gathers small, medium and large-scale farmers, which aim
to support farmers to improve competitive ness and income profitability. These organizations are nation-wide and have branches in all relevant
areas for each specific agricultural system. Usually, the gremios provide a variety of services including, but not limited to, research and
innovation, technical and commercial assistance, input provider, among others. Most of these gremios were established decades ago, they
represent farmers before governmental institutions so that their needs are addressed. Some of those organizations have separate research
and innovation entities to support farmers.

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval |  |  |  | This is the date that the |  | A.14. ESS category |  |  | Refer to the AE’s safeguard
policy and GCF ESS
Standards to assess your FP
category.
B
 |  |  |  | Accredited Entity obtained/will |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | obtain its own approval to |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | implement the project/ |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | programme, if available. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 7/31/2021 |  |  |  |  | 
 | A.15. Has this FP been |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  |  |  | A.16. Has Readiness or |  | Yes ☒ No
☐
 | submitted as a CN |  |  |  |  |  | PPF support been used |  | 
 | before? |  |  |  |  |  | to prepare this FP? |  | 
 | A.17. Is this FP included |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  |  |  | A.18. Is this FP included |  | Yes ☒ No
☐
 | in the entity work |  |  |  |  |  | in the country |  | 
 | programme? |  |  |  |  |  | programme? |  | 
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence |  |  | Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF,
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
Yes ☒ No ☐ |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.20. Executing Entity
information |  |  | The Government of Colombia through the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (MHCP)
will be the entity responsible for the project loan resources from the Green Climate Fund
(GCF) as well as the loan resources from CAF. For its part, the Ministry of Agriculture
and Rural Development (MADR) will be responsible for executing the resources and
technical implementation of the project through its Directorate of Innovation,
Technological Development and Sanitary Protection. The CSICAP Project is presented
as a national initiative under the leadership of the MADR, as executing entity (EE). MADR
will be responsible for providing technical guidance for project implementation and
supervising the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), as Procured Party,
to ensure that all activities are executed on time and with the required quality to ensure
the achievement of project results. The MADR will receive technical support from the
Alliance between Bioversity International and CIAT (part of the CGIAR, an accredited
agency to the GCF), Agrosavia (the agricultural research institution in Colombia),
CIMMYT, CIPAV, and producer associations (gremios)1 (ASBAMA and AUGURA-
Cenibanano (banana), ASOHOFRUCOL (plantain), ASOCAÑA-CENICAÑA (sugar
cane), FEDEPANELA (panela cane), FEDECAFE - CENICAFE (coffee), FEDEPAPA
(potato), FEDEARROZ (rice), FENALCE (corn) and FEDEGAN (livestock)), following the
regulations and schemes defined and allowed under Colombian legislation. |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
1. The climate problem. Colombia is projected to be negatively impacted by climate change, with temperature rises,
changes in rainfall regimes, and greater frequency and intensity of weather and climate extremes (Fowler et al.,
2021; Kharin et al., 2018; Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012). Temperatures increased by 0.13 °C per decade in
Colombia during the period 1971-2000, reaching 3 to 5 °C by mid-XXI century (Arnell et al, 2004; IPCC, 2007;
IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017). Climatic variations relevant to agriculture occur at a range of
timescales (from days to multiple decades), and it is virtually certain that anthropogenically-driven climate change
will alter climatic patterns at all those timescales (Bindoff et al., 2013; Donat et al., 2013; Seneviratne et al., 2018
IPCC, 2021). More specifically, an amplification of ENSO-rainfall variability is projected by the new CMIP6 model
ensemble (Yun et al., 2021 IPCC, 2021). Likewise, the frequency of extreme El Niño events is expected to increase;
with warming (Cai et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2017). Ultimately, while robust projection of ENSO is not feasible with
the current generation of cl;i mate models, it is clear that ENSO-related climate variations will continue to challenge
agricultural production in all regions of Colombia. Strong ENSO events can severely impair agricultural productivity
in Colombia (Barrios-Perez et al., 2021).
2. According to the Third National Communication of Colombia, climate change is expected to have a major impact
on the Colombian agricultural sector (IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017), due to both the long-
term trends in climate with progressive increase in temperature and large anomalies in the timing of periods of
excessive rain and drought, as well as greatly increased variation in weather patterns with more frequent and
anomalous extreme weather events. The Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) of the IPCC (IPCC, 2021) Colombia is
likely to be most challenged by extreme heat (especially in the lowland northern regions) and heavy precipitation
events and flooding (across the Pacific and the inter-Andean Valleys). Unprecedented flooding events have been |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 6 ---
Refer to the AE’s safeguard
policy and GCF ESS
Standards to assess your FP
category.
B

--- Table 3 on Page 6 ---
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval

--- Table 4 on Page 6 ---
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence

--- Table 5 on Page 6 ---
A.20. Executing Entity
information

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 75
AA
reported in recent decades in the lower reaches of the Atrato, Cauca, and Magdalena rivers (IPCC, 2021 – Chapter
12; Avila et al., 2019). Extreme precipitation can also drive landslides, with Colombia being considered one of the
countries in Latin America with high incidence of fatal landslides. Regarding drought, it is estimated that 62% of the
existing streamflow timeseries across the country exhibit a significant decreasing trend (Carmona and Poveda,
2014; IPCC, 2021). Of particular concern are the northern lowlands (Caribbean region, and lower Cauca), where
hydrological and agricultural drought affect agricultural production and livelihoods substantially current climates
(https://interactive-atlas.ipcc.ch; Perez et al., 2020; Contreras, 2019; Castro, 2019). As a result of climate change,
the supply of food and basic products, which is regularly affected by weather-related events, not only may be
affected by reductions in crop and livestock productivity, but also by interruptions or delays in the mobilization of
goods and services due to infrastructure damage that generates price spikes for poor urban consumers.
3. Among the most relevant challenges in the agricultural sector generated by climate change in Colombia are: i)
losses in the livestock sector both in number of animals and productivity; ii) crop yields reductions; iii) reduced
resilience of crops to extreme shocks associated with changes in climatic variables; iv) increased variation in both
water excess and deficit affecting irrigation water availability; v) increased soil erosion; vi) more frequent deficits in
surface soil moisture; vii) increased incidence of pests and diseases; viii) increased occurrence of unexpected fires;
ix) reduction of the number of growing cycles; x) increase in greenhouse gas emissions arising from livestock
production and deforestation, and; xi) increased variation in crop yields leading to decreased food and nutritional
security. At the same time, it should be noted that increased CO2 in the atmosphere will bring opportunities to
increase water use efficiency in most crops and to higher potential yields per unit land area of the C3 crops.
4. Because climatic variations occur at a range of timescales and these variations are all affected by long-term climate
change, adaptation needs to be framed accordingly. Adaptation strategies can be incremental, systemic, or
transformational. Incremental adaptation helps respond to seasonal and interannual variations; systemic adaptation
helps prepare for changes in the coming decades; and transformational change involves planning agricultural
transitions when systems are no longer viable (Ramirez-Villegas and Khoury, 2013; Rippke et al., 2016). Farmers
have limited access to practices and technologies suitable for adapting to climate change and climate variability,
and can therefore experience large economic losses. Most technological packages currently recommended to
farmers are adapted to average weather conditions or climate: they are not tailored to the weather conditions which
any individual farmer actually faces. As extreme climatic events have become more intense and frequent, with the
consequent incidence of floods and droughts, added to rising temperature, producers have not had the tools to
anticipate climate impacts and cope with physical and monetary losses. Furthermore, as international markets and
global commitments respond to these sustainability and climate challenges through demands and technical
requirements, countries will have to adapt their food systems to these challenges to maintain their competitiveness
and food security. Colombia needs to accelerate programs that provide the technical and scientific required to
provide concrete advances to resolve the problems producers face in meeting the challenge of climate change and
to strengthen the institutional capacity to share knowledge of these advances both with and between the rural
producers. Colombia is committed to reducing GHG but currently has limited information on how this can be
achieved in the agricultural sector. Information is required to implement programs that minimize the GHG emissions
in agriculture.
5. Proposed interventions. The Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and sustainability in
prioritized agricultural production systems (rice, corn, banana, sugar cane, potato and cattle) in Colombia (CSICAP)
has been formulated under the leadership of the MADR, with technical support from the alliance between Bioversity
International and CIAT, in coordination with producer associations, AGROSAVIA and the Development Bank of
Latin America (CAF), as accredited agency before the Green Climate Fund (GCF) for a total amount of USD 99.58
million. The implementation period will be five years with a scope / impact of 25 years. MADR will be the executing
entity (EE) with the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), as the main procured party. CIMMYT,
Agrosavia, CIPAV and the gremios will act both as co-financiers and procured parties.
6. The general objective of the project is to reduce the vulnerability of agricultural production to climatic threats to
minimize their impacts on the competitiveness of the agricultural sector and to have an adequate and stable
availability of quality food by strengthening climate risk management, while reducing greenhouse gas emissions
from agricultural production. The project seeks to change the current paradigm of agricultural production of intensive
use of inputs, little adaptation of technologies to reduce the vulnerability of crops to droughts, floods and other
climatic stressors. For this paradigm shift, the Project establishes three (3) purposes: (i) implement digital
agriculture systems and climate services to modernize agricultural extension services and provide adaptation and
mitigation recommendations that support the reduction of agro-climatic risks and the loss of crops, while promoting
a low-carbon pathway; (ii) develop, validate and scale-up technologies (genetic improvement, crop management
and other technologies) to increase resilience and low-carbon agricultural development and; (iii) strengthen the
capacities of producers, technicians, and institutions for the adoption and implementation of technologies and
propose new business models based on the massive adoption of technologies under environmental, social, and
gender considerations.
7. The Project will have national scope on livestock and agricultural systems (rice, corn, potatoes, sugar cane, panela
cane, livestock, coffee, bananas and plantains). The project will have the participation of agricultural producer

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 75
AA
associations such as: ASBAMA and AUGURA-Cenibanano (banana), ASOHOFRUCOL (banana), ASOCAÑA-
CENICAÑA (sugar cane), FEDEPANELA (sugar cane), FEDECAFE - CENICAFE (coffee), FEDEPAPA (potato),
FEDEARROZ (rice), FENALCE and CIMMYT (corn) and FEDEGAN and CIPAV (livestock) and, AGROSAVIA (for
all crops).2
8. Climate impacts and benefits. It is estimated that the Project will benefit directly more than 619,691 people,
194,871 rural producers and their families directly and 347,996 producers indirectly, and it is expected to increase
the climate resilience of the agricultural system in a total of 967,997 hectares, distributed in 22 departments (69%
of the country's departments) and 219 municipalities (20% of all municipalities). The total emissions that the project
expects to reduce throughout its life is 9,152,034 tCO2e.
2 The beneficiary producers do not need to be part of one of the gremios to participate in the project. By law, gremios support their members,
but also other producers, because the gre mios receive public funding to do that.

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 75
BB
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
9. The climate problem. The agricultural sector contributed 6.2% of Colombia's total GDP (DANE, 2020); the largest
contribution within this agricultural GDP came from temporary and permanent crops (57%), coffee (11%), livestock
(25%), forestry and wood extraction (3.5%) and fishing and aquaculture (2.8%). Approximately 43 million hectares
are used in agriculture, of which 80% correspond to pastures and uncropped or fallow land and 20% to agricultural
use (DANE, 2016). There are 2.4 million agricultural production units (UPA), most of which (44%) are located in the
departments of Boyacá, Cundinamarca, Antioquia and Nariño. Land distribution is highly skewed with 70% of the
UPA less than five hectares. The 0.2% of the UPA that are greater than one thousand hectares represent 74% of
the dispersed rural area (dispersed rural area includes both residential and farmed land outside municipal limits
(DANE, 2016). Colombia has a diverse range of climatic conditions ranging from paramos in the highlands, through
cloud forest and inter-Andean valleys to coastal deserts and tropical rainforest. Each of these distinct climates
shows distinct characteristics in terms of both climate variability and long-term climate change trends: there is no
single description of how climate change will influence weather patterns in the country, as these patterns depend
of the locality. Agricultural production is distributed both in lowlands and mountainous regions where most of the
rural population lives (DANE, 2016). Farmers, depending on their location, face a series of climate/weather related
threats including flooding, erosion, landslides, drought, waterlogging, above-average temperatures and extreme
events including frosts, high winds, hailstorms and in the North the tail ends of hurricanes (Feola et al., 2015;
Barrios-Perez et al., 2021; Perez et al., 2020). These adversities are likely to increase with climate change (IDEAM,
PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017; Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012). The supply of food and basic products
is regularly affected by weather-related events, which not only directly reduce production in the field but also
damage rural infrastructure and interrupt the supply chains, often leaving farmers with produce they cannot sell
whilst leading to scarcity and price increases which hurt the urban poor.
10. Colombia has and will continue to be affected by the negative impact of climate change, including higher
temperatures, periods of intense rain and drought, and a higher frequency of ever more extreme events. The IPCC’s
Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) (IPCC, 2021) continues to affirm the high sensitivity that exists in water resources,
agriculture and livestock against of climate change scenarios for Colombia. AR6 shows more marked warming and
observed increases in heat extremes and a positive trend for an increase in the frequency and length of droughts
and a decrease in the index related to cold days. This has important implications for agriculture in Colombia,
especially for threats and risks identified in Table B.1.1.
11. Climatic variations relevant to agriculture occur at a range of timescales (from days to multiple decades), and it is
virtually certain that anthropogenically-driven climate change will alter climatic patterns at all those timescales
(Bindoff et al., 2013; Donat et al., 2013; Seneviratne et al., 2018). A clear example of altered climate variability
resulting from climate change relates to the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO). ENSO is the most important
mode of variability on Earth (Cai et al., 2018), and while 21st century ENSO projections entail high uncertainty,
recent research suggests that the frequency of strong ENSO events is likely to increase as a result of climate
change (Cai et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2017; Yun et al., 2021; IPCC, 2021). Relatively early research (i.e., pre-AR5,
e.g., Stevenson, 2012 and references therein) already indicated that climate model simulations suggest changes
in the ocean-atmospheric dynamics related to ENSO and its impacts. More recent research (post AR5, feeding into
AR6) have contributed substantially to advancing our understanding of ENSO under climate change. Notably,
Freund et al. (2020) suggest that future changes to ENSO depend on both mean state changes and decadal-scale
natural variability, whereas Yun et al. (2021) demonstrate an amplification of ENSO-rainfall variability using the
CMIP6 ensemble, regardless of the lack of signal in the amplification of the Sea Surface Temperature (SST)
anomalies (Figure B1.1.1, also see IPCC, 2021). Various other studies contribute evidence on how ENSO responds
to global warming. For instance, Wang et al. (2017) demonstrate that the frequency of extreme El Niño events
increases linearly with increased global mean temperature, doubling at 1.5ºC warming. Likewise, Cai et al. (2018)
find a likely increase in the number of ‘strong’ equatorial Pacific El Niño events and associated extreme weather
events using CMIP5. Ultimately, while a robust projection of ENSO is not feasible with the current generation of
climate models, it is clear that ENSO-related climate variations will continue to challenge agricultural production in
all regions of Colombia. Strong ENSO events can severely impair agricultural productivity in Colombia (Barrios-
Perez et al., 2021).
Figure B.1.1. Changes in amplitude of ENSO variability. Variability of (a) SST and (b) precipitation anomalies averaged
over Niño3.4 region for 1950-2014 from CMIP6 historical simulations and for 2015-2100 from four SSPs. Each line
shows the average of all climate models for the historical period or for the SSPs. Shading is the 5-95% range across
CMIP6 models. Taken from IPCC (2021) (Fig. 4.10; Chapter 4, WGI).

--- Table 1 on Page 9 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION | 
 | B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) | 
9. The climate problem. The agricultural sector contributed 6.2% of Colombia's total GDP (DANE, 2020); the largest
contribution within this agricultural GDP came from temporary and permanent crops (57%), coffee (11%), livestock
(25%), forestry and wood extraction (3.5%) and fishing and aquaculture (2.8%). Approximately 43 million hectares
are used in agriculture, of which 80% correspond to pastures and uncropped or fallow land and 20% to agricultural
use (DANE, 2016). There are 2.4 million agricultural production units (UPA), most of which (44%) are located in the
departments of Boyacá, Cundinamarca, Antioquia and Nariño. Land distribution is highly skewed with 70% of the
UPA less than five hectares. The 0.2% of the UPA that are greater than one thousand hectares represent 74% of
the dispersed rural area (dispersed rural area includes both residential and farmed land outside municipal limits
(DANE, 2016). Colombia has a diverse range of climatic conditions ranging from paramos in the highlands, through
cloud forest and inter-Andean valleys to coastal deserts and tropical rainforest. Each of these distinct climates
shows distinct characteristics in terms of both climate variability and long-term climate change trends: there is no
single description of how climate change will influence weather patterns in the country, as these patterns depend
of the locality. Agricultural production is distributed both in lowlands and mountainous regions where most of the
rural population lives (DANE, 2016). Farmers, depending on their location, face a series of climate/weather related
threats including flooding, erosion, landslides, drought, waterlogging, above-average temperatures and extreme
events including frosts, high winds, hailstorms and in the North the tail ends of hurricanes (Feola et al., 2015;
Barrios-Perez et al., 2021; Perez et al., 2020). These adversities are likely to increase with climate change (IDEAM,
PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017; Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012). The supply of food and basic products
is regularly affected by weather-related events, which not only directly reduce production in the field but also
damage rural infrastructure and interrupt the supply chains, often leaving farmers with produce they cannot sell
whilst leading to scarcity and price increases which hurt the urban poor.
10. Colombia has and will continue to be affected by the negative impact of climate change, including higher
temperatures, periods of intense rain and drought, and a higher frequency of ever more extreme events. The IPCC’s
Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) (IPCC, 2021) continues to affirm the high sensitivity that exists in water resources,
agriculture and livestock against of climate change scenarios for Colombia. AR6 shows more marked warming and
observed increases in heat extremes and a positive trend for an increase in the frequency and length of droughts
and a decrease in the index related to cold days. This has important implications for agriculture in Colombia,
especially for threats and risks identified in Table B.1.1.
11. Climatic variations relevant to agriculture occur at a range of timescales (from days to multiple decades), and it is
virtually certain that anthropogenically-driven climate change will alter climatic patterns at all those timescales
(Bindoff et al., 2013; Donat et al., 2013; Seneviratne et al., 2018). A clear example of altered climate variability
resulting from climate change relates to the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO). ENSO is the most important
mode of variability on Earth (Cai et al., 2018), and while 21st century ENSO projections entail high uncertainty,
recent research suggests that the frequency of strong ENSO events is likely to increase as a result of climate
change (Cai et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2017; Yun et al., 2021; IPCC, 2021). Relatively early research (i.e., pre-AR5,
e.g., Stevenson, 2012 and references therein) already indicated that climate model simulations suggest changes
in the ocean-atmospheric dynamics related to ENSO and its impacts. More recent research (post AR5, feeding into
AR6) have contributed substantially to advancing our understanding of ENSO under climate change. Notably,
Freund et al. (2020) suggest that future changes to ENSO depend on both mean state changes and decadal-scale
natural variability, whereas Yun et al. (2021) demonstrate an amplification of ENSO-rainfall variability using the
CMIP6 ensemble, regardless of the lack of signal in the amplification of the Sea Surface Temperature (SST)
anomalies (Figure B1.1.1, also see IPCC, 2021). Various other studies contribute evidence on how ENSO responds
to global warming. For instance, Wang et al. (2017) demonstrate that the frequency of extreme El Niño events
increases linearly with increased global mean temperature, doubling at 1.5ºC warming. Likewise, Cai et al. (2018)
find a likely increase in the number of ‘strong’ equatorial Pacific El Niño events and associated extreme weather
events using CMIP5. Ultimately, while a robust projection of ENSO is not feasible with the current generation of
climate models, it is clear that ENSO-related climate variations will continue to challenge agricultural production in
all regions of Colombia. Strong ENSO events can severely impair agricultural productivity in Colombia (Barrios-
Perez et al., 2021).
Figure B.1.1. Changes in amplitude of ENSO variability. Variability of (a) SST and (b) precipitation anomalies averaged
over Niño3.4 region for 1950-2014 from CMIP6 historical simulations and for 2015-2100 from four SSPs. Each line
shows the average of all climate models for the historical period or for the SSPs. Shading is the 5-95% range across
CMIP6 models. Taken from IPCC (2021) (Fig. 4.10; Chapter 4, WGI). |  | 

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 75
BB
12. According to Colombia’s Third National Communication (TNC) under the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), prepared by Colombia’s Institute of Hydrology, Meteorology and Environmental
Studies (IDEAM), the agricultural sector will be substantially affected by climate change with yields, land suitability
and harvest seasons all impacted by variations temperature and rainfall (IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP,
CANCILLERÍA, 2017). Several research studies support these findings (e.g., Castro-Llanos et al., 2019; Ramirez-
Villegas et al., 2012; Nuñez et al., 2018).
13. Farmers have limited access to practices and technologies suitable for adapting to climate change. Hence, farmers
are vulnerable to large crop losses due to both long-term trends in climate and greater climate variability in weather
patterns and the urban population faces the prospect of periodic food scarcity and volatile prices. Remedying this
dire situation for the whole country requires provision of technologies that counteract the effects of climate change
and greater variation in the weather. Because climatic variations occur at a range of timescales and these variations
are all affected by long-term climate change, adaptation needs to be framed accordingly. Adaptation strategies can
be incremental, systemic, or transformational. Incremental adaptation helps respond to seasonal and interannual
variations; systemic adaptation helps prepare for changes in the coming decades; and transformational change
involves planning agricultural transitions when systems are no longer viable (Ramirez-Villegas and Khoury, 2013;
Rippke et al., 2016).
14. Colombia’s rural population (30.4% of the total population) is highly vulnerable to extreme events. Forty five percent
of the rural population are poor, and their income is largely derived from agriculture (ECLAC, 2012). The magnitude
of the agricultural sector’s vulnerability to climatic variation is illustrated by the losses of approximately USD 480
million during the El Niño event in 1997-1998 (ECLAC, 1999) and US$ 1 billion due to La Niña of 2010-11 (ECLAC,
2012). In the 2010-2011 La Niña, severe rains flooded 3.5 million hectares and affected 3.2 million people, 64.7%
of whom lived in rural areas. Climate change-driven changes in the frequency and intensity of droughts, floods,
rains and storms, and increased temperatures will most likely exacerbate these impacts.
15. The temperature in Colombia increased by 0.13° C per decade during the 1971-2000 period according to IDEAM
(Ruiz, 2010), and is expected to increase by 3 to 5° C by mid- 21st century (Arnell et al., 2004; IPCC, 2007; IPCC,
2021). According to the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) of the IPCC (IPCC, 2021), extreme heat (especially in the
lowland northern regions) and heavy precipitation events and flooding (across the Pacific and the inter-Andean
Valleys) are the most important changes in climatic impact drivers for Colombia. Regarding the latter,
unprecedented flooding events have been reported in recent decades in the lower reaches of the Atrato, Cauca,
and Magdalena rivers (IPCC, 2021 – Chapter 12; Avila et al., 2019). Extreme precipitation can also drive landslides,
with Colombia being considered one of the countries in Latin America with high incidence of fatal landslides. ENSO
and climate change are the main causes of these landslides (IPCC, 2021; Sepulveda and Petley, 2015). Greater
confidence exists regarding precipitation decreases (IPCC, 2021; https://interactive-atlas.ipcc.ch), and resulting
changes in hydrological and agricultural drought. For instance, it is estimated that 62% of the existing streamflow
timeseries across the country exhibit a significant decreasing trend (Carmona and Poveda, 2014; IPCC, 2021). Of
particular concern are the northern lowlands (Caribbean region, and lower Cauca), where hydrological and
agricultural drought affect agricultural production and livelihoods substantially current climates (https://interactive-
atlas.ipcc.ch; Perez et al., 2020; Contreras, 2019; Castro, 2019). More evidence is, however, needed in order to
assess future projected changes for precipitation-related impact drivers.
Figure B.1.2. Changes in temperature and precipitation in Colombia, 2071-2100 vs 1976-2005, RCP 4.5 (IDEAM,
PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017).
Differences in mean annual temperature Differences in mean average annual precipitation
(2071-2100 vs 1976-2005) (2071-2100 vs 1976-2005)

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 75
BB
16. IDEAM’s climate projections suggest that 2 6 of the 32 Colombian departments are likely to see larg e yield losses
on basic crops associated with food security, such as cassava, rice, plantain, sugarcane, potatoes, maize and
beans due to these changes unless remedial action is taken. The current and projected effects of climate change
on both agricultural and livestock systems are alarming. In livestock, the economic impact of climate change in
Colombia shows that the departments that have experienced the greatest reductions in livestock production are
Nariño (18.5% reduction in production vis-à-vis the 1970-2010 baseline scenario), Casanare (6,0%), Córdoba
(5.4%), Caquetá (4.6%), Guaviare (3.6%) and Cundinamarca (3.5%) (DNP, 2014). In the case of maize (FAO-
MADR, 2013), yield losses are projected in the main production regions vis-à-vis the baseline scenario: humid
Caribbean (25%); Orinoquia (20%); Upper Cauca Basin (11%) and Upper Magdalena (62%). Likewise, yield losses
of around 25% are expected in rice production in Orinoquia, potato yield losses of around 10% will likely be
experienced in Cundinamarca-Boyacá and around 40% in Nariño. It is estimated that sugarcane production is
highly vulnerable to changes of over 2°C in temperature and over 3% in precipitation (Lau et al, 2010). Not only will
yield be affected, but the timing of agronomic events and crop quality could also change. For example, banana
phenology, related to quality for the export market, is likely to change with a negative impact on desirable
characteristics and sugar concentration is likely to be reduced as temperatures rise. Furthermore, flooding,
waterlogging and increased pest and disease pressure are likely. See Table B.1.1 for a summary of the impacts
for the value chains considered in the Project. It is noteworthy that the body of evidence related to climate change
impacts on crop production in Colombia is not very substantial. However, it clearly suggests that, even in relatively
stringent climate mitigation trajectories such as RCP2.6 and RCP4.5, without adaptation actions climate change
will negatively affect all eight agricultural sub-sectors targeted by CSICAP (see e.g., Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012;
Castro-Llanos et al., 2019; Jägermeyr et al., 2021).
Table B.1.1. Climate change risks and impacts in the targeted agricultural sub-sectors, and adaptation and mitigation
interventions and benefits. Information provided is for RCP4.5 unless otherwise specified.
Sector Mitigation
Threat /
/ value Impacts of climate change Adaptation interventions and benefits interventions and
Climate risk
chain benefits
Rice - Low radiation/ low For the dry Caribbean region, a 22% Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non- Interventions: Massive
yields; reduction in climatic suitability is estimated remote sensors and agroclimatic information services implementation of
- High for 2050 at RCP 8.5 (Castro-Llanos et al., improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and agronomic management
humidity/increased 2019). For the humid Caribbean region, disease alert prediction models); New varieties tolerant technologies and
diseases changes in crop phenology are expected by or resistant to drought, water deficit, high temperatures transformation processes
- Dry 2050 for all RCPs (Ramirez-Villegas et al., and low radiation (develop, validation, massive that promote low-carbon
periods/irrigation 2012). In the central part of the country, an multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers).; Water development
supply problems 80% reduction in climate suitability is resource planning at the basin level; Massive
Benefits: Direct emissions
expected by 2050 with RCP 8.5 (Castro- implementation of agronomic management technologies
reductions 41,016 tCO2e
Llanos et al., 2019). Impacts are projected

--- Table 1 on Page 11 ---
 | Sector |  | Threat /
Climate risk | Impacts of climate change | Adaptation interventions and benefits |  | Mitigation | 
 | / value |  |  |  |  |  | interventions and | 
 | chain |  |  |  |  |  | benefits | 
Rice |  |  | - Low radiation/ low
yields;
- High
humidity/increased
diseases
- Dry
periods/irrigation
supply problems | For the dry Caribbean region, a 22%
reduction in climatic suitability is estimated
for 2050 at RCP 8.5 (Castro-Llanos et al.,
2019). For the humid Caribbean region,
changes in crop phenology are expected by
2050 for all RCPs (Ramirez-Villegas et al.,
2012). In the central part of the country, an
80% reduction in climate suitability is
expected by 2050 with RCP 8.5 (Castro-
Llanos et al., 2019). Impacts are projected | Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non-
remote sensors and agroclimatic information services
improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and
disease alert prediction models); New varieties tolerant
or resistant to drought, water deficit, high temperatures
and low radiation (develop, validation, massive
multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers).; Water
resource planning at the basin level; Massive
implementation of agronomic management technologies | Interventions: Massive
implementation of
agronomic management
technologies and
transformation processes
that promote low-carbon
development
Benefits: Direct emissions
reductions 41,016 tCO2e |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 11 ---
Threat /
Climate risk

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 75
BB
- High to be generally less under more stringent and transformation processes that enable more efficient
temperatures/low mitigation scenarios such as RCP2.6 or use of water
yields RCP4.5, with less severe yield and/or
Benefits: Increase productivity (20%), loss reduction,
suitability reductions (Jägermeyr et al.,
lower costs (8-13%) and increased profitability resulting
See: Castro-Llanos 2021; Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012). For the
technologies for agroclimatic risk management and
et al. (2019), eastern plains region, a 25% reduction in
digital agriculture adoption, use of genetically improved
Ramirez-Villegas et yield is estimated for 2030 under RCP 4.5
climate resilient varieties and efficient water use
al. (2012), FAO & (FAO and MADR, 2013; Jägermeyr et al.,
practices.
MADR (2013), 2021). In some regions where it is possible
Cortés & Alarcón to take advantage of better climatic
(2017) conditions projected for the crop are the
Jägermeyr et al. middle and upper parts of the Magdalena
(2021) inter-Andean valley (Cortés & Alarcón,
2017, FAO and MADR, 2013) and the upper
part of the Cauca inter-Andean valley
(Castro-Llanos et al., 2019).
Maize - Low radiation/ low Yield reductions are predicted in the main Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non- Interventions: Massive
yields production areas of Colombia. Estimated remote sensors and agroclimatic information services implementation of
- High humidity/ yield reductions to 2030 for the humid improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and agronomic management
increased diseases Caribbean fluctuate between 12 and 28% disease alert prediction models); New varieties tolerant technologies and
- Dry periods/ (FAO and MADR, 2013, Govaerts et al., or resistant to drought, water deficit, high temperatures transformation processes
irrigation supply 2019, CIMMYT & CIAT, 2019; Jägermeyr et and disease resistance (develop, validation, massive that promote low-carbon
problems al., 2021). In the inter-Andean valleys, the multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers); Massive development.
- High temperatures/ yield reduction to 2030 is estimated to be implementation of agronomic management technologies
Benefits: Direct emissions
low yields/increased between 6 and 62% (Goavaerts et al., 2019, and transformation processes that enable more efficient
reductions 15,965 tCO2e.
pests CIMMYT & CIAT,2019, FAO and MADR, use of water and promote low-carbon development.
2013). For the eastern plains region, yield
Benefits: Increase productivity (10-27%), loss reduction,
See: FAO and reductions to 2030 are estimated to be
and increased profitability resulting technologies for
MADR (2013), between 1 and 20% (Goavaerts et al., 2019,
agroclimatic risk management and digital agriculture
Goavaerts et al CIMMYT & CIAT,2019, DNP-BID, 2014). At
adoption, use of genetically improved maize varieties
(2019), CIMMYT and the local level, in Cereté (Córdoba) a
and efficient water use practices.
CIAT (2019), DNP- decrease in yield of between 13% to 28% is
BID (2014). expected, in Espinal (Tolima) between 6%
to 8%, and in Uribe (Meta) from 1% to 3%.
Cattle - Waterlogging-rainy For cattle farming, the economic impacts of Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non- Interventions: Landscape
season/ Forage rot climate change in Colombia show that the remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information restoration and technology
- Dry periods/ low departments experiencing the greatest and recommendations) for ranchers; New forages transfer and scaling
forage production reductions in cattle production are Nariño varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, water deficit and (implementation of
- High temperatures/ (18.5% reduction in production when excess (develop, validation, massive multiplication and sustainable livestock
animal stress compared to the 1970-2010 baseline deliver of seed to farmers); Quantifying the water models: silvo-pastoral
scenario), Casanare (6.0%), Córdoba footprint; Evaluation of efficient water use practices; systems, pasture rotation,
(DNP-IDB, 2014; (5.4%), Caquetá (4.6%), Guaviare (3.6%) Massive implementation of agronomic management pasture improvement, living
DNP-BID, 2015), and Cundinamarca (3.5%) (DNP-IDB, 2014, technologies and transformation processes that enable fences); Massive
CIAT and DNP-BID, 2015). more efficient use of water. implementation of
CORMACARENA agronomic management
Benefits: Increase in 12% in productivity for beef cattle
(2018) technologies and
and double the yields for dairy farming resulting
transformation processes
increased profitability from adoption of technologies for
that promote low-carbon
agroclimatic risk management and digital agriculture
development; Quantifying
adoption and efficient water use practices.
the carbon footprint.
Benefits: Direct emissions
reductions 208,220 tCO2e
Panela - High temperatures/ This is a crop of great social importance in Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non- Interventions: Massive
sugarcane increased pest Colombia, as it is the basis for the remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information implementation of
infestation livelihoods of some 160,000 families of and recommendations) for panela sugar cane agronomic management
- Excess of smallholder farmers. However, little has producers. New varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, technologies and
water/plant rot been studied and there is practically no water deficit and high temperatures (develop, validation, transformation processes
- Dry periods/low research related to climate. However, it is massive multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers); that promote low-carbon
yields expected to have similar behavior as Quantifying the water footprint, water resource planning development; Quantifying
sugarcane, and may experience gradual at the basin level, evaluation of efficient water use the carbon footprint.
Since there are no loss of climate suitability and decrease in practices; Massive implementation of agronomic
Benefits: Direct emissions
specific studies on yields by 2050 (Ramirez-Villegas et al., management technologies and transformation
reductions 78,799 tCO2e.
this crop, the risk 2012). processes that enable more efficient use of water.
comes from the
Benefits: Increase productivity (65%), loss reduction,
expert’s opinion from
lower costs (30%) and increased profitability resulting
the gremio,
technologies for agroclimatic risk management and
Agrosavia, Cenicaña
digital agriculture adoption and efficient water use
and CIAT.
practices.
Potato Dry periods/low The areas for this crop are concentrated in Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non- Interventions: Massive
yields the high zones of the mountains of the remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information implementation of
Excessive Andean region, and the estimated yield and recommendations) for potato producers; New agronomic management
rainfall/increased reduction to 2030 is estimated at between varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, water deficit and technologies and
diseases 10% and 40% (DNP-BID, 2014, FAO and high temperatures (massive multiplication and deliver of transformation processes
Frosts/crop loss MADR, 2013). DNP-BID (2014) estimates seed to farmers); Massive implementation of agronomic that promote low-carbon

--- Table 1 on Page 12 ---
 |  | - High
temperatures/low
yields
See: Castro-Llanos
et al. (2019),
Ramirez-Villegas et
al. (2012), FAO &
MADR (2013),
Cortés & Alarcón
(2017)
Jägermeyr et al.
(2021) | to be generally less under more stringent
mitigation scenarios such as RCP2.6 or
RCP4.5, with less severe yield and/or
suitability reductions (Jägermeyr et al.,
2021; Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012). For the
eastern plains region, a 25% reduction in
yield is estimated for 2030 under RCP 4.5
(FAO and MADR, 2013; Jägermeyr et al.,
2021). In some regions where it is possible
to take advantage of better climatic
conditions projected for the crop are the
middle and upper parts of the Magdalena
inter-Andean valley (Cortés & Alarcón,
2017, FAO and MADR, 2013) and the upper
part of the Cauca inter-Andean valley
(Castro-Llanos et al., 2019). | and transformation processes that enable more efficient
use of water
Benefits: Increase productivity (20%), loss reduction,
lower costs (8-13%) and increased profitability resulting
technologies for agroclimatic risk management and
digital agriculture adoption, use of genetically improved
climate resilient varieties and efficient water use
practices. |  | 
 | Maize | - Low radiation/ low
yields
- High humidity/
increased diseases
- Dry periods/
irrigation supply
problems
- High temperatures/
low yields/increased
pests
See: FAO and
MADR (2013),
Goavaerts et al
(2019), CIMMYT and
CIAT (2019), DNP-
BID (2014). | Yield reductions are predicted in the main
production areas of Colombia. Estimated
yield reductions to 2030 for the humid
Caribbean fluctuate between 12 and 28%
(FAO and MADR, 2013, Govaerts et al.,
2019, CIMMYT & CIAT, 2019; Jägermeyr et
al., 2021). In the inter-Andean valleys, the
yield reduction to 2030 is estimated to be
between 6 and 62% (Goavaerts et al., 2019,
CIMMYT & CIAT,2019, FAO and MADR,
2013). For the eastern plains region, yield
reductions to 2030 are estimated to be
between 1 and 20% (Goavaerts et al., 2019,
CIMMYT & CIAT,2019, DNP-BID, 2014). At
the local level, in Cereté (Córdoba) a
decrease in yield of between 13% to 28% is
expected, in Espinal (Tolima) between 6%
to 8%, and in Uribe (Meta) from 1% to 3%. | Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non-
remote sensors and agroclimatic information services
improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and
disease alert prediction models); New varieties tolerant
or resistant to drought, water deficit, high temperatures
and disease resistance (develop, validation, massive
multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers); Massive
implementation of agronomic management technologies
and transformation processes that enable more efficient
use of water and promote low-carbon development.
Benefits: Increase productivity (10-27%), loss reduction,
and increased profitability resulting technologies for
agroclimatic risk management and digital agriculture
adoption, use of genetically improved maize varieties
and efficient water use practices. | Interventions: Massive
implementation of
agronomic management
technologies and
transformation processes
that promote low-carbon
development.
Benefits: Direct emissions
reductions 15,965 tCO2e. | 
 | Cattle | - Waterlogging-rainy
season/ Forage rot
- Dry periods/ low
forage production
- High temperatures/
animal stress
(DNP-IDB, 2014;
DNP-BID, 2015),
CIAT and
CORMACARENA
(2018) | For cattle farming, the economic impacts of
climate change in Colombia show that the
departments experiencing the greatest
reductions in cattle production are Nariño
(18.5% reduction in production when
compared to the 1970-2010 baseline
scenario), Casanare (6.0%), Córdoba
(5.4%), Caquetá (4.6%), Guaviare (3.6%)
and Cundinamarca (3.5%) (DNP-IDB, 2014,
DNP-BID, 2015). | Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non-
remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information
and recommendations) for ranchers; New forages
varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, water deficit and
excess (develop, validation, massive multiplication and
deliver of seed to farmers); Quantifying the water
footprint; Evaluation of efficient water use practices;
Massive implementation of agronomic management
technologies and transformation processes that enable
more efficient use of water.
Benefits: Increase in 12% in productivity for beef cattle
and double the yields for dairy farming resulting
increased profitability from adoption of technologies for
agroclimatic risk management and digital agriculture
adoption and efficient water use practices. | Interventions: Landscape
restoration and technology
transfer and scaling
(implementation of
sustainable livestock
models: silvo-pastoral
systems, pasture rotation,
pasture improvement, living
fences); Massive
implementation of
agronomic management
technologies and
transformation processes
that promote low-carbon
development; Quantifying
the carbon footprint.
Benefits: Direct emissions
reductions 208,220 tCO2e | 
 | Panela
sugarcane | - High temperatures/
increased pest
infestation
- Excess of
water/plant rot
- Dry periods/low
yields
Since there are no
specific studies on
this crop, the risk
comes from the
expert’s opinion from
the gremio,
Agrosavia, Cenicaña
and CIAT. | This is a crop of great social importance in
Colombia, as it is the basis for the
livelihoods of some 160,000 families of
smallholder farmers. However, little has
been studied and there is practically no
research related to climate. However, it is
expected to have similar behavior as
sugarcane, and may experience gradual
loss of climate suitability and decrease in
yields by 2050 (Ramirez-Villegas et al.,
2012). | Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non-
remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information
and recommendations) for panela sugar cane
producers. New varieties tolerant or resistant to drought,
water deficit and high temperatures (develop, validation,
massive multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers);
Quantifying the water footprint, water resource planning
at the basin level, evaluation of efficient water use
practices; Massive implementation of agronomic
management technologies and transformation
processes that enable more efficient use of water.
Benefits: Increase productivity (65%), loss reduction,
lower costs (30%) and increased profitability resulting
technologies for agroclimatic risk management and
digital agriculture adoption and efficient water use
practices. | Interventions: Massive
implementation of
agronomic management
technologies and
transformation processes
that promote low-carbon
development; Quantifying
the carbon footprint.
Benefits: Direct emissions
reductions 78,799 tCO2e. | 
 | Potato | Dry periods/low
yields
Excessive
rainfall/increased
diseases
Frosts/crop loss | The areas for this crop are concentrated in
the high zones of the mountains of the
Andean region, and the estimated yield
reduction to 2030 is estimated at between
10% and 40% (DNP-BID, 2014, FAO and
MADR, 2013). DNP-BID (2014) estimates | Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non-
remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information
and recommendations) for potato producers; New
varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, water deficit and
high temperatures (massive multiplication and deliver of
seed to farmers); Massive implementation of agronomic | Interventions: Massive
implementation of
agronomic management
technologies and
transformation processes
that promote low-carbon | 

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 75
BB
High that Nariño and Cundinamarca will have the management technologies and transformation development (conservation
temperatures/increa greatest reductions in yields. The drop in processes that enable more efficient use of water and tillage models).
sed pests, yields compared to those simulated in the promote low-carbon development (conservation tillage
Benefits: Direct emissions
displacement of baseline scenario are related to the higher models)
reductions 34,324 tCO2e
production expected occurrence of irregular
Benefits: Increase productivity and loss reduction (16-
precipitation periods (rainfall concentrated
20%), lower costs (10%) and increased profitability
DNP-BID (2014), in short periods and long periods without
resulting technologies for agroclimatic risk management
FAO and MADR rain) and increases in air temperature that
and digital agriculture adoption and efficient water use
(2013) affect various physiological processes of
practices.
the crop. In Cundinamarca, a decrease in
yields ranging from 5% to 35% when
compared with those estimated for the
2000-2010 period is expected. In addition,
in the case of Boyacá, there would be a
downward trend ranging from 7% to 12% for
yields between the period 2041 and 2070.
Coffee Excessive Coffee is distributed in the mid-mountain Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non-
rainfall/low yields zone across the entire mountain geography remote sensors and agroclimatic information services
High of the Andean region. Here, changes in the improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and
temperatures/berry phenology of the crop are expected by 2050 disease alert prediction models); New varieties tolerant
borer infestation (Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012), a gradual or resistant to pest resistance (massive multiplication
loss of climatic suitability and decrease in and deliver of seed to farmers); Water resource planning
Ramirez-Villegas et yields by 2050, above 1500 masl (Ramirez- at the basin level; Evaluation of efficient water use
al. (2012), (CIAT- Villegas et al., 2012), and an intensification practices.
USAID-FNC, 2017). of problems related to pests and diseases
Benefits: Increase productivity (10-15%), loss reduction,
(below 1500 masl) by 2050 (Ramirez-
lower costs (3-7%) and increased profitability resulting
Villegas et al., 2012). In a specific study in
technologies for agroclimatic risk management and
Colombia’s ‘coffee-growing region’ as it is
digital agriculture adoption.
known, it was reported that by 2030, 22% of
the current suitable coffee-producing area is
expected to have been lost (CIAT-USAID-
FNC, 2017).
Sugarcan Waterlogging/crop Higher temperatures, higher dioxide Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non-
e loss concentration, and higher yields 12.5% remote sensors and agroclimatic information services
Dry periods/irrigation (FAO and MADR, 2013). improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and
supply problems Gradual loss of climate suitability and disease alert prediction models); New sugarcane
decrease in yields by 2050 (Ramirez- varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, water deficit and
FAO and MADR Villegas et al., 2012). excess (develop, validation, massive multiplication and
(2013). deliver of seed to farmers);
Ramirez-Villegas et
Benefits: Increase productivity by 20%, loss reduction,
al., (2012).
and increased profitability resulting technologies for
agroclimatic risk management and digital agriculture
adoption and use of genetically improved varieties.
Musaceae Dry periods/low yield Banana crop is concentrated in two regions Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non- Interventions: Massive
High temperatures/ of the country, one near the humid remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information implementation of
low yields and Caribbean zone and the other near the dry and recommendations) for banana and plantain agronomic management
increased pest Caribbean. Changes in crop phenology are producers; New varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, technologies and
infestation expected by 2050, changes in pest and water deficit and high temperatures (validation, massive transformation processes
disease incidence (below 500 masl) by multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers); that promote low-carbon
2050 and gradual loss of climatic suitability Quantifying the water footprint; Water resource planning development.; Quantifying
and decrease in yields by 2050, below 500 at the basin level; Evaluation of efficient water use the carbon footprint.
masl (Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012). practices; Massive implementation of agronomic
Benefits: Direct emissions
Plantain crop is found throughout much of management technologies and transformation
reductions 53,973 tCO2e.
the national geography and in different processes that enable more efficient use of water.
thermal floors. By 2030, problems are
Benefits: Increase productivity (16-22%), loss reduction,
expected with high temperatures and
lower costs (15%) and increased profitability resulting
therefore loss of climatic suitability in the
technologies for agroclimatic risk management and
lower parts, especially in the dry humid
digital agriculture adoption, and efficient water use
Caribbean and the Orinoquia (CIAT, 2014).
practices.
Source: Own elaboration.1 IDEAM, 2015
17. Given the extent and scope of climate change impacts, actions are needed that put climate-smart varieties,
agricultural technologies, practices, and information services in the hands of farmers so that they are better
prepared to respond to existing and new climate-related stresses. These technologies will help farmers cope with
climatic variability and extremes (both which are projected to change under climate change, Fowler et al., 2021;
Kharin et al., 2018), and continue with their agricultural activities in the shifted temperature and rainfall regimes
expected in the coming decades. Likewise, greater knowledge production, management and exchange is needed
to strengthen agricultural extension services, improve institutional capacities, and farmers’ knowledge and ability
to implement climate-smart technologies.

--- Table 1 on Page 13 ---
 | High
temperatures/increa
sed pests,
displacement of
production
DNP-BID (2014),
FAO and MADR
(2013) | that Nariño and Cundinamarca will have the
greatest reductions in yields. The drop in
yields compared to those simulated in the
baseline scenario are related to the higher
expected occurrence of irregular
precipitation periods (rainfall concentrated
in short periods and long periods without
rain) and increases in air temperature that
affect various physiological processes of
the crop. In Cundinamarca, a decrease in
yields ranging from 5% to 35% when
compared with those estimated for the
2000-2010 period is expected. In addition,
in the case of Boyacá, there would be a
downward trend ranging from 7% to 12% for
yields between the period 2041 and 2070. | management technologies and transformation
processes that enable more efficient use of water and
promote low-carbon development (conservation tillage
models)
Benefits: Increase productivity and loss reduction (16-
20%), lower costs (10%) and increased profitability
resulting technologies for agroclimatic risk management
and digital agriculture adoption and efficient water use
practices. | development (conservation
tillage models).
Benefits: Direct emissions
reductions 34,324 tCO2e
Coffee | Excessive
rainfall/low yields
High
temperatures/berry
borer infestation
Ramirez-Villegas et
al. (2012), (CIAT-
USAID-FNC, 2017). | Coffee is distributed in the mid-mountain
zone across the entire mountain geography
of the Andean region. Here, changes in the
phenology of the crop are expected by 2050
(Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012), a gradual
loss of climatic suitability and decrease in
yields by 2050, above 1500 masl (Ramirez-
Villegas et al., 2012), and an intensification
of problems related to pests and diseases
(below 1500 masl) by 2050 (Ramirez-
Villegas et al., 2012). In a specific study in
Colombia’s ‘coffee-growing region’ as it is
known, it was reported that by 2030, 22% of
the current suitable coffee-producing area is
expected to have been lost (CIAT-USAID-
FNC, 2017). | Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non-
remote sensors and agroclimatic information services
improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and
disease alert prediction models); New varieties tolerant
or resistant to pest resistance (massive multiplication
and deliver of seed to farmers); Water resource planning
at the basin level; Evaluation of efficient water use
practices.
Benefits: Increase productivity (10-15%), loss reduction,
lower costs (3-7%) and increased profitability resulting
technologies for agroclimatic risk management and
digital agriculture adoption. | 
Sugarcan
e | Waterlogging/crop
loss
Dry periods/irrigation
supply problems
FAO and MADR
(2013).
Ramirez-Villegas et
al., (2012). | Higher temperatures, higher dioxide
concentration, and higher yields 12.5%
(FAO and MADR, 2013).
Gradual loss of climate suitability and
decrease in yields by 2050 (Ramirez-
Villegas et al., 2012). | Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non-
remote sensors and agroclimatic information services
improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and
disease alert prediction models); New sugarcane
varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, water deficit and
excess (develop, validation, massive multiplication and
deliver of seed to farmers);
Benefits: Increase productivity by 20%, loss reduction,
and increased profitability resulting technologies for
agroclimatic risk management and digital agriculture
adoption and use of genetically improved varieties. | 
Musaceae | Dry periods/low yield
High temperatures/
low yields and
increased pest
infestation | Banana crop is concentrated in two regions
of the country, one near the humid
Caribbean zone and the other near the dry
Caribbean. Changes in crop phenology are
expected by 2050, changes in pest and
disease incidence (below 500 masl) by
2050 and gradual loss of climatic suitability
and decrease in yields by 2050, below 500
masl (Ramirez-Villegas et al., 2012).
Plantain crop is found throughout much of
the national geography and in different
thermal floors. By 2030, problems are
expected with high temperatures and
therefore loss of climatic suitability in the
lower parts, especially in the dry humid
Caribbean and the Orinoquia (CIAT, 2014). | Interventions: Big Data platforms using remote and non-
remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information
and recommendations) for banana and plantain
producers; New varieties tolerant or resistant to drought,
water deficit and high temperatures (validation, massive
multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers);
Quantifying the water footprint; Water resource planning
at the basin level; Evaluation of efficient water use
practices; Massive implementation of agronomic
management technologies and transformation
processes that enable more efficient use of water.
Benefits: Increase productivity (16-22%), loss reduction,
lower costs (15%) and increased profitability resulting
technologies for agroclimatic risk management and
digital agriculture adoption, and efficient water use
practices. | Interventions: Massive
implementation of
agronomic management
technologies and
transformation processes
that promote low-carbon
development.; Quantifying
the carbon footprint.
Benefits: Direct emissions
reductions 53,973 tCO2e.

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 75
BB
18. The country currently lacks appropriate agro-climatic advisory services, and an agricultural research and extension
system that can provide producers with time and site-specific information on how to respond to climate variability
and climate change. Furthermore, agricultural technology development in Colombia has been based on the top-
down linear model largely directed to increasing yield under favorable weather conditions, whence producers have
few technological options to meet the challenges of more variable and often adverse weather conditions.
Furthermore, there is only limited institutional capacity to develop technology specifically designed for current and
future adverse weather conditions, emphasizing the need to build institutional capacity to not only develop resilient
agricultural technology but also to ensure that farmers have access to and confidence in novel, robust farming
techniques. Within this context Colombia has not embraced the widely accepted move towards innovation systems
and continuous to follow the outmoded pattern of research followed by validation and then extension.
19. Context – Adaptation and mitigation needs
20. Adaptation needs. The most relevant impacts of climate variability and change in the agricultural sector in Colombia
include: i) losses in livestock, both in terms of the number of animals and productivity; ii) losses in crop yields; iii)
reduced crop resilience to external shocks linked to changes in climatic variables; iv) reduced water availability; v)
increased soil erosion; vi) reduced topsoil moisture; vii) increased incidence of pests and diseases; viii) increased
occurrence of unexpected fires; ix) reduced number of growing cycles; x) decreased food and nutritional security.
21. Irrigation provides only 10% of the water requirement for permanent and transitory crops and the remaining 90% is
provided by rainwater. This increases the vulnerability of the sector, considering the changes in precipitation
regimes due to climate change (MADR-PIGCCS, 2020). The irrigation requirement is higher in sugarcane, palm
and bananas, which represent 55% of irrigation water in agriculture. For its part, the irrigation requirement of
temporary crops is concentrated in irrigated rice cultivation, which represents approximately 13% of irrigation water
in agriculture.
22. Mitigation needs. According to the TCN, the agricultural sector is the second most important source of greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions in Colombia, contributing 30% of total emissions. Emission sources in the agricultural sector
include enteric fermentation produced by livestock, manure handling, rice cultivation, prescribed burning in
savannas, field burning of agricultural residue and agricultural soils as a source of nitrogen as part of various
agricultural practices (applying synthetic fertilizers, adding manure and agricultural residues to the soil as fertilizers,
nitrogen-fixing crops, and mineralization of soil organic nitrogen). In this sense, it is necessary to improve practices
in both livestock and agricultural production to reduce GHG emissions. In the case of rice, there is no information
on the emission levels associated with different crop technologies, and low carbon technologies have not been
identified and quantified. There is no mitigation plan or strategy for this crop at the aggregate level, despite being
one of the most emitting crops. For other crops, there is no certainty about low-carbon technologies that can be
scaled-up to the region. In the case of livestock, a large area and numerous regions and livestock systems must
be covered, which makes it challenging to scale-up this technological approach.
23. With technical support from MADS and DNP, MADR carried out a technical exercise to identify and prioritize
mitigation measures for the agricultural, forestry and land-use change sectors, considering the following criteria: i)
Expected increase or decrease of the area used in 2018 for agricultural production systems, Colombia Siembra
program; ii) Representative nature of agricultural activities in the national territory (area); iii) Reference of NAMA
structured documents; iv) Potential for reduction based on information (Uniandes 2015 sheets, MADR CIAT 2012-
2015 agreements); v) Technical meetings to coordinate the AFOLU sector. The GHG emission reduction measures
identified in 2017, as well as the cost of implementing these measures up to 2030, which amounts to USD 4,884.6
million. It is estimated that implementing these measures would reduce GHG emissions by 16,180 Gg CO2eq.
24. Project definition and justification. In order to respond to the negative impacts of climate variability and climate
change in Colombia’s agricultural sector and to contribute to the fulfillment of national goals and objectives in
promoting low-emission and climate-resilient agricultural development, the MADR, with support from CAF, the
Bioversity International and CIAT Alliance, AGROSAVIA, gremios working with livestock and rice, maize, potato,
panela sugarcane, sugarcane, coffee, banana and plantain crops, prioritized the formulation of the CSICAP Project,
which covers and adequately reflects the needs and requirements in terms of technology, knowledge and
information for the crops prioritized in the Project’s framework and scope.
25. In a scenario without the Project and the proposed interventions, the previously described problems affecting the
agricultural sector would persist or further deteriorate. This would lead to limited investment in innovative proposals
such as using digital media to disseminate climate information. Similarly, there would be limitations in investments
to develop climate-resilient or low GHG emitting varieties, since there would be limited knowledge of the water
footprint and water-efficient technologies, and on the carbon footprint of agricultural production chains.
26. The CSICAP Project is a national initiative aimed at developing, validate, replicate and scaling-up low carbon and
climate resilient practices and lessons learned from the national government’s efforts in the pilot project and other
initiatives to mainstream Climate-Smart Agriculture and Livestock Farming as a transformational approach and
promote actions that contribute to low-emission, resilient agriculture and livestock production. Additionally, the
Project seeks to create institutional, technical and governance capacities that enable the effective adoption of low
carbon and climate resilient practices and technologies which integrate climate information in decision-making

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 75
BB
processes and innovate in more sustainable production models that are adapted to the country’s different economic,
social and environmental aspects. The CSICAP Project also seeks to address the different barriers that have
prevented scaling-up resilient and low-emission activities in the agricultural sector, by implementing knowledge
management strategies, different technology transfer approaches and producer association’s extension services,
thereby strengthening the enabling factors required for its implementation.
27. Finally, the CSICAP Project is aligned with nationally-set priorities to strengthen the role of the agricultural sector.
It is also in line with GCF’s investment criteria to generate transformational impacts in development models that
contribute to a stronger adaptation capacity regarding current and future climate variability and climate change
risks, while also contributing to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
28. Objective of the Project. The overall objective of the project is to reduce the agricultural production’s vulnerability
to climate hazards to minimize their impacts on the sector’s competitiveness and ensure sufficient and stable
availability of quality food by strengthening climate risk management, while reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
The following are the specific objectives of the CSICAP Project:
• Modernize the agricultural extension system to be climate responsive through the implementation and use of
digital agriculture systems and climate services to provide recommendations on adaptation and mitigation
measures. This will include providing direct technical support to approximately 123,389 producers and indirect
support to 104,000 users, who will receive recommendations through the climatic services platforms and 15
Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups to reduce crop losses.
• Develop, validate, and implement at least 30 new low-emission and resilient technologies and scale-up 70
existing technologies (genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options)3
in 131,710 hectares, to increase resilience and promote low-carbon agricultural development by reducing
432,297 tons of CO2e in 8,750 hectares.
• Strengthen capacities andimproved business models on climate resilience and low-carbon technologies in at
least 60 entities of the agricultural sector (including Departmental and Municipal Agriculture Secretariats)
covering 4,400 technician s and reinforce training among 54,000 agricultural producers for low-carbon and
resilient agriculture considering environmental, social and gender aspects, to ensure adequate technological
adoption.
29. Scope. The CSICAP Project is national in scope, and it considers livestock and eight crops: rice, maize, potato,
sugarcane, panela sugarcane, coffee, and musaceae (banana and plantain). CSICAP will be implemented in 22
departments and 219 municipalities, directly benefiting 619,691 people, of which there are more than 194,871
producers from differen livestock and producers’ associations and their families (424,820 people) and reducing or
avoiding emissions amounting to 9.15 million tCO2e during the project lifespan.
t
Figure B.1.2. Map of prioritized municipalities where direct actions will be carried out as part of the CSICAP Project
3 In the case of rice and maize, the aim is to scale technologies that were previously evaluated in the pilot and were found to perform well.
For example, the MIRI system for low wa ter consumption in rice; Cenicaña developments in the efficient use of water, Augura development
in bio-pesticides and efficient use of fertilizers; Fedepanela with more efficient burner systems and fertilizer use; Fedegan, CIPAV, Agrosavia
and the CIAT- Bioversity Alliance with sustainable livestock systems model; Cenicafé with systems for the efficient use of fertilizers and
harvesting, treatment and use of water in agroforestry models; in potatoes with minimum tillage and conservation agriculture developed by
the CIAT Bioversity Alliance..

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 75
BB
30. Related interventions and shortcomings to be addressed. MADR, Agrosavia, and the producer associations
(to a greater or lesser extent, depending on each sector) are the main actors in the development and validation of
agricultural technologies and practices. Colombia's MADR has focused its climate-smart agriculture (CSA) efforts
on new agricultural technology developments, agro-climatic forecasting and related advisory services, site-specific
or precision agriculture approaches, and low-carbon agricultural practices. These are aligned with sustainable
intensification at the farm level and include efficient use of natural resources. Similarly, MADR considers low-
emissions and climate resilient interventions at the landscape level (e.g., management of farm and forest
boundaries), services (in particular information and finance services), institutions (particularly market governance,
incentives for adoption) and food systems (especially consumption patterns and broader climate-informed safety
nets). In this sense, MADR developed a pilot experience to work on alternatives to reduce crop losses due to
climatic factors. MADR signed a Technical and Scientific Cooperation agreement with the International Center for
Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) at the end of 2012, to improve the agricultural sector’s competitiveness, by increasing
investment in climate-related research, technological development and innovation. This scientific alliance made it
possible to join efforts, resources and institutional capacities to strengthen the agricultural sector’s capacity to adapt
to climate variability and climate change and improve resource efficiency in some regions’ productive systems. One
of the main results of this agreement was the joint work carried out between the national government, academia,
research centers, NGOs and producer associations in the productive chains.
31. The pilot project included four components: (a) agroclimatic risk management, (b) site-specific agriculture, (c)
testing new technologies for adaptation, and (d) evaluating sustainable production systems. Fedearroz and Fenalce
engaged in work involving three crops: rice, maize and bean. During the pilot phase, progress was made in
developing and validating climate forecast models for some of the prioritized areas, and an initial analyses
on Site-Specific Agriculture. Advanced waterlogging- and drought-tolerant lines were evaluated, and the water
footprint was measured for different production systems, including rice. The producer associations (Fedearroz and
Fenalce) consider that the information and tools created during two years’ worth of work were valuable and hold
great potential. Similarly, a capacity-building process to benefit producer associations’ technicians was
initiated, and information on certain specific issues was delivered directly to the producers. The pilot project also
included other elements, such as measuring the carbon footprint in palm, Intensive Silvopastoral Systems and
Fruit Trees; measurements were made to determine soil loss and water footprint in potatoes, and cassava
materials were evaluated. Annex 23 provides a detailed analysis of the result of the pilot activities.
32. The results of the pilot evidenced a great potential, but also gaps, for adapting the agricultural sector to climate
change. Some of those gaps for up-scaling and replication include knowledge and resources (human,
technological, etc.) to develop the necessary tools and instruments to reach local producers with recommendations
of climate resilient and low-carbon technologies. As later discussed in section B.3, there are still several gaps in
data collection and digital tools, limited use of digital media to disseminate climate information coverage of climate
services, limited capacity by the gremios to develop climate resilient genetic resources, and gaps in extension
services. For example, most of the gremios are highly dependent on the technological developments that are
carried out in research centers, and it is unlikely that the latter will generate the technology needed for all crops and

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 75
BB
under different environmental conditions. In the best of cases, generic technologies are developed that are
applicable in certain contexts. The CSICAP project seeks to address those gaps, expand activities to other
crops not included in the original pilot (e.g. coffee, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, and musaceaes) and expand
its geographic coverage to a greater number of municipalities and farmers (Figure B.1.2). It is worth noting
that most of the gremios work on the promotion of technologies and, depending on the gremio, they develop
technologies related to various agronomic and product processing issues. As mentioned earlier, most of the
gremios do not have the capacity to develop the tools and instruments that will be developed with the project, but
have the capacity to implement them and to continue with the work after their development. In some cases, the
gremios have the technical capacity to achieve some of the outputs, but not all, and the few that can do it, do not
do it due to budget constraints. That is, what the project would achieve in 5 years for the strongest gremios (coffee,
rice, bananas), it may take more than 20 years to achieve it by themselves. Once these tools are developed, and
the gremios appropriate them, it is expected, as it occurred with the pilot, that it will have a positive impact on
farmers, and that the gremios will continue and expand their operation and application.
33. Progress and basic investment. On the other hand, the CSICAP project complements several agricultural and
climate-change interventions that have been developed in Colombia, besides the pilot mentioned above. These
include:
• The Sustainable Bovine Livestock NAMA with the participation of the Colombian Livestock Federation
(FEDEGAN), the Center for Research on Sustainable Agricultural Production Systems (CIPAV), CIAT
(LivestockPlus), MADR and MADS. The total project amount is USD 8.2 million, of which USD 5.8 million is
private investment, USD 1.6 million are national public resources and USD 0.8 million international funds.
• The GEF project for the initial implementation of the NAMA for the Panela subsector (USD 2 million), which
includes the participation of Fedepanela, CAF, the Financing Fund for the Agricultural Sector (FINAGRO), MADR
and MADS.
• The CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) and the International
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) have worked on various initiatives regarding climate change and the
agricultural sector in Colombia. CIAT-CCAFS led the creation of six Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups
(MTA) and carried out critical scientific research that enabled widespread and sustained use of site-specific
agroclimatic forecasts. Research results included agronomic practice manuals to support agronomic forecasts
and training in the collection and use of site-specific data. Through the MTAs, local and national governments,
producer associations such as the National Federation of Cereal, Legume and Soy Growers (Fenalce), the
National Federation of Rice Growers (Fedearroz), the National Federation of Coffee Growers (FNC) and
Cenicaña, and other participating institutions such as Agrosavia and universities, have institutionalized CIAT-
CCAFS’ climate information in their decision-making processes. CIAT-CCAFS' scientific work and capacity
building in crop modeling and seasonal climate projections allowed national partners, particularly Fedearroz and
Fenalce, to analyze local conditions and produce and disseminate seasonal agro-climatic forecasts in maize and
rice-producing regions.4 CIAT-CCAFS scientists assessed the information needs in Santander, Córdoba, Tolima,
Valle del Cauca, and Meta, thereby enabling the provision of tailored services for users and identifying and inviting
participants to MTAs. For example, joint work with Fedearroz has enabled determining suitable areas for rice
production under climate change in the five rice-growing areas: Bajo Cauca, Centro, Llanos Orientales,
Santanderes and Costa Norte. These studies determined that the geographic valleys of the Cauca and Patía
rivers will be more suitable in the future than the Magdalena River valley (Huila and Tolima) is today, as its
suitability will be slightly reduced. These analyzes have been used to determine climate-change adaptation
strategies for rice crops.
• Other GCF projects may complement geographically the project activities, such as the Amazon Bioeconomy
Fund (FP173) which focuses on coffee value chains in the Amazon basin, an area not covered by the proposed
project. For the project on “Scaling up climate resilient water management practices for vulnerable communities
in La Mojana” (FP056), both projects will be working in a common municipality (San Marcos, Sucre), where they
will complement each other as the proposed project will work on mitigation (measurement of GHG in rice), while
FP056 is working on adaptation. Although working in different regions, both projects work on agroclimatic
information and can interact to share and strengthen knowledge between them.
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram)
4 From the experience with Fenalce and Fedearroz, the development, dissemination and use of site-specific climate information and data
platforms has some constraints and chall enges, including digitalization of existing data, organization of different databases and formats, and
the collection of missing data (e.g. soils for Fenalce). For the use of data, training is required for technicians and farmers to understand the
information provided by the tool, which requires time to achieve confidence especially for the gremios’ technicians, since the farmers have a
high degree of confidence on them. A limitation that remains is coverage, since each technician is able to visit and collect information from a
limited number of farms (approx. 100), and the use of all remote and non-remote instrumentation would substantially expand the coverage.

--- Table 1 on Page 17 ---
under different environmental conditions. In the best of cases, generic technologies are developed that are
applicable in certain contexts. The CSICAP project seeks to address those gaps, expand activities to other
crops not included in the original pilot (e.g. coffee, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, and musaceaes) and expand
its geographic coverage to a greater number of municipalities and farmers (Figure B.1.2). It is worth noting
that most of the gremios work on the promotion of technologies and, depending on the gremio, they develop
technologies related to various agronomic and product processing issues. As mentioned earlier, most of the
gremios do not have the capacity to develop the tools and instruments that will be developed with the project, but
have the capacity to implement them and to continue with the work after their development. In some cases, the
gremios have the technical capacity to achieve some of the outputs, but not all, and the few that can do it, do not
do it due to budget constraints. That is, what the project would achieve in 5 years for the strongest gremios (coffee,
rice, bananas), it may take more than 20 years to achieve it by themselves. Once these tools are developed, and
the gremios appropriate them, it is expected, as it occurred with the pilot, that it will have a positive impact on
farmers, and that the gremios will continue and expand their operation and application.
33. Progress and basic investment. On the other hand, the CSICAP project complements several agricultural and
climate-change interventions that have been developed in Colombia, besides the pilot mentioned above. These
include:
• The Sustainable Bovine Livestock NAMA with the participation of the Colombian Livestock Federation
(FEDEGAN), the Center for Research on Sustainable Agricultural Production Systems (CIPAV), CIAT
(LivestockPlus), MADR and MADS. The total project amount is USD 8.2 million, of which USD 5.8 million is
private investment, USD 1.6 million are national public resources and USD 0.8 million international funds.
• The GEF project for the initial implementation of the NAMA for the Panela subsector (USD 2 million), which
includes the participation of Fedepanela, CAF, the Financing Fund for the Agricultural Sector (FINAGRO), MADR
and MADS.
• The CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) and the International
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) have worked on various initiatives regarding climate change and the
agricultural sector in Colombia. CIAT-CCAFS led the creation of six Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups
(MTA) and carried out critical scientific research that enabled widespread and sustained use of site-specific
agroclimatic forecasts. Research results included agronomic practice manuals to support agronomic forecasts
and training in the collection and use of site-specific data. Through the MTAs, local and national governments,
producer associations such as the National Federation of Cereal, Legume and Soy Growers (Fenalce), the
National Federation of Rice Growers (Fedearroz), the National Federation of Coffee Growers (FNC) and
Cenicaña, and other participating institutions such as Agrosavia and universities, have institutionalized CIAT-
CCAFS’ climate information in their decision-making processes. CIAT-CCAFS' scientific work and capacity
building in crop modeling and seasonal climate projections allowed national partners, particularly Fedearroz and
Fenalce, to analyze local conditions and produce and disseminate seasonal agro-climatic forecasts in maize and
rice-producing regions.4 CIAT-CCAFS scientists assessed the information needs in Santander, Córdoba, Tolima,
Valle del Cauca, and Meta, thereby enabling the provision of tailored services for users and identifying and inviting
participants to MTAs. For example, joint work with Fedearroz has enabled determining suitable areas for rice
production under climate change in the five rice-growing areas: Bajo Cauca, Centro, Llanos Orientales,
Santanderes and Costa Norte. These studies determined that the geographic valleys of the Cauca and Patía
rivers will be more suitable in the future than the Magdalena River valley (Huila and Tolima) is today, as its
suitability will be slightly reduced. These analyzes have been used to determine climate-change adaptation
strategies for rice crops.
• Other GCF projects may complement geographically the project activities, such as the Amazon Bioeconomy
Fund (FP173) which focuses on coffee value chains in the Amazon basin, an area not covered by the proposed
project. For the project on “Scaling up climate resilient water management practices for vulnerable communities
in La Mojana” (FP056), both projects will be working in a common municipality (San Marcos, Sucre), where they
will complement each other as the proposed project will work on mitigation (measurement of GHG in rice), while
FP056 is working on adaptation. Although working in different regions, both projects work on agroclimatic
information and can interact to share and strengthen knowledge between them. |  | 
 | B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) | 

--- Table 2 on Page 17 ---
 | both projects will be working in a common municipality (San Marcos, Sucre), where they |  | 
will complement each other as the |  | proposed project will | work on mitigation (measurement of GHG in rice), while
FP056 is working on adaptation. Although working in different regions, both projects work on agroclimatic |  |  | 
information and can interact to share and strengthen knowledge between them |  |  | 

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 75
BB
34. Aware of the economic, social, and environmental challenges associated with the impacts of climate change in the
Colombian agricultural sector, the Government of Colombia, producer associations and other key actors within the
agricultural sector are increasingly looking for effective ways to promote a more sustainable, inclusive and resilient
development pathway. Substantial efforts are needed to ensure systematic and structural change, and this
transition faces barriers that are diverse and intertwined. While this approach may not respond to other financial
and governance challenges that are also relevant to the sustainable and inclusive development of the agricultural
sector, the theory of change proposes that Program activities will be sufficient to produce the expected results and
impacts to achieve a paradigm shift towards a low-carbon, climate-resilient development trajectory. The Theory of
Change is outline in Figure B.2.1 and described in detail in the following paragraphs.
35. Project Goal. The overall long-term goal of the CSICAP project is to reduce the vulnerability of agricultural
production and the most vulnerable segments of the rural population, especially women, to the threats of variable
weather and climate change. At the same time, a national goal is to reduce GHG emissions from agricultural
activities. As part of that goal, the project seeks that farmers and those engaged in agriculture to have better
information, site and time specific, on currently available technologies suitable for their particular climate needs.
This would enable farmers to better manage their crops because they would be able to tailor their crop management
to their particular farm conditions, including changes in climate variability and climate change. If novel technological
solutions to combat climate variation and climate change were to be developed and then shown to be effective,
then farmers would adopt these technological solutions and become less vulnerable, while using less resources. If
growers and extension agents were able to access information and share experiences on how best to manage
crops for specific sites in both space and time, then farmers would manage their crops better, leading to more
stable production. If farmers were aware of the GHG emissions associated with distinct management of their farms
and they perceived benefits from reduced emissions they would likely adopt these systems and GHG emissions
would be reduced.
36. Goal Statement: IF farmers in Colombia’s agricultural sector adopt climate-resilient and low-carbon practices,
THEN they will be able to improve their well-being while increasing their resilience and adaptability to climatic
threats while reducing the agricultural sector´s GHG emissions, BECAUSE farming systems with improved
competitiveness will be able to provide and sufficient and stable availability of quality food, by strengthening climate
risk management while expanding sustainable management of farmland and natural resources.
37. Outcomes. To reach the overall project goal, there are four expected project outcomes: i) The targeted productive
agricultural value chains have greater strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks ; ii)
Increased generation and use of climate information in decision-making; iii) Improvement in the well-being of
producer families and socio-environmental sustainability of Colombian agriculture; and iv) Improved management
of land in agricultural areas contributing to GHG emissions reductions. Each of these outcomes is aligned with GCF
results areas and Fund Level impacts as outlined in Section E. More specifically, outcomes (i) and (ii) are aligned
with the “increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions”;
outcome (iii) is aligned with the “increased resilience of health and well-being, and food and water security”; and
outcome (iv) is aligned with the “reduced emissions from land use, reforestation, reduced deforestation, and through
sustainable forest management and conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks”. It is also worth noting
that there is causal relationship between outcomes, where the increased generation and use of climate information
in decision-making (Outcome 2) could lead to greater strengthened adaptive capacity of the targeted value chains
(Outcome 1). At the same time, the greater adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks of the targeted
value chains (Outcome 1), the increased generation and use of climate information in decision-making (Outcome
2), and the improved management of land in agricultural areas (Outcome 4) could lead to the improvement in the
well-being of producer families and socio-environmental sustainability of Colombian agriculture (Outcome 3).
38. Results. The project outcomes are sustained by a series of project results. Specifically, under Component 1, a
strengthened and modernized agricultural extension system oriented towards adaptation and mitigation (Result
1.1, with the support of Results 3.1 and 3.2) will result in the adoption by farmers and farmer associations of digital
agriculture for improved decision making for climate change adaptation and mitigation in the targeted value chains,
resulting in greater climate resilience and adaptability to extreme weather events and climate change (Outcome 1).
The establishment and/or strengthening of agroclimatic services in the selected value chains (Result 1.2, with the
support of Results 3.1 and 3.2) will result in increased generation and use of climate information in decision-making
by farmers and farmer associations (Outcome 2), the greater resilience of the targeted agricultural value chains
(Outcome 1) and the improvement in the well-being of producer families (Outcome 3). Under Component 2, the
strengthened germplasm bank, development of new varieties and massive seed distribution (Result 2.1, with the
support of Results 1.1, 3.1, and 3.2), would result in the adoption by farmers and farmer associations of new climate
smart practices, technologies and varieties that will support Outcomes 1, 3 and 4. With site specific crop
management techniques and other technological options validated (Result 2.2, with the support of Results 1.1, 3.1,
and 3.2), the project will result in more efficient use of water resources, restoration of soil properties, and improving
GHG mitigation practices by farmers and farmer associations for improved management of land in agricultural areas
contributing to GHG emissions reductions (Outcome 4). Under Component 3, improved business models that

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 75
BB
provide farmers with reasonable profits and help them adopt climate mitigation actions (Result 3.1) will contribute
to Outcomes 1, 2, 3 and 4. The modernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services with multi-tool
strategies, differentiated and adapted to specific environmental, social, gender and productive contexts (Result 3.2)
will result in strengthened institutional capacity through trained producers, technicians and producers associations
with the information to improve management and adopt climate mitigation practices and technologies, contributing
to Outcomes 1, 2, 3 and 4.
Figure B.2.1. Theory of change of the CSICAP Project
Limited knowledge of water
footprint and water use
efficient technologies to
promote behavioral changes
that contribute to a better
use of water resources,
particularly under stress
conditions
39. Gaps and barriers. Based on the expected project outcomes, and results, the project, through its activities,
addresses barriers that at the moment lead the agricultural sector of Colombia towards a development path that is
not sustainable. The project seeks to change production practices and technologies in the Colombian agricultural
tnemetatS
lao
G
semoctu
O
s t l u
s e
R
seitivitcA
sreirraB
IF farmers in Colombia’s agricultural sector adopt climate-resilient and low-carbon practices, THENthey will be able to improve their well-being while increasing their resilience to
climatic threats and adaptability while reducing the agricultural sector’s GHG emissions, BECAUSEfarming systems with improved competitiveness will be able to provide sufficient and
stable availability of quality food, by strengthening climate risk management while expanding sustainable management of farmlandand natural resources.
Paradigm Shift
1. Productive agricultural value 3. Improvement in the well-being of 4. Improved management
chains with strengthened producer families (men and women) of land in agricultural areas
adaptive capacity and reduced and socio-environmental sustainability contributing to GHG
exposure to climate risks of Colombian agriculture emissions reductions
1.1 Strengthened and 1.2. Agroclimatic services in place and / 2.1. Strengthened 2.2. Site specific crop 3.2. Modernized technical
modernized agricultural or strengthened germplasm bank, new management techniques assistance and agricultural
extension system with an climate resilient varieties and water efficient and low extension services with multi-tool emphasis on adaptation and developedand their seeds carbon technological strategies, differentiated and
mitigation massively distributed options validated adapted to specific environmental,
social, gender and productive
contexts at the national level
1.1.1. Organize the information from 1.2.1. Design and/or strengthen agroclimatic
the different repositories and information services.
producer association databases to 1.2.2. Develop more accurate and precise
connect them with updated climate and weather prediction models and
information available. complementary improved crop simulation
1.1.2. Develop a bot-based digital models.
instrument to strengthen the 1.2.3. Connect agroclimatic forecasts with
extension service. artificial intelligence models
1.1.3. Design and develop the entire 1.2.4. Strengthen mechanisms to disseminate
data mining and analysis operating agroclimatic information and transfer
system that will allow capacities.
interconnecting all available 1.2.5. Other activities related to producing,
information. transferring or using agroclimatic information
1.1.4. Train technicians in the use (automation of meteorological information,
and application of advanced data analysis of climate change signals, nutrient
analysis methods. balance models).
• Farmers remain interested and actively participate in project activities; adopt technological packages and best management practices.
• Key stakeholders such as farmer associations and government or quasi public sector organizations are effectively engaged, support the initiative and are willing to accept and adopt more pluralistic,
participative and inclusive, less top-down, approaches.
• Technicians participate in the training activities, anddevelop activities where they can share their knowledge.
• Trainings and farmer-to-farmer exchanges are effective/sufficient to enable and speed up the adoption of low carbon climate-resilient agriculture practices.
• Agro-climatic information generated is received effectively by farmers, which maintains farmers’ interest in actively participating in the project. Farmers attend the trainings and know how to use the
information.
• The capacities created in the farmer associations are maintained and renewed periodically and catalyze a better management ofclimate risks.
• The technologies, tools, strategies are available and respond to the needs of the sector. The information is disseminatedand the organizations / institutions are able toaccess it.
• Field activities for variety development are not delayed.
snoitpmussA
Limited capacities of agricultural Limited Limited access to Weak extension services based on linear
extension programmes and local knowledge and ability to and knowledge of model that provides blanket
farmers to collect, manage and properly use agroclimatic genetic resources recommendations rather than site and time
systematize data to generate site information in local farmers’ and their tolerance specific guidelines. Limited technical and
and time specific advice for good decision-making processes to climate variability institutional capacities to adopt and scale
management practices under to respond timely to climate and change by local up climate smart technologies in agricultural
climatic conditions induced by risks and hazards induced by farmers and production. Farmers experiences and
climate variability and change climate variability and change producers knowledge not shared, and power of
farmers groups not effectively utilized.
Limited knowledge of contributing factors to climate smart agricultural
technologies uses and adoption by farmers in the targeted value chains
sksiR
2. Increased generation
and use of climate
information in decision-
making
Transversal Activities / Results
3.1. Improved business
models that provide
farmers with reasonable profits and
improved GHG
mitigation practices
2.1.1. Develop a state-of-the-art 2.2.1. Quantifying the baseline 3.1.1. Strengthen gremios 3.2.1. Promotion of dialogue between
phenotyping platform designed water footprint capacities to use digitally local knowledge and practices and the
to identify low carbon production 2.2.2. Quantifying the baseline enabled tools project concepts, as well as guidelines
and climate-resistant genetic carbon footprint 3.1.2. Implement and a communications plan for the
resources. 2.2.3. Hydrological modeling of inclusive climate-resilient collective construction and
2.1.2. Identification of heat, basins to identify water and low-carbon business appropriation of knowledge -
drought and excess water harvesting points in crop models socialization
tolerance and incorporation of production systems 3.1.3. Enhance financial 3.2.2. Strengthening the capacities of
these traits into advanced lines. 2.2.4. Evaluation of efficient sector engagement with beneficiaries, especially women and
2.1.3. Develop new varieties from water use practices in farmers and their needs young farmers, regarding climate
advanced lines for climate agronomic management and 3.1.4. Fostering agri- resilience, chain analysis and business
change adaptation and transformation processes digital entrepreneurship models
mitigation. 2.2.5. Evaluation of GHG ecosystems 3.2.3. Updating and implementation of
2.1.4. Mass seed multiplication emission mitigation practices in gender-sensitive technology transfer
(clones) for distribution to agronomic management and strategies and extension services
farmers. transformation processes 3.2.4. Develop a strategy for the
dissemination, access and use of project
results
Limited knowledge of Weak/vulnerable
carbon footprint at crop business models, lack
and technology level to of tailored financial
promote a large-scale instruments and
adoption of low- limited technical
emissions practices capacities and
strategic knowledge
transfer
Transversal Barriers (gender, environment, impact evaluation)
Limited access to productive factors and participation in labor and decision-making processes by Limited adoption of good environmental and
women and young farmers, which reduces their production potential in agricultural value chains social practices to reduce associated risks
• Farmers and ranchers tends to be very conservative when adapting to new technologies, varieties or crops, which delays adoption of new potentially profitable and beneficial production practices.
• Vulnerable groups (women, young farmers, small farmers, ethnic groups) might face social and economic constraints which hinder their fully participation in project activities and adoption of new
technologies.
• Possible incorrect design or management of field trials and activities (which might raise environmental risks), or failures in partnership agreements or institutional settings.
• Delay in planned scheduled works, including the acquisition of inputs, human resources, materials and tools.
• Potential issues regarding local governance or mechanisms that may limit the sustainability of the project.
• The project will carry out activities in remote areas with difficult access, which represents a risk for the execution of theproject in terms of delays and costs.
• Potential issues related to use of site and time specific information and internet connectivity and coverage, especially in remote areas with low connectivity.

--- Table 1 on Page 19 ---
tnemetatS
lao
G |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
semoctu
O |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
s t l u
s e
R |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
seitivitcA | 1.1.1. Organize the information from
the different repositories and
producer association databases to
connect them with updated
information available.
1.1.2. Develop a bot-based digital
instrument to strengthen the
extension service.
1.1.3. Design and develop the entire
data mining and analysis operating
system that will allow
interconnecting all available
information.
1.1.4. Train technicians in the use
and application of advanced data
analysis methods. |  | 1.2.1. Design and/or strengthen agroclimatic
information services.
1.2.2. Develop more accurate and precise
climate and weather prediction models and
complementary improved crop simulation
models.
1.2.3. Connect agroclimatic forecasts with
artificial intelligence models
1.2.4. Strengthen mechanisms to disseminate
agroclimatic information and transfer
capacities.
1.2.5. Other activities related to producing,
transferring or using agroclimatic information
(automation of meteorological information,
analysis of climate change signals, nutrient
balance models). |  |  | 2.1.1. Develop a state-of-the-art
phenotyping platform designed
to identify low carbon production
and climate-resistant genetic
resources.
2.1.2. Identification of heat,
drought and excess water
tolerance and incorporation of
these traits into advanced lines.
2.1.3. Develop new varieties from
advanced lines for climate
change adaptation and
mitigation.
2.1.4. Mass seed multiplication
(clones) for distribution to
farmers. |  |  | 2.2.1. Quantifying the baseline
water footprint
2.2.2. Quantifying the baseline
carbon footprint
2.2.3. Hydrological modeling of
basins to identify water
harvesting points in crop
production systems
2.2.4. Evaluation of efficient
water use practices in
agronomic management and
transformation processes
2.2.5. Evaluation of GHG
emission mitigation practices in
agronomic management and
transformation processes | 3.1.1. Strengthen gremios
capacities to use digitally
enabled tools
3.1.2. Implement
inclusive climate-resilient
and low-carbon business
models
3.1.3. Enhance financial
sector engagement with
farmers and their needs
3.1.4. Fostering agri-
digital entrepreneurship
ecosystems |  | 3.2.1. Promotion of dialogue between
local knowledge and practices and the
project concepts, as well as guidelines
and a communications plan for the
collective construction and
appropriation of knowledge -
socialization
3.2.2. Strengthening the capacities of
beneficiaries, especially women and
young farmers, regarding climate
resilience, chain analysis and business
models
3.2.3. Updating and implementation of
gender-sensitive technology transfer
strategies and extension services
3.2.4. Develop a strategy for the
dissemination, access and use of project
results
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
sreirraB | Limited capacities of agricultural
extension programmes and local
farmers to collect, manage and
systematize data to generate site
and time specific advice for good
management practices under
climatic conditions induced by
climate variability and change |  | Limited
knowledge and ability to
properly use agroclimatic
information in local farmers’
decision-making processes
to respond timely to climate
risks and hazards induced by
climate variability and change | Limited access to
and knowledge of
genetic resources
and their tolerance
to climate variability
and change by local
farmers and
producers |  |  | Limited knowledge of
carbon footprint at crop
and technology level to
promote a large-scale
adoption of low-
emissions practices |  | Limited knowledge of water
footprint and water use
efficient technologies to
promote behavioral changes
that contribute to a better
use of water resources,
particularly under stress
conditions | Weak/vulnerable
business models, lack
of tailored financial
instruments and
limited technical
capacities and
strategic knowledge
transfer | Weak extension services based on linear
model that provides blanket
recommendations rather than site and time
specific guidelines. Limited technical and
institutional capacities to adopt and scale
up climate smart technologies in agricultural
production. Farmers experiences and
knowledge not shared, and power of
farmers groups not effectively utilized. | 
 |  |  |  |  | Transversal Barriers (gender, environment, impact evaluation) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Limited access to productive factors and participation in labor and decision-making processes by
women and young farmers, which reduces their production potential in agricultural value chains |  |  |  |  |  |  | Limited knowledge of contributing factors to climate smart agricultural
technologies uses and adoption by farmers in the targeted value chains |  |  | Limited adoption of good environmental and
social practices to reduce associated risks | 

--- Table 2 on Page 19 ---
2. Increased generation
and use of climate
information in decision-
making | 3. Improvement in the well-being of
producer families (men and women)
and socio-environmental sustainability
of Colombian agriculture | 4. Improved management
of land in agricultural areas
contributing to GHG
emissions reductions

--- Table 3 on Page 19 ---
 | 

--- Table 4 on Page 19 ---
 |  |  | 
 |  |  | 
 |  |  | 
 |  |  | 

--- Table 5 on Page 19 ---
 | 

--- Table 6 on Page 19 ---
 |  | 

--- Table 7 on Page 19 ---
 | 

--- Table 8 on Page 19 ---
sksiR | • Farmers and ranchers tends to be very conservative when adapting to new technologies, varieties or crops, which delays adoption of new potentially profitable and beneficial production practices.
• Vulnerable groups (women, young farmers, small farmers, ethnic groups) might face social and economic constraints which hinder their fully participation in project activities and adoption of new
technologies.
• Possible incorrect design or management of field trials and activities (which might raise environmental risks), or failures in partnership agreements or institutional settings.
• Delay in planned scheduled works, including the acquisition of inputs, human resources, materials and tools.
• Potential issues regarding local governance or mechanisms that may limit the sustainability of the project.
• The project will carry out activities in remote areas with difficult access, which represents a risk for the execution of theproject in terms of delays and costs.
• Potential issues related to use of site and time specific information and internet connectivity and coverage, especially in remote areas with low connectivity.
snoitpmussA | • Farmers remain interested and actively participate in project activities; adopt technological packages and best management practices.
• Key stakeholders such as farmer associations and government or quasi public sector organizations are effectively engaged, support the initiative and are willing to accept and adopt more pluralistic,
participative and inclusive, less top-down, approaches.
• Technicians participate in the training activities, anddevelop activities where they can share their knowledge.
• Trainings and farmer-to-farmer exchanges are effective/sufficient to enable and speed up the adoption of low carbon climate-resilient agriculture practices.
• Agro-climatic information generated is received effectively by farmers, which maintains farmers’ interest in actively participating in the project. Farmers attend the trainings and know how to use the
information.
• The capacities created in the farmer associations are maintained and renewed periodically and catalyze a better management ofclimate risks.
• The technologies, tools, strategies are available and respond to the needs of the sector. The information is disseminatedand the organizations / institutions are able toaccess it.
• Field activities for variety development are not delayed.

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 75
BB
sector towards a sustainable use of resources (water, soil, agricultural inputs, etc.), while developing and
implementing management practices of cultivation and agricultural technologies that increase resilience to climate
change (e.g., droughts and floods). In the context of the adaptation and mitigation needs presented in section B.1,
the barriers that will be addressed by the project and that will allow the change in the development trajectory of the
Colombian agricultural sector are:
40. i) Limited capacities of agricultural extension services and local farmers to collect, manage and systematize data
to generate site and time specific advice for good management practices under climatic conditions induced by
climate variability and change. There is limited basic information or analytical capacity, and the deficient technical
assistance system prevents the expansion of this type of program. Information and data collection and analysis is
required to generate a site-specific agricultural platform for certain crops. Currently there is a follow-up and
monitoring of manual cultivation, depending mainly on the face-to-face assistance of technicians or the producers
themselves, where there are difficulties in making climate-smart decisions with precision, site-specific and on time.
There is limited capacity in the recording and management of information for climate-smart decision making, where
there are gaps in the capture, analysis and dissemination of information. At the same time, there is reduced
coverage of technical assistance, with little use of digital media to disseminate climate information, and a lack of
capacity in digital agriculture and data analysis with machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI). There is
a lack of resources in the producer groups to promote training programs for technicians and producers, especially
in the use of tools in data analysis.
41. ii) Limited knowledge and ability to properly use agroclimatic information for local decision-making’s processes to
respond timely to climate risks and hazards induced by climate variability and change. Currently, there are gaps in
meteorological monitoring and the climate predictions that are generated are little contextualized and are not local
in scale. At the same time, the agroclimatic models have not been properly developed, where there is a lack of
basic information, calibration or evaluation; the climate-production system relationship, the variables and critical
moments within the crop cycle are not well understood. The application and use of agroclimatic information
projections are limited by the lack of capacity in agricultural advisory services and inefficient dissemination
mechanisms to include new regions within the existing platform (corn, coffee, potatoes), the lack of characterization
of climatic threats (potato, livestock), the lack of resources to calibrate crop models with agroclimatic projections
and / or the lack of knowledge to calibrate said models (rice, corn, sugar cane).
42. iii) Limited access to and knowledge of genetic resources and their tolerance to climate variability and change by
local farmers and producers. There is limited knowledge on direct measures for the development of hybrids and
varieties adapted, evaluated and selected to tolerate extreme climatic conditions of drought and waterlogging, as
well as diseases. In the case of forage species in livestock, there is low biomass productivity due to phenomena
associated with climate variability such as droughts and floods. At the same time, there is little or no availability of
improved seeds to increase adaptation to climate change and a need to expand the production capacity and supply
of planting material.
43. iv) Limited knowledge of water footprint and water use efficient technologies to promote behavioral changes that
contribute to a better use of water resources, particularly under stress conditions. There is no information on the
water footprint of the different technologies and, therefore, there is no certainty about the technologies with the
lowest water footprint that can be applied in the different regions. There are some technologies and information for
less water use, but there is no scaling-up strategy for these technologies.
44. v) Limited knowledge of carbon footprint at crop and technology level to promote a large-scale adoption of low-
emission practices. There is no information on the emission levels associated with different crop technologies, the
variations in greenhouse gas emissions due to genetics are not known, and low carbon technologies have not been
identified and quantified. There is no mitigation plan or strategy at the crop level. There is a lack of information and
dissemination on low-carbon technologies at the commercial level and with strong scientific support on the
mitigation potential. The costs of this type of analysis are high and there is no budget to carry out this type of
studies. Likewise, farmer groups have limitations to carry out this type of study on their own.
45. vi) Weak/vulnerable business models and lack of tailored financial instruments. As climate change and variability
increase the risk for investing in the agricultural sector, key actors of the agricultural sector (farmers, gremios’
technicians, and other sector entities) have limited technical capacities and dealignment with the digital age to both
transfer and understanding relevant knowledge to reduce climate risks across their business models. Many of the
business models of the farmers do not include elements necessary to scale up to profitable, climate resilient low
carbon production systems that are well integrated with wholesale and retail markets, with special attention given
to product differentiation that are climate friendly. Farmers are poorly linked with other actores in the value chain to
mitigate climate change and reduce GHG emissions. Moreover, agricultural sector stakeholders lack of tailored
financial instruments and products that can support de-risking strategies, which is often due to the lack of
knowledge, information, and active involvement of financial institutions regarding the efforts made by agricultural
sector stakeholders for a climate-resilient and low-carbon agricultural production system. A further impediment to
innovation is that the first mover takes the risk of failure, but if he succeeds the knowledge produced is a public
good. Hence, it is fair for public or quasi-public funds to be used to underwrite risk taken with novel technologies.

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 75
BB
This is particularly necessary with the adoption of GHG reducing technology that produces a public good and may
not produce any benefit for the initial adopter.
46. vii) Weak extension services based on linear model that provides blanket recommendations rather than site and
time specific guidelines. Gremios that are a striking feature of the major crops in Colombian agriculture were all
formed long before the digital age. They and the agencies that provide services to the growers have mostly
remained with highly centralized structures that pay relatively little attention to variation over space and time of the
industries they support. Thus, famers frequently receive blanket recommendations for their crops from the extension
services and often have a minimal say in the overall strategies and management of the powerful growers’
associations that represent them. In addition, in some cases, required inputs such as biological control agents for
a climate resilient sound agriculture are not available. As a result, there is limited technical and institutional
capacities to adopt and scale up climate smart technologies in agricultural production. Farmers experiences and
knowledge are not shared, and power of gremios is not effectively utilized.
47. viii) Limited knowledge of contributing factors to climate smart agricultural technologies uses and adoption by
farmers in the targeted value chains. Despite continued research in the adoption of climate smart technologies in
agricultural production systems, there are still knowledge gaps in terms on what mechanisms and what influence
some of these technologies may have in reducing climate vulnerability and GHG emissions.
48. ix) Limited access to productive factors and participation in labor and decision-making process by women and
young farmers. Housework and unpaid care work are activities that fall on rural women, which considerably limits
their labor participation and permanence in the paid labor market and decision-making in farming units. Additionally,
women farmers and ranchers have less access to productive factors, such as land, credit and technology, which
reduces their production potential in crop chains, and limits local economic development. Additional details are
described in the Gender Assessment (Annex 8).
49. x) Limited adoption of good practices to reduce environmental risks in at risk areas. There are risks of in paramo
ecosystems of agricultural reconversion, especially when it comes to livestock activities. There is a need to
implement measures to reduce the use of agrochemicals, and that farmer associations review the existing protocols
of agrochemical use to promote greater adoption of good practices, in such a way that environmental risks can be
reduced. in human health. Further details are described in the Social and Environmental Risk Assessment (Annex
6).
50. Project activities to overcome barriers and catalyze transformational change. Based on the identification of
the barriers, this project develops three Components, six results and their respective activities to reduce or eliminate
these barriers (see diagram of Theory of Change and Table B.2.1). Specifically, the barrier (i) of limited capacity
for analysis and information management in agricultural extension services will be addressed by Result 1.1 that
seeks to modernize and expand the coverage of agricultural extension services in Colombia by training technicians
in the management of digital tools so that the recommendations of the technicians to the producers are reliable,
timely and specific by site, resulting in agility and lower cost for the provision of agricultural extension services. The
activities of Result 1.1 will be coordinated with the activities of Result 3.2 (capacity building and knowledge transfer),
which is transversal to Components 1 and 2.
51. In the case of barrier (ii) of limited use and adequate application of agroclimatic information, it will be addressed
by Result 1.2 of agroclimatic information services, which seeks the design and/or strengthen agroclimatic
information services for the various agricultural value chains. In this case, it seeks to expand the coverage of
agroclimatic information services for new production systems (potatoes, sugarcane, livestock, bananas and
plantains) and strengthening of existing agroclimatic information services which function independently in rice, corn,
sugarcane and coffee. These activities will be coordinated with Results 1.1 and 3.2. As a result of the activities
under Component 1, the agricultural value chains are expected to have greater resilience and adaptability to
extreme weather events and impacts of climate change, which translates into lower losses compared to expected
and/or historical scenarios. similar for each activity. This will improve the well-being of producer families and the
socio-environmental sustainability of Colombian agriculture.
52. Component 2 seeks the massive implementation of technologies and crop management options that allow
improving the resilience of productive systems and low-carbon agricultural development, considering alternatives
for genetic improvement, efficient use of water resources, soil and other adaptation and mitigation options. In this
case, the barrier (iii) of limited knowledge of genetic resources and their tolerance to climate variability will be
addressed by Result 2.1, which seeks to strengthen the germplasm bank, the development of new varieties and
massive multiplication of seeds adapted to conditions. extremes of precipitation and temperature and/or that lead
to a lower emission of greenhouse gases. Barrier (iv) of limited knowledge about the water footprint and water
efficient technologies and barrier (v) of limited knowledge of the carbon footprint at the crop and technology level
will be addressed by Result 2.2 which focuses on the development and scaling of crop management techniques
and other low-carbon and climate-resilient technology options, in coordination with Components 3.1 and 3.2. As a
result, it is expected that these improved practices and technologies will be implemented together with the farmer
groups, which would result in the strategic agricultural production value chains for the country with greater
productivity, sustainability and adaptability to climate change.

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 75
BB
53. Component 3 seeks to facilitate the strengthening of agriculture business models by enabling ownership,
transfer and use of the knowledge generated in components 1 and 2 through innovative, inclusive and digitally
enabled approaches for meeting farmers needs and by actively involving financial institutions to understand
gremios and farmers efforts to de-risk agricultural production systems and incentivizing them to use project’s
information to inform the development of tailored financial instruments. Hence, barrier (vi) will be addressed
by Result 3.1 through which business models in prioritized value chains will be analyzed to identify
opportunities to engage with potential buyers in climate-resilient and low carbon markets, while involving
financial institutions; barrier (vii) will be addressed by Result 3.2, which will allow gremios to improve their
knowledge transference using innovative, inclusive, and digitally enabled approaches. Finally, barriers (viii),
(ix) and (x) will be addressed transversally by Components 1, 2 and 3, as they implement related activities to
gender, social and environmental issues, as well as impact evaluation of project activities.
54. Risks. Among the identified risks for this project is that farmers and ranchers tend to be very conservative when
adapting to new technologies, varieties or crops, presenting a very important but passive resistance to the
introduction of new profitable procedures or systems. There are also possible incorrect design or management of
field trials, failures in partnership agreements or institutional settings that may hinder the transfer and adoption of
crop technologies. Potential issues regarding local governance or mechanisms that may limit sustainability of the
interventions. Delay in planned scheduled works, including the acquisition of inputs, human resources, materials
and tools. Finally, the project will carry out activities in remote areas with difficult access, which represents a risk
for the execution of the project in terms of delays and costs. This also poses potential issues related to use of site
and time specific information and internet connectivity and coverage, especially in remote areas with low
connectivity.
55. Assumptions. It is noteworthy that the project outcomes will be achieved through implementation of the project
activities under the assumptions of: i) Farmers remain interested and actively participate in project activities; adopt
technological packages and best management practices; ii) Key stakeholders such as farmer associations and
organizations are effectively engaged, support the initiative and are willing to participate, and the capacities created
in the farmer associations are maintained and renewed periodically; iii) Technicians participate in the training
activities, and develop activities where they can share their knowledge; iv) Trainings and farmer-to-farmer
exchanges are effective/sufficient to enable and speed up the adoption of low carbon climate-resilient agriculture
practices; v) Agro-climatic information generated is received effectively by farmers, which maintains farmers’
interest in actively participating in the project. Farmers attend the trainings and know how to use the information;
vi) technologies, tools, and strategies are available and respond to the needs of the sector; vii) The information is
disseminated and the organizations / institutions are able to access it; and field activities for variety development
are not delayed by severe weather events.
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages)
56. Project components. The project comprises three interconnected components and their respective activities
aimed at reducing the vulnerability of agricultural production to climatic threats and the use of resources (water,
fertilizers, energy): 1) Digital agriculture and climate services for rural modernization with an emphasis on
adaptation and mitigation; 2) Genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options
and their scaling-up to increase resilience and promote low-carbon agricultural development; and 3) Innovative and
inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems and a more engaged financial sector.
57. Component 1. Digital agriculture and climate services for rural modernization with an emphasis on
adaptation and mitigation. This component includes the design, assembly, implementation and operation of
climate information services for technicians and producers. The objective is to improve decision-making at the
producer level and avoid crop losses. As can be seen in Figure B.2.1, this component includes early warning
services on climate hazards, as well as other sophisticated warning systems on pests, diseases and other abiotic
factors that can occur due to climatic phenomena. It also includes comprehensive territorial planning systems. Big
data analysis, technological platforms and other digital agriculture tools will enable combining climate information
with biophysical and agronomic information to select the most recommendable adaptation measures for producers.
It foresees two main results: (i) Improved and inclusive decision making by farmers and gremios for climate change
adaptation and mitigation in targeted value chains through the adoption of digital agriculture and, (ii) Increased
adoption and improved use by farmers and gremios through of climate services.
58. Result 1.1. Strengthened and modernized agricultural extension system with an emphasis on adaptation and
mitigation. The project seeks to modernize and expand the coverage of agricultural extension in Colombia for
improved and inclusive decision making by farmers and gremios for climate change adaptation and mitigation in
targeted value chains through the adoption of digital agriculture. As a result, more than 2,200 technicians will be
trained in using this type of tools and technicians' recommendations to producers will be reliable, timely (available
when required) and site-specific, thereby resulting in a more agile and less costly provision of agricultural extension
services. Deliverables under this component will include the design, assembly, implementation and operation of
seven (7) Big Data platforms to supply analyzed and processed information that considers user’s social, ethnic and

--- Table 1 on Page 22 ---
53. Component 3 seeks to facilitate the strengthening of agriculture business models by enabling ownership,
transfer and use of the knowledge generated in components 1 and 2 through innovative, inclusive and digitally
enabled approaches for meeting farmers needs and by actively involving financial institutions to understand
gremios and farmers efforts to de-risk agricultural production systems and incentivizing them to use project’s
information to inform the development of tailored financial instruments. Hence, barrier (vi) will be addressed
by Result 3.1 through which business models in prioritized value chains will be analyzed to identify
opportunities to engage with potential buyers in climate-resilient and low carbon markets, while involving
financial institutions; barrier (vii) will be addressed by Result 3.2, which will allow gremios to improve their
knowledge transference using innovative, inclusive, and digitally enabled approaches. Finally, barriers (viii),
(ix) and (x) will be addressed transversally by Components 1, 2 and 3, as they implement related activities to
gender, social and environmental issues, as well as impact evaluation of project activities.
54. Risks. Among the identified risks for this project is that farmers and ranchers tend to be very conservative when
adapting to new technologies, varieties or crops, presenting a very important but passive resistance to the
introduction of new profitable procedures or systems. There are also possible incorrect design or management of
field trials, failures in partnership agreements or institutional settings that may hinder the transfer and adoption of
crop technologies. Potential issues regarding local governance or mechanisms that may limit sustainability of the
interventions. Delay in planned scheduled works, including the acquisition of inputs, human resources, materials
and tools. Finally, the project will carry out activities in remote areas with difficult access, which represents a risk
for the execution of the project in terms of delays and costs. This also poses potential issues related to use of site
and time specific information and internet connectivity and coverage, especially in remote areas with low
connectivity.
55. Assumptions. It is noteworthy that the project outcomes will be achieved through implementation of the project
activities under the assumptions of: i) Farmers remain interested and actively participate in project activities; adopt
technological packages and best management practices; ii) Key stakeholders such as farmer associations and
organizations are effectively engaged, support the initiative and are willing to participate, and the capacities created
in the farmer associations are maintained and renewed periodically; iii) Technicians participate in the training
activities, and develop activities where they can share their knowledge; iv) Trainings and farmer-to-farmer
exchanges are effective/sufficient to enable and speed up the adoption of low carbon climate-resilient agriculture
practices; v) Agro-climatic information generated is received effectively by farmers, which maintains farmers’
interest in actively participating in the project. Farmers attend the trainings and know how to use the information;
vi) technologies, tools, and strategies are available and respond to the needs of the sector; vii) The information is
disseminated and the organizations / institutions are able to access it; and field activities for variety development
are not delayed by severe weather events. |  | 
 | B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) | 
56. Project components. The project comprises three interconnected components and their respective activities
aimed at reducing the vulnerability of agricultural production to climatic threats and the use of resources (water,
fertilizers, energy): 1) Digital agriculture and climate services for rural modernization with an emphasis on
adaptation and mitigation; 2) Genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options
and their scaling-up to increase resilience and promote low-carbon agricultural development; and 3) Innovative and
inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems and a more engaged financial sector.
57. Component 1. Digital agriculture and climate services for rural modernization with an emphasis on
adaptation and mitigation. This component includes the design, assembly, implementation and operation of
climate information services for technicians and producers. The objective is to improve decision-making at the
producer level and avoid crop losses. As can be seen in Figure B.2.1, this component includes early warning
services on climate hazards, as well as other sophisticated warning systems on pests, diseases and other abiotic
factors that can occur due to climatic phenomena. It also includes comprehensive territorial planning systems. Big
data analysis, technological platforms and other digital agriculture tools will enable combining climate information
with biophysical and agronomic information to select the most recommendable adaptation measures for producers.
It foresees two main results: (i) Improved and inclusive decision making by farmers and gremios for climate change
adaptation and mitigation in targeted value chains through the adoption of digital agriculture and, (ii) Increased
adoption and improved use by farmers and gremios through of climate services.
58. Result 1.1. Strengthened and modernized agricultural extension system with an emphasis on adaptation and
mitigation. The project seeks to modernize and expand the coverage of agricultural extension in Colombia for
improved and inclusive decision making by farmers and gremios for climate change adaptation and mitigation in
targeted value chains through the adoption of digital agriculture. As a result, more than 2,200 technicians will be
trained in using this type of tools and technicians' recommendations to producers will be reliable, timely (available
when required) and site-specific, thereby resulting in a more agile and less costly provision of agricultural extension
services. Deliverables under this component will include the design, assembly, implementation and operation of
seven (7) Big Data platforms to supply analyzed and processed information that considers user’s social, ethnic and |  | 

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 75
BB
gender differences, and the empowerment of producer associations to deliver recommendations on adaptation and
mitigation measures to producers. It is considered that rice, coffee and sugarcane crops are the most advanced in
implementing these practices, while livestock and maize are close behind and banana, potato and panela cane are
the least advanced in this sense. This is why different activities will be carried out depending on the different crops
and producer associations. For livestock and for potato, banana and plantain crops, this platform will be fully
implemented. In the case of panela sugarcane, the SRIA platform for information collection is currently available.
Therefore, the scope will be aimed at improving and expanding information-collection processes, setting up the
information processing and analysis system and developing the system to produce outputs. In the case of rice and
maize, the output will be aimed at improving Big Data platforms, expanding information, updating and improving
information processing algorithms, with special emphasis on generating platform-based outputs. In the case of
sugarcane, a Big Data system is already operating, and therefore, it will be complemented with necessary
information-collection instruments related to some variables, including water availability for cultivation5.
59. In all cases, the Big Data platforms will be administered by the producer associations and AGROSAVIA, in an effort
to promote the adoption and use of these instruments as inputs for the National Unified Agricultural and Rural
Information System, without generating additional and permanent long-term costs for the national government (this
aspect will be clearly defined in the different implementation agreements with the strategic partners (research
institutions and gremios). This Result will be under the leadership of the Digital Inclusion team of the CIAT-Bioversity
Alliance. This team will coordinate implementation with the producer associations’ teams and AGROSAVIA. It
includes the following activities:
• Activity 1.1.1. Organize the information from the different repositories and producer association databases
(public and free-access systems) to connect them with updated information available from existing free-
access platforms through remote sensing or other sources. This includes: i) developing a data collection
strategy linked to environmental, social, technological, productive and economic indicators and local
knowledge; ii) developing a protocol to integrate databases with existing crop information; iii) processing and
cleaning information in the databases; iv) consolidating processed information in a database management
system; v) analyzing data using machine learning and computational optimization methods; vi) disseminating
results in workshops or field days.
• Activity 1.1.2. Develop a bot-based digital instrument to strengthen the extension service. There are plans to
develop communication tools that facilitate human-machine interaction to provide automatic answers to
frequently asked questions in conversations between farmers and technicians. This will facilitate sharing the
recommendations derived from data analysis, as well as agroclimatic forecasts. This includes: i) testing
pattern recognition models in texts that producers and technicians have exchanged; ii) engaging with potential
users of different sex, age, cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds to collect a baseline of the information
more frequently required for decision making, as well as the most frequently used information channels. This
will be done through workshops, interviews, questionnaires and possibly focus groups; iii) creating an
automatic wizard to exchange agroclimatic information with producers, through chats or text messages on
planting dates, choice of varieties and rain forecasts, among others.
• Activity 1.1.3. Design and develop the entire data mining and analysis operating system that will allow
interconnecting all available information. In turn, systems will be developed to enable the automatization of
analysis and modeling processes, in an effort to encourage more robust recommendations and more agile
and efficient processes. This includes: i) monitoring the crop cycle using remote sensors (satellite images
and drones) and non-remote sensors (soil moisture sensors, electroconductivity, leaf moisture sensors); ii)
establishing field and flight sensors to capture images using drones; iii) designing a data management system
that allows searching for information, downloading and processing it; iv) analyzing the information and
validating and disseminating the results.
• Activity 1.1.4. Train technicians in the use and application of advanced data analysis methods, including: i)
holding in-person and virtual training workshops, and short-term stays of professionals from producer
associations at CIAT and other centers of excellence, to develop skills in the use of data mining, evolutionary
computing and remote sensors to generate information for decision-making in the field; ii) Developing,
validating and implementing a module based on graphical interfaces to facilitate data analysis and
consultation, aimed at producer association technicians; iii) Training of trainers on Information Literacy for
producers with an ethnic and gender focus and develop and implement dissemination means, including
communication platforms. This seeks to expand the number of users served under Activities 1.1.1 and 1.1.3.
60. Result 1.2. Agroclimatic services in place and/or strengthened. This will support the increased adoption and
improved use by farmers and gremios of accessible climate services and information to reduce agroclimatic risks.
As a result, the project will allow to provide timely and reliable information to more than one million users (considered
indirect beneficiaries) on the main climatic threats and crop management recommendations to avoid losses. The
5 In the case of coffee cultivation, the currently available SICA system handles a good volume of variables and therefore, it was not included
in this component. Nonetheless, informat ion from the SICA system will be analyzed in other components of this project.

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 75
BB
Project will ensure technical support in the implementation of adaptation and mitigation measures to about 49,200
of these producers, who are considered direct project beneficiaries. The project will follow-up on these beneficiaries
and will evaluate6 results achieved. This component includes the design and implementation of early warning
platforms that provide accurate and timely information to farmers by generating climate predictions, using simulation
models and Big Data information. A platform for climate services in rice and maize crops is currently operating. It
was designed, installed and put into operation as part of the pilot carried out in the context of the MADR-CIAT
agreement. Platforms for the cultivation of sugarcane and coffee operate independently.
61. A first step in this activity is to expand the coverage of services to other crops (potato, panela sugarcane, livestock,
banana and plantain), and this requires purchasing, installing and calibrating equipment to measure and record
climatic and related variables. Data collection, storage and analysis, climate predictions, crop modeling, climate-
crop integration, process automation and an information query platform are also required. Information systems will
be strengthened with new-generation models and improved performance of climate predictions and crop modeling.
Likewise, for some crops, there will be a transition towards new alert services related to pests, diseases, abiotic
factors and water use planning in irrigation systems. In this case, it is necessary to move forth in developing,
calibrating and validating pest and disease behavior modeling, and hydrological modeling at the supply basin level.
62. This Result will be under the leadership of the Climate Action team of the CIAT-Bioversity Alliance, which will
coordinate its implementation with the producer associations’ and Agrosavia’s teams. It includes the following
activities:
• Activity 1.2.1. Design and/or strengthen agroclimatic information services. It seeks to expand the coverage
of information services to reduce the agroclimatic risk for new productive systems (potatoes, panela
sugarcane, livestock, banana and plantain) and strengthen existing agroclimatic information services which
function independently for rice, corn, sugarcane and coffee. Under this activity, the deliverables include four
(4) improved agroclimatic platforms with better forecasting performance (sugarcane, coffee, rice and maize)
and five (5) new agroclimatic platforms in operation (potato, panela sugarcane, livestock, banana and
plantain). This includes: i) evaluating climate forecasts at different time scales (e.g., seasonal, sub-seasonal)
and developing a protocol for the use of climate information; ii) Developing a network to collect climate
information (meteorological stations network) in already selected prioritized sites;7 iii) Identifying and mapping
areas that are vulnerable to experience water and biological stress, based on their water supply; iv) creating,
structuring and implementing the Cenicaña AgroClimate Service for the Cauca River Valley, including the
automation of the productivity prediction system for sugarcane and the analysis of climatic variables; and v)
adjusting and validating climate prediction models in coffee and its relationship with diseases, and making
recommendations.
• Activity 1.2.2. Develop more accurate and precise climate and weather prediction models and complementary
improved crop simulation models by using new-generation climate models, improving the performance of
climate prediction models, modeling crop physiological processes, including alerts for pests, diseases and
other abiotic factors (for example, frosts), and irrigation planning and optimization.
• Activity 1.2.3. Connect agroclimatic forecasts with artificial intelligence models (Result 1.1). This includes: i)
integrating agroclimatic forecasts in the design and implementation of early warning platforms that use climate
forecasts, simulation models and Big Data information to provide accurate and timely information to farmers
and technicians; ii) Usability tests with producers of agroclimatic platforms and mass dissemination systems;
iii) Adjustments in outputs and generation of new services based on needs; iv) Generation of visualization
interfaces targeted at different users according to agroclimatic information needs.
• Activity 1.2.4. Strengthen mechanisms to disseminate agroclimatic information and transfer capacities.
Ensure the operation of at least 15 Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups (MTA), with diverse
representation, and provide training for their members and other actors in order to strengthen the
dissemination of climate services to technicians and producers in other crops, considering the different needs,
interest and constraints of different types of producers. Moreover, develop content and circulate
recommendations through diverse media and dissemination mechanisms and tools (including digital tools) in
order to reach one million users. This includes generating agroclimatic information and including it in the
AclimateColombia (www.aclimatecolombia.org), SIPA (sugarcane), and ASISTEGAN (livestock) platforms.
• Activity 1.2.5. Other activities related to producing, transferring or using agroclimatic information (automation
of meteorological information, analysis of climate change signals, nutrient balance models). In the case of
sugarcane, the analysis of meteorological information and climate forecasts will be automated, allowing early
decision-making to mitigate the effects of climate variability on production. Similarly, the producer association
plans to study the signs of climate change and climate forces in the Cauca River Valley, to produce
information to mitigate the climate change effects in the entire value chain of the sugarcane industry. In the
6 Monitoring and evaluation will be carried out as part of the impact evaluation component and will focus on a representative sample of these
producers.
7 See Appendix 3 in Annex 2.

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 75
BB
case of coffee, there is a proposal to use the information generated by Cenicafé and new research to model
nutrient input and output in coffee production systems in the context of climate variability. Finally, in the case
of rice, there are plans to evaluate the water balance and fertilization modules of the rice cultivation models,
in order to expand their application in decision-making and in the optimization of natural and agro-industrial
resources.
63. Component 2. Genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options and
their scaling-up to increase climate resilience and promote low-carbon agricultural development. This
component comprises technologies and crop management options to improve the resilience of productive systems
and promote low-carbon agricultural development, and considers alternatives for genetic improvement, efficient
use of water resources and soil, and other adaptation and mitigation options. This component considers two
thematic Results with their corresponding results and activities as described below:
64. Result 2.1. Strengthened germplasm bank, new climate resilient varieties developed and their seeds massively
distributed. This will allow the adoption by farmers and gremios of new climate smart practices, technologies and
varieties. As a result of this activity, more than 123,000 hectares will implement the practices, technologies and
varieties proposed by the Project. This component includes developing a state-of-the-art phenotyping platform
designed to identify climate-resistant genetic resources8 aimed at developing heat- and drought-resistant, nitrogen-
use efficient and low-GHG emission accessions for rice, maize, bananas, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, coffee,
potatoes and livestock.
65. This component will be under the leadership of the Crops for Nutrition and Health team of the CIAT- Bioversity
Alliance, which will coordinate implementation with the producer associations’ and Agrosavia’s teams. It includes
the following activities:
• Activity 2.1.1. Develop a state-of-the-art phenotyping platform designed to identify low carbon production and
climate-resistant genetic resources. It will initially be tested and validated with beans. Once the tests have
been carried out, the platform will be made available to rice and livestock (forages). This includes: i) Installing,
calibrating and testing growth chambers designed to simulate future climatic conditions by manipulating
lighting, temperature and relative humidity; ii) Installing and testing field equipment that supports the capture
of sensor images and data; iii) Calibrating and testing cameras and sensors to quantify the impact of abiotic
stresses on photosynthesis; iv) Sequencing of parental genetic material and/or progeny; v)Application of a
genomic selection model.
• Activity 2.1.2. Identify heat, drought and excess water tolerant accessions for rice, m aize, potatoes,
Musaceae, and livestock (forages), including: i) Detecting physiological traits using the phenotyping platform
described in Activity 2.1.1; ii) DNA sequencing to identify regions of the genome that control the traits
assessed; iii) Identify traits to increase crop resilience; iv) Selection and evaluation under controlled
conditions for water deficit, low nitrogen and waterlogging of elite parental lines.
• Activity 2.1.3. Develop new varieties from advanced lines for climate change adaptation and mitigation for
rice, maize, livestock, banana (varieties that are tolerant or resistant to water deficit and diseases that demand
high use of chemical fungicides, such as black Sigatoka) and sugarcane (water deficit, waterlogging and
greater efficiency in nitrogen use). This includes: i) selecting and evaluating advanced varieties under
controlled conditions (greenhouse, laboratory) that simulate climate change environments: water deficit,
salinity, low nitrogen, waterlogging; ii) Genetic characterization and creation of the elite parents bank; iii) New
crosses with promising lines; iv) Validation and performance evaluation of materials developed in other
countries but that have not been tested in Colombia; v) Selection of lines with better performance; vi)
Evaluation of greenhouse gas emissions of different genetic materials; vii) Materials registration process and
release of new materials.
• Activity 2.1.4. Massive seed multiplication for coffee, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, potato, banana and
plantain through in vitro culture or the buds method for distribution to farmers. The application of techniques
to massively multiply outstanding variety seeds and the design of a gender-responsive delivery strategy
(including the collection of gender-differentiated feedback on the new varieties), thereby allowing for large-
scale adoption of the varieties developed throughout the Project. This includes establish a thermotherapy
protocol, clean by cryopreservation, multiplication of the material, detection of virus and diseases,
implementation of the in-vitro technique of Somatic Embryogenesis (SE) and implementation of bioreactors
for scale up.
8 Seed multiplication is a very heterogeneous process that varies per crop. For example, for rice the certified seed market (40-65% of the
cultivated area) is mostly represented by four producing companies (FEDEARROZ, Semillano, Semillas Huila-Pajonales). For corn seeds,
the main actors are transnational companies (Pionner, Monsanto, Syngenta, Advanta), Fenalce and Semivalle. Fenalce receives the support
of international entities such as CIMMYT. In the case of potatoes, is mostly grown on the basis of informal seed with only 5% of the total area
planted using certified seed. In sugarcane, there is no private market for seed, and producers, through their associations, are responsible for
all research. In coffee, the National Coffee Research Center (CENICAFE) is in charge of an improved seed production system. For bananas,
the seeds come from in vitro cultivation, a high percentage of which are distributed by the company Rahan Meristem.

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 75
BB
66. Result 2.2. More efficient use of water resources, restoring soil properties, and improving GHG mitigation practices
by farmers and gremios through the adoption of new climate smart practices and technologies. This component
seeks to support crop management techniques and other technological options and their scaling-up to increase
resilience and mitigation in the targeted value chains for different types of farmers. This considers the validation
and incorporation of sustainable production practices that allow more efficient use of water resources, restoring soil
properties, reducing GHG emissions or increasing carbon capture, while enabling productivity increases. As a result
of these interventions, more than 9,230 hectares will implement the technologies, of which 8,750 benefit the
reduction of GHG emissions. It is expected that there will be a reduction of 432,297 tons of CO2e during the project
lifespan, at a rate of 18,796 tons of CO2e per year.
67. Under this component, sustainable management practices will be formulated and implemented at a large scale.
These include the incorporation of rational use of fertilizers and bioproducts (potatoes, maize, rice, panela
sugarcane, banana, plantain and coffee), optimization of irrigation systems (rice, potato, plantain and banana),
conservation agriculture (potato and maize), use of harvest residues (coffee, maize, banana), low-emission planting
materials (rice and sugarcane), optimization of processing systems (panela, and coffee), water harvesting (rice,
panela, coffee and plantain), enclosures of riverine corridors and assisted restoration (for sugar cane), enclosures
of biological corridors, riverine corridors, living fences, intensive and non-intensive silvo-pastoral systems, pasture
rotation, scattered trees in pastures, and hedges fodder (for livestock). This component will be under the leadership
of the Multifunctional Landscapes team of the CIAT-Bioversity Alliance, which will coordinate implementation with
the producer associations’ and AGROSAVIA’s teams. It includes the following activities:
• Activity 2.2.1. Quantifying the baseline water footprint in six (6) crops (potato, sugarcane, panela sugarcane
bananas, plantains, and livestock) and in the industrial phase of sugar production. This includes: i) Designing
and selecting experimental plots; ii) Installing monitoring sensors; iii) Measuring water balance and water
quality, iv) Quantifying the water footprint and identifying critical points of high water consumption.
• Activity 2.2.2. Quantifying the baseline carbon footprint for seven (7) crops (rice, potato, sugarcane, panela
cane, bananas, plantain, and livestock), fertilizer use and industrial processing in sugarcane cultivation. This
includes: i) Collecting information on activities in cultivation and transformation processes; ii) Building a
database with emission factors in cultivation and manufacturing; iii) Quantifying the carbon footprint and
identifying the critical points.
• Activity 2.2.3. Hydrological modeling of basins to identify water harvesting points in rice, panela cane,
bananas, and coffee production systems. This includes: i) Collecting spatial and hydroclimatic information in
the basin; ii) Designing and validating with men and women farmers of different ages and socioeconomic
backgrounds the hydrological model and creating scenarios of changes in coverage and climate forecast; iii)
Mapping, identifying and validating water harvesting points; iv) Generating water conveyance routes; v)
Building water reservoirs (in the case of panela cane, plantain and coffee); vi) Training workshops for
professional associations’ staff (e.g. agricultural engineers); vii) Efficient planning of water uses at the level
of irrigation districts.
• Activity 2.2.4. Evaluation of efficient water use practices in agronomic management and transformation
processes (e.g., milling of panela cane) in potato, panela cane, plantain, banana, coffee crops and livestock.
This includes: i) Identifying and formulating agronomic management practices and industrial transformation;
ii) Selecting and implementing conventional productive plots with efficient use practices; iii) Installing
equipment to monitor moisture balance; iv) Creating moisture balance and monitoring water quality; v)
Quantifying the water footprint in conventional systems and efficient water use practices; vi) Training
workshops for producers on monitoring and managing efficient water use systems.
• Activity 2.2.5. Evaluation of GHG emission mitigation practices in agronomic management and transformation
processes in rice, maize, potato, panela cane, plantain, banana, coffee, sugarcane crops, and livestock. This
includes: i) Identifying productive typologies considering gender and socioeconomic related variables; ii)
Implementing productive plots to monitor conventional systems and practices with mitigation potential; iii)
Collecting information regarding activity data; iv) Installing and monitoring static cameras to collect soil-
released GHG samples; v) Generating emission factors; vi) Quantifying the carbon footprint in conventional
systems and systems with practices with mitigation potential; vii) Training workshops for producers on
monitoring and managing practices with mitigating potential.
• Activity 2.2.6. Landscape restoration in sugarcane cultivation and livestock systems. The activities that will
be developed include enclosures of riverine corridors and assisted restoration (for sugar cane), enclosures
of biological corridors, riverine corridors, living fences, intensive and non-intensive silvo-pastoral systems,
pasture rotation, scattered trees in pastures, hedges fodder (for livestock). Under this activity, the project will
support with: i) Prioritizing activities and identifying potential intervention areas and landscape units through
inclusive participatory processes; ii) Using a nursery for the propagation of native species targeting the
engagement of women farmers; iii) Coverage mapping; iv) Implementation of the identified interventions.

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 75
BB
• Activity 2.2.7. Massive implementation of agronomic management technologies and transformation
processes that enable more efficient use of water and promote low-carbon development in rice, maize, potato,
sugarcane, plantain, banana, and livestock production. This includes: i) Identifying production typologies and
selecting producers for implementation; ii) Training producers and other actors in the implementation and
management of sustainable production practices including targeted trainings for women climate resilient
agriculture focused on the tasks they perform within each crop/chain (e.g. seed selection, diversification of
crops, subsistence farming, pre and post-harvest); iii) Co-designing systems to be implemented through
inclusive participatory processes with producers; iv) Generating dissemination material suitable for different
types of farmers; v) Implementing sustainable systems/practices at the regional level.
68. Component 3. Innovative and inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems and a
more engaged financial sector. The generation, massive transfer and scaling-up of technological options require
modernized innovation systems to permanently support relevant cross-cutting issues to ensure that: (i)
technological options enable the development of innovative business models that mainstream its benefits over time
across key agricultural sector stakeholders, including financial institutions; (ii) this technological options reach the
largest possible number of users through considering the different needs, capacities, knowledge and conditions of
the various producer and population groups (women, men, youth, elderly), as well as the different social and
environmental contexts, and (iii) the impacts of the project are properly recorded and analyzed.
69. This component aims to support the development of science-based business models and the modernization of
innovation systems to reach producers effectively, by enhancing the dialogue between technician-technician and
producer-producer through digitally-enabled tools and approaches for sharing knowledge and experiences, and
increased awareness of gender-based constraints to the adoption of sustainable production systems and capacities
to address these. A key focus of this component is understanding prioritized value chains and use project’s results
in other components to identify climate-resilient and low carbon markets in which gremios, agri-business and
farmers can offer their value proposition and open new commercial opportunities. A second focus of this component
is the bringing gremios and different types of farmers to develop modernized innovation systems that incorporate
the advantages of the digital era. This modernization involves the strengthening institutional capacities to increase
coverage of extension services, which will rely on new knowledge generated by producer association professionals
through two-way digitally enabled tools. In this component, the project will closely engage with financial institutions
both national and local so that they know and understand the strategies that gremios and farmers will implement
for de-risking agricultural investments within the framework of the project, highlighting the need for tailored financial
mechanisms and products to enable benefits beyond project’s life. The training and capacity-building strategy of
this component will contemplate the relationship with the Departmental Agricultural Extension Plans (PDEA),
providing support on agro-climatic risk management and climate change adaptation, through information,
generation of new knowledge and technology transfer processes. This component will result in two result areas,
which are described below with their corresponding activities:
70. Result 3.1. Improved business models that provide farmers with reasonable profits and improved GHG mitigation
practices. The agricultural private sector (gremios, service providers and farmers) will increase its capacity to
identify novel and inclusive business models. As a result of this component, gender sensitive value chain analysis
will be developed for specific cases to identify additional and/or new market opportunities for climate-resilient and
low-carbon agricultural products and/or services. With the support of the project’s expert team, a strategic plan will
be co-developed with the relevant gremios for high-potential opportunities. Through this component, financial
institutions will be engaged in four relevant geographic areas in which the MTAs are in place, so that they receive
regular information on de-risking strategies implemented in Components 1 and 2 and engage with gremios, service
providers and farmers to better understand their needs and opportunities to support the transition towards a more
climate-resilient and low-carbon agriculture. This component includes the following activities:
• Activity 3.1.1. Strengthen gremios capacities to use digitally enabled tools that improve the provision of
services to farmers with emphasis on profitable production system that also reduce GHG emissions and
increase climate-resilience.This activity supports gremios efforts to enhance their extension and knowledge
transfer functions by using, inter alia, digital tools to increase the understanding and provide more appropriate
response to farmers deman ds while strengthening processes of allocation of resources to provide services
to farmers. These activities are conceptually aligned with an innovation systems approach. This will include:
i) Assessment of gremios capabilities and needs, as well as, opportunities to better-inform their allocation of
resources (human, financial) to respond to farmers demands and help them to manage climate to their
advantage; ii) Co-design of implementation plans for gremios to the decision-making processes to cost-
effectively enhance their provision of climate-related services to farmers; iii) Co-develop feedback loop
mechanisms to provide information to the gremios to inform allocation of resources/efforts (human, financial)
for climate-related services provision to farmers.
• Activity 3.1.2. Implement inclusive climate-resilient and low-carbon business models for agricultural products
and services. Investment by gremios and farmers in low carbon and climate resilient options is expected to
reward farmers with tangible benefits, therefore, market opportunities will need to be assessed so that farmers

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 75
BB
can explore alternatives to increase their supply, enter specialized markets, increase revenue due to due to
increased added value, among others. This activity will provide technical support and facilitate producer-
buyer-consumer to explore these alternatives. This activity includes a gender-sensitive analysis of the value
chains and definition of sectoral strategies with a focus on low carbon and climate resilient activities, in
addition to the co-design and validation of business models, including: i) Systematization of the results
generated by the components of the project on digital agriculture, climate-smart and low-carbon practices to
guide its inclusion into business models; ii) Coordinate producers, gremios, buyers and other actors in the
value chains, to prioritize opportunities for improvement, as well as address barriers that limit the escalation
of climate resilience and low emission practices and the inclusion of women farmers and other vulnerable
groups wherever these have been previously excluded, or the recognition and appropriate valuation of their
contributions; iii) Design of an escalation strategy (with gremios, producers and other actors) that allows the
integration of digital agriculture elements and climate services to the value chains, to increase climate
resilience and mitigate GHG emissions; iv) Implement business models for producers and buyers, to enhance
climate mitigation practices and evaluate market opportunities for differential products; v) Evaluate changes
in the business models of producers and buyers, and identify lessons learned and success factors in scaling
up digital agriculture mechanisms and low-carbon practices in the value chains.
• Activity 3.1.3. Enhance financial sector engagement with farmers and their needs and efforts on climate-
resilience and climate mitigation activities. This will involve fostering the financial sector to develop tailored
financial products that supports gremios and different types of farmers to de-risk agriculture by implementing
climate-resilient and low-emissions options. Furthermore, the financial sector is expected to be a user of
project’s relevant information through digitally enabled tools so as to make better informed financial market
decisions based on the specific conditions in time and space. This will include: i) Implementation of a capacity
building program to raise awareness of financial sector institutions on mid and long-term de-risking
mechanisms that the project will implement throughout its components; ii) Facilitate participation and
involvement of financial institutions in the MTAs; iii) Identify opportunities with financial institutions and
prioritize cases studies to provide technical support for incorporating climate-resilient and low-carbon criteria
to their agricultural financial products.
• Activity 3.1.4. Fostering agri-digital entrepreneurship ecosystems. This activity aims to explore and identify
potential opportunities for creating new ventures and transforming existing businesses by developing new
digital technologies or experimenting with novel digital services to help farmers and others along the supply
chain. This will include: i) Explore and identify potential opportunities for new ventures; ii) support creation of
new ventures and transforming existing businesses by developing new digital technologies.
71. Result 3.2. Modernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services with multi-tool strategies,
differentiated and adapted to specific environmental, social, gender and productive contexts at the national level.
As part of the overall modernization of the services provided by the growers’ associations the technical assistance
and transfer systems will be updated. The renovated and up-to-date systems will be built on the principles of sharing
information from multiple sources compiled and analyzed in digitally enabled tools and made available to farmers
in interactive formats which will facilitate group discussions on the available options. This will result in farmers aware
of options for improved management of their crops with emphasis on profitability, efficient use of resources and
reduced GHG emissions. As a result of this component, more than 60 sector entities and more than 2,200
technicians (producer associations, sector entities, private sector and students) will be trained in climate change
resilience and mitigation (besides the 2,200 individuals trained under Component 1). The scope in this component
refers to the increase in the capacities of producers, professionals, institutions and other actors of the productive
chains considered in the Project. Strengthening knowledge, encouraging changes in people’s attitudes towards
technologies or processes, and developing new skills are required to bring about a change in capacities and to
ensure that beneficiaries make routine and sustainable changes to their practices. This component also considers
using various communication means and defining appropriate language, materials and messages for different types
of audiences. This includes the following activities:
• Activity 3.2.1. Foster inclusion of two-way digitally enabled tools for enhancing models for technology transfer
technical assistance within an innovations system approach. Updating and implementing strategies to
transfer producer associations’ technologies and extension services, as well as plans to link producers,
organizations and other actors for the project sectors including: i) Linking plans directed by Agrosavia, for
Musaceae , potato and panela cane; HUB innovation model applied by CIMMYT for maize; Knowledge
Management Model in Sustainable Livestock by Fedegan; Dissemination campaigns of the National
Extension Service of the National Federation of Coffee Growers; AMTEC mass adoption model in rice; The
technical cooperation and technology transfer service (SCTT) with the network of Technology Transfer
Groups (GTT) in sugarcane; Rural School Methodology (ECAS) by Asohofrucol - Musaseas; ii) Exchange of
experiences; iii) Use of voice (IVR) and text (SMS) messaging, WhatsApp networks and chatbot; iv) Producer
association digital platforms or available mobile applications.

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 75
BB
• Activity 3.2.2. Capability development on innovation systems approach and its inclusion into updated
technology transfer plans. Standardizing of languages and concepts use for collective knowledge
construction and socialization, including: i) Organizing events to disseminate the project and its content; ii)
Holding general training events by Result; iii) Work meetings; iv) Written, printed and digital material; v)
Videos with project themes; vi) Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups.
• Activity 3.2.3. Strengthen gremios and farmers capacities on climate adaptation and mitigation and nurture
knowledge exchanges across farmers groups. Strengthening the capacities of beneficiaries regarding climate
resilience, conducting analyses of the agricultural sector’s chains and business models, accompanied by an
internal and external communication plan. This includes: i) Specific workshops by topic; ii) Operation planning
meetings; iii) Workshops to create procedures, carry out experiments and analyze results jointly; iv) Three
Communities of Practice on Digital Agriculture and Data Analysis, Climate Forecasts, and Communication
and Outreach; v) Open training courses on specific topics on virtual education platforms; vi) Strengthening
academic programs, thesis and internships.
72. Activity 3.2.4. Develop a strategy that allows dissemination, access and use of project results by key public and
private stakeholders. This includes: i) Holding management meetings together with national institutions; ii)
Preparing executive reports for producer associations on the progress and needs to support service sustainability;
iii) Promoting communication through traditional and digital media, social networks, project website; iv) Developing
infographics on the Project Identify.
73. Several producer associations and AGROSAVIA have clear and validated strategies for their extension services
and technology transfer. It is expected that by the end of the Project, the collaboration between all the producer
associations will have strengthened and modernized these services. Analysis at the production chain level and the
identification and implementation of business models with a view to promoting technology adoption and supporting
the development of differentiated products are also considered. This component will be co-led by CIAT- Bioversity
Alliance teams of Sustainable finance, Inclusive Business Models, and Knowledge Management, which will
coordinate implementation with the producer associations’ and AGROSAVIA’s teams.
74. Selection of beneficiary producers. The producers participating in the project will be selected in coordination with
the gremios based on the vulnerability of each municipality and adaptation needs, as well as other characteristics.
The selection process will follow the requirements that the MADR usually determines in the different programs that
are developed with public resources. A procedure and schedule will be established for an open call to those
interested in participating in the project, holding workshops to publicize the Project, presenting its scope and other
relevant information, as well as the procedures and requirements requested and the means of receiving requests.
The calls will be socialized with gremios, technicians, local institutions and community leaders from the project
intervention areas. During the reception of requests from interested producers, it will be verified that they meet the
minimum requirements to participate in the project (e.g., at least 20% of their land in production of the crop from
which they wish to receive project support). Once the producers have been selected, they must sign an act of
commitment with the MADR to actively participate in the training provided by the project, to make use and
application of technology, and to meet other requirements to ensure their participation in the project. For the
business model activities (3.1.2, 3.1.3 and 3.1.4) that are focused on other actors along the value chains, the same
procedures will be followed. See Appendix 3 in Annex 2 for further details on the selection of beneficiary producers
and its procedures and specific requirements following the policies and guidelines from the MADR.
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
75. The Government of Colombia through the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (MHCP) will be responsible for the
reception of project resources, both credit and grant resources from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) as well as CAF
financing resources9. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR) will be responsible for
executing the project resources and technical implementation through its Direction of Innovation, Technological
Development and Health Protection. In this case, the CSICAP Project is presented as a national initiative under
the leadership of MADR which, based on the good results and development of the 2012-2015 pilot experience,
considers replicating a similar framework for the implementation of the Project. The Government of Colombia will
take loans from both GCF and CAF and will provide grants to the beneficiaries (gremios) given the public goods
nature of the interventions (seeFigure G.3.1. for the flow of funds of the project). The MADR is the Executing Entity
(EE). The MADR will be responsible for the project financial execution and implementation before MHCP and CAF.
CAF and the Government of Co lombia, through MHCP and MADR, will enter a Subsidiary Agreement for the use
of GCF funds. MADR will carry out direct contracting with the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT)10
9 The MHCP will set up two separate accounts, one for loan resources and another for the grant resources. From these accounts MHCP will
disburse to the MADR, as EE, according to the requirements of the project.
10 The review of CIAT capacities by CAF shows that: i) it is an international non-profit organization with legal status, (ii) it is committed to
complying with local laws in all countries where it operates, (iii) its Audit, Finance and Risk Committee - AFRC - receives periodic updates on
any risk materialization. Once the different documents were reviewed, it was concluded that CIAT has all the administrative, organizational,
financial capacity, and technical to support the implementation of the CSICAP project.

--- Table 1 on Page 29 ---
• Activity 3.2.2. Capability development on innovation systems approach and its inclusion into updated
technology transfer plans. Standardizing of languages and concepts use for collective knowledge
construction and socialization, including: i) Organizing events to disseminate the project and its content; ii)
Holding general training events by Result; iii) Work meetings; iv) Written, printed and digital material; v)
Videos with project themes; vi) Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups.
• Activity 3.2.3. Strengthen gremios and farmers capacities on climate adaptation and mitigation and nurture
knowledge exchanges across farmers groups. Strengthening the capacities of beneficiaries regarding climate
resilience, conducting analyses of the agricultural sector’s chains and business models, accompanied by an
internal and external communication plan. This includes: i) Specific workshops by topic; ii) Operation planning
meetings; iii) Workshops to create procedures, carry out experiments and analyze results jointly; iv) Three
Communities of Practice on Digital Agriculture and Data Analysis, Climate Forecasts, and Communication
and Outreach; v) Open training courses on specific topics on virtual education platforms; vi) Strengthening
academic programs, thesis and internships.
72. Activity 3.2.4. Develop a strategy that allows dissemination, access and use of project results by key public and
private stakeholders. This includes: i) Holding management meetings together with national institutions; ii)
Preparing executive reports for producer associations on the progress and needs to support service sustainability;
iii) Promoting communication through traditional and digital media, social networks, project website; iv) Developing
infographics on the Project Identify.
73. Several producer associations and AGROSAVIA have clear and validated strategies for their extension services
and technology transfer. It is expected that by the end of the Project, the collaboration between all the producer
associations will have strengthened and modernized these services. Analysis at the production chain level and the
identification and implementation of business models with a view to promoting technology adoption and supporting
the development of differentiated products are also considered. This component will be co-led by CIAT- Bioversity
Alliance teams of Sustainable finance, Inclusive Business Models, and Knowledge Management, which will
coordinate implementation with the producer associations’ and AGROSAVIA’s teams.
74. Selection of beneficiary producers. The producers participating in the project will be selected in coordination with
the gremios based on the vulnerability of each municipality and adaptation needs, as well as other characteristics.
The selection process will follow the requirements that the MADR usually determines in the different programs that
are developed with public resources. A procedure and schedule will be established for an open call to those
interested in participating in the project, holding workshops to publicize the Project, presenting its scope and other
relevant information, as well as the procedures and requirements requested and the means of receiving requests.
The calls will be socialized with gremios, technicians, local institutions and community leaders from the project
intervention areas. During the reception of requests from interested producers, it will be verified that they meet the
minimum requirements to participate in the project (e.g., at least 20% of their land in production of the crop from
which they wish to receive project support). Once the producers have been selected, they must sign an act of
commitment with the MADR to actively participate in the training provided by the project, to make use and
application of technology, and to meet other requirements to ensure their participation in the project. For the
business model activities (3.1.2, 3.1.3 and 3.1.4) that are focused on other actors along the value chains, the same
procedures will be followed. See Appendix 3 in Annex 2 for further details on the selection of beneficiary producers
and its procedures and specific requirements following the policies and guidelines from the MADR. |  | 
 | B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) | 
75. The Government of Colombia through the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (MHCP) will be responsible for the
reception of project resources, both credit and grant resources from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) as well as CAF
financing resources9. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR) will be responsible for
executing the project resources and technical implementation through its Direction of Innovation, Technological
Development and Health Protection. In this case, the CSICAP Project is presented as a national initiative under
the leadership of MADR which, based on the good results and development of the 2012-2015 pilot experience,
considers replicating a similar framework for the implementation of the Project. The Government of Colombia will
take loans from both GCF and CAF and will provide grants to the beneficiaries (gremios) given the public goods
nature of the interventions (seeFigure G.3.1. for the flow of funds of the project). The MADR is the Executing Entity
(EE). The MADR will be responsible for the project financial execution and implementation before MHCP and CAF.
CAF and the Government of Co lombia, through MHCP and MADR, will enter a Subsidiary Agreement for the use
of GCF funds. MADR will carry out direct contracting with the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT)10 |  | 

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 75
BB
under the Colombian legal framework called the Technical and Scientific Cooperation Agreement.11 The
Government of Colombia, acting through MADR, will retain the final approval authority over any matter/decision
adopted by the project cooperation team/any other governance bodies or units. MADR will have the support in the
operation of the Project from the Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT and the producer associations;
following the regulations and frameworks defined and allowed by Colombian legislation. These arrangements will
be reflected in the agreement signed between the MADR and CIAT. In addition, CIAT will develop a model
agreement to be approved by the MADR that will be signed with each of the gremios, including the details of the
activities, the co-financing provided by each gremio and commitments acquired at the end of the project for its
continuity. At the beneficiary level, and once producers have been selected, they will sign an act of commitment
with the MADR to actively participate in the project activities.
76. CIAT, as procured party, will form a Project Coordination Team (PCT) that will be directly responsible for interacting
with the Project Executing Unit (PEU) within MADR and responding to its technical and administrative requirements.
The project coordination team (PCT) will consist of (1) project leader, (2) a technical associate, (3) a research
assistant, (4) a project analyst, (5) a logistics assistant, and (6) two emeritus advisors on technical issues related
to climate and agriculture. This team will be responsible for implementing the project and, will guide the six theme
leaders and eight crop coordinators. The team will work with the relevant areas of MADR, CIAT, the strategic
partners, and any other institution, firm, or person contracted to provide a service or supply a good.
77. This team will be responsible for the project’s institutional relations, led by the project leader, and therefore must
respond to MADR, who will ensure the proper execution of the project and the adequate use of resources. The
team will be responsible for preparing the technical reports and submitting to MADR and preparing the financial
report. CIAT, as main procured party, will operate from its hub in the city of Palmira, Valle del Cauca. The whole
team of the Project Executing Unit (PEU) will be covered by project resources. The interaction between MADR and
CIAT will be carried out through the PEU (MADR) and the PCT (CIAT).
Figure B.4.1. Framework for engagement and interaction between MADR, as EE, and the main procured party
78. The Project Coordinating Team (PCT) will have main theme coordinators and cross-cutting theme leaders. The
project will have a group of six theme leaders, comprised of CIAT staff based in the city of Palmira, Valle del Cauca.
These are experts with PhDs and renowned experts with at least 10 publications. These leaders will be responsible
for implementing the activities of each of the project components. Each will have a budget subject to the project
financial plan and procurement plan approved by the executing unit. Each leader is responsible for implementing
the activities of each component and ensuring the achievement of their respective outputs and goals.
• Main theme leader 1. Agro-climatic Forecasting and Digital Agriculture Coordinator.
• Main theme leader 2. Water Efficient Use and Low Emission Technologies Coordinator.
• Main theme leader 3. Genebank Improvement and Strengthening Technologies Coordinator.
• Cross-cutting theme leader 1. Knowledge Management and Capacity Building Coordinator.
• Cross-cutting theme leader 2. Environmental, Social and Gender Affairs Coordinator.
11 The direct contracting of CIAT will be carried out based on the Colombian national regulations as established in literal (e) numeral 4 of
article 2 of Law 1150 of 2007 and by mea ns of which the measures for efficiency and transparency are established in the Law 80 of 1993 and
where the general provisions on contracting with public resources are dictated. As well as in accordance with article 2.2.1.2.1.4.7 of Decree
1082 of 2015, articles 2 and 17 of Decree - Law 591 of 1991, article 33 of Law 1286 of 2009.

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 75
BB
• Cross-cutting theme leader 3. Impact Assessment Coordinator.
79. The project will also have eight (8) crop coordinators, one for each crop. These coordinators are renowned
experts in each of the crops, with PhD degrees and with at least 10 publications in the crop to be led, in indexed
international journals. These professionals will be responsible for integrating each of the topics within each crop in
order to achieve coherence, efficiency and coordination in the implementation processes. These coordinators will
be responsible for giving direction and making proposals for improvement, adjustments or coordination activities
as needed, which should be covered by the resources managed by the main and cross-cutting theme leaders, as
appropriate, given that they will not have a budget allocated for costs other than the cost of their time dedicated to
the project. This team will consist of staff from CIAT (livestock, rice, musaceae), CIMMYT (maize), Agrosavia
(panela cane and potato), Cenicafe (coffee), and Cenicaña (sugarcane). CIAT and CIMMYT staff will be based in
the city of Palmira, Valle del Cauca; Agrosavia in Bogotá at the Tibaitatá headquarters; Cenicafe in Chinchiná
(Caldas); and Cenicaña in the municipality of Candelaria, Valle del Cauca. Figure B.4.2 shows the structure of
CIAT´s work team.
Figure B.4.2. Organigram of the main procured party (CIAT)
80. Strategic partners. The project will have thirteen (13) strategic partners for project implementation, of which
there are ten (10) gremios and three (3) research institutions. For the execution of the CSICAP Project, CIAT will
work in coordination with the following 10 gremios: Fedearroz (rice), Fenalce (maize), Fedegan (livestock),
Fedepanela (panela cane), Fedepapa (potato), Federación Nacional de Cafeteros - Cenicafe (coffee), Asocaña -
Cenicaña (sugarcane), Augura, Asbama, and Aohofrucol (musaceae). Additionally, there are three (3) research
institutions as part of the strategic implementing partners: the Colombian Agricultural Research Corporation
(Agrosavia), the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) and the Center for Research on
Sustainable Agricultural Production Systems (CIPAV) of Colombia (see Figure B.4.3). These strategic partners will
have a role in the implementation of project activities and therefore will be assigned a budget that will be subject to
outputs and deliverables. The importance of these partners lies in the fact that they are the institutions that will be
responsible for the continuity and sustainability of the project actions once the project is completed.
81. These strategic partners are national institutions with presence in the different producing regions of each crop, with
a high level of recognition and outreach to producers and a high level of technical knowledge of the production
systems prioritized in the project. They are entities with financial capacity that will assume part of the costs of project
implementation through the use of public funds assigned to them (“fondos parafiscales”).

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 75
BB
Figure B.4.3. Framework for working with strategic partners
82. Project supervision structure. Two bodies will be formed to supervise the project technical and financial
execution, the Monitoring Committee and the Steering Committee. The following is the governance structure, its
conformation and functions of the different instances.
Figure B.4.4. Project governance structure
83. Monitoring Committee. The Monitoring Committee will be in charge of approving the progress on technical
execution, progress on financial execution, approving compliance with results, making recommendations,
observations and/or requesting adjustments. The Committee will have annual meetings. The Committee will be
comprised of representatives of MADR (2 delegates: Vice Minister of Agricultural Affairs or his delegate and Director
of Innovation, Technological Development and Sanitary Protection), CAF (1 delegate: country representative or his
designee), DNP (2 delegates: Director of Sustainable Rural Development and Director of Environment and
Sustainable Development), and MINHACIENDA (one delegate). Invited actors include MADS (Director of Climate
Change), IDEAM (Director) and others upon approval of the monitoring committee.
84. Steering Committee. Its functions are to review the annual operating plan, provide strategic guidance to the
project, make recommendations on actions and initiatives to achieve synergies with other projects, programs and
policies, identify and recommend strategic partnerships to assist in scaling up project actions, review progress
reports on technical execution, financial execution, and compliance with results to be presented to the monitoring
committee. The Committee will meet every six months. The Steering Committee will be made up of representatives
of MADR (2 delegates: Director of Innovation, Technological Development and Health Protection or his delegate
and the project coordinator), DNP (2 delegates: the delegate of the Sustainable Rural Development Direction Office
and the delegate of the Environment and Sustainable Development Direction Office or his delegate) and the
Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT (1 delegate: project leader).
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)

--- Table 1 on Page 32 ---
Figure B.4.3. Framework for working with strategic partners
82. Project supervision structure. Two bodies will be formed to supervise the project technical and financial
execution, the Monitoring Committee and the Steering Committee. The following is the governance structure, its
conformation and functions of the different instances.
Figure B.4.4. Project governance structure
83. Monitoring Committee. The Monitoring Committee will be in charge of approving the progress on technical
execution, progress on financial execution, approving compliance with results, making recommendations,
observations and/or requesting adjustments. The Committee will have annual meetings. The Committee will be
comprised of representatives of MADR (2 delegates: Vice Minister of Agricultural Affairs or his delegate and Director
of Innovation, Technological Development and Sanitary Protection), CAF (1 delegate: country representative or his
designee), DNP (2 delegates: Director of Sustainable Rural Development and Director of Environment and
Sustainable Development), and MINHACIENDA (one delegate). Invited actors include MADS (Director of Climate
Change), IDEAM (Director) and others upon approval of the monitoring committee.
84. Steering Committee. Its functions are to review the annual operating plan, provide strategic guidance to the
project, make recommendations on actions and initiatives to achieve synergies with other projects, programs and
policies, identify and recommend strategic partnerships to assist in scaling up project actions, review progress
reports on technical execution, financial execution, and compliance with results to be presented to the monitoring
committee. The Committee will meet every six months. The Steering Committee will be made up of representatives
of MADR (2 delegates: Director of Innovation, Technological Development and Health Protection or his delegate
and the project coordinator), DNP (2 delegates: the delegate of the Sustainable Rural Development Direction Office
and the delegate of the Environment and Sustainable Development Direction Office or his delegate) and the
Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT (1 delegate: project leader). |  | 
 | B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) | 

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 75
BB
85. GCF Fund Justification. Given the high uncertainty and vulnerability to unexpected weather events, agricultural
investments are risky. The GCF investment will help increase the adaptive capacity of farmers and ranchers and
support the adoption of new agricultural technologies and practices to make them more resilient to climate change,
while supporting GHG emissions reductions. Colombia has suffered the consequences of climatic events that have
affected important agricultural regions of Colombia, causing significant monetary losses. Given that Colombia plans
to improve a large part of the agricultural infrastructure, productivity and competitiveness, it is necessary to improve
the design and technical approach of agriculture and livestock, so that new or rehabilitated fields / crops last longer;
and for farmers and ranchers to avoid and prepare for climatic events. However, the nature of the investments
required are of a public nature, for which domestic markets and the private sector do not play an important role. On
the other hand, the capital markets in Colombia are not ready yet to assume the risks of new technologies or
developments in new places. This is why the GCF plays a critical role in reducing risk to manageable levels and,
furthermore, in making the technologies developed by the project more widespread as they are adopted on a larger
scale.
86. Although the pilot experiences show very high returns on investments in CSICAP technologies (see Annex 23 for
the ex-post evaluation of the pilots), there is a large gap in Colombia for these technological options to be adopted
at scale, and become the norm. Although the farmer groups see the advantages in these investments, they do not
have the financial capacity to generate the technologies required to improve resilience and reduce the carbon
footprint, so they need support from the public sector to make these public goods investments. Most of the reasons
are related to the associated risks and the lack of institutional capacity to mobilize farmers for the adoption of
technologies and practices, both areas where the participation of the GCF can help to change the current paradigm.
The project, through its activities, seeks to reduce these associated risks in terms of the adoption of climate-resilient
and low-carbon technologies and practices.
87. It is important to note that and in the economic recovery strategy of the Government of Colombia post-COVID 19,
investments are being promoted to be resilient and low in carbon, a bet that the Government is making after the
signing of the peace accords in 2016.
88. Justification of financial instruments. The proposed financial instruments (loans and grants) were selected for
each of the components and activities according to the nature of the investments (whether they are public or private
goods), and the financing and co-financing capacity, both of the public sector and from the private sector (e.g.,
agricultural producer organizations). In this case, there is a balance between loans and grants for each of the
components, both GCF funds and CAF loan resources. The Government of Colombia, through the decision to take
senior loans for these investments in these public goods (USD 25 million from the GCF and USD 10.3 million from
the CAF), shows the level of commitment it has with this Project. Furthermore, the mix of loans and grants is justified
in the sensitivity analysis included in the Economic and Financial Analysis (Annex 3).
89. Justification of the level of concessionality. GCF offers a unique opportunity for blending low interest loans and
grants, reducing the financial cost of the project, and representing a specialized source of climate financing. The
project is structured in such a way that there is a minimum of concessionality to make the investments in the
proposed activities possible with the participation of the private sector and the public sector. As shown in the
Economic and Financial analysis (Annex 3), the reduction in the concessionality would make the project not viable.
When reducing the grant amount by only a third, would make the project non-viable for certain gremios (i.e. livestock
and sugar cane). At reduced levels of grants (75% reductionthe project is not viable for the majority of the gremios.
There are no commercial financing sources available in Colombia for the type of investments (gene banks and
seed improvement, big data, GHG emission measurement, etc.) considered by the project. That is, reimbursable
instruments to the producers (instead of grants) are not viable because these kinds of investments are usually not
financed to farmers. Also, around 10 percent of total project costs go to public infrastructure that do not have direct
revenue generation potential. Without GCF and CAF support, the government would need to look for another
unlikely available similar sources of funding. The concessionality in this case mainly benefits the producer
associations, which in turn are willing to provide co-financing so that the project's objectives are met. About a third
of the project are loans that the Government of Colombia is taking from the GCF (USD 25 million) and CAF (USD
10.3 million), as these are mainly investments in public goods. There is a total of USD 16.5 million of direct co-
financing from the farmer groups and CIAT, which represents about 17 percent of the total amount of the project.
The rest, approximately 48,3 percent of the total project budget is grants. In this case, the grants will benefit direct
activities with direct beneficiaries in the different production chains. The level of concessionality of the GCF
instruments is the minimum required to make the investments viable, with the proposed structure adjusted to the
minimum concessionality required for the project to be viable. Please refer to the detailed sensitivity analysis in
Annex 3 for different levels of concessionality and project viability.
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

--- Table 1 on Page 33 ---
85. GCF Fund Justification. Given the high uncertainty and vulnerability to unexpected weather events, agricultural
investments are risky. The GCF investment will help increase the adaptive capacity of farmers and ranchers and
support the adoption of new agricultural technologies and practices to make them more resilient to climate change,
while supporting GHG emissions reductions. Colombia has suffered the consequences of climatic events that have
affected important agricultural regions of Colombia, causing significant monetary losses. Given that Colombia plans
to improve a large part of the agricultural infrastructure, productivity and competitiveness, it is necessary to improve
the design and technical approach of agriculture and livestock, so that new or rehabilitated fields / crops last longer;
and for farmers and ranchers to avoid and prepare for climatic events. However, the nature of the investments
required are of a public nature, for which domestic markets and the private sector do not play an important role. On
the other hand, the capital markets in Colombia are not ready yet to assume the risks of new technologies or
developments in new places. This is why the GCF plays a critical role in reducing risk to manageable levels and,
furthermore, in making the technologies developed by the project more widespread as they are adopted on a larger
scale.
86. Although the pilot experiences show very high returns on investments in CSICAP technologies (see Annex 23 for
the ex-post evaluation of the pilots), there is a large gap in Colombia for these technological options to be adopted
at scale, and become the norm. Although the farmer groups see the advantages in these investments, they do not
have the financial capacity to generate the technologies required to improve resilience and reduce the carbon
footprint, so they need support from the public sector to make these public goods investments. Most of the reasons
are related to the associated risks and the lack of institutional capacity to mobilize farmers for the adoption of
technologies and practices, both areas where the participation of the GCF can help to change the current paradigm.
The project, through its activities, seeks to reduce these associated risks in terms of the adoption of climate-resilient
and low-carbon technologies and practices.
87. It is important to note that and in the economic recovery strategy of the Government of Colombia post-COVID 19,
investments are being promoted to be resilient and low in carbon, a bet that the Government is making after the
signing of the peace accords in 2016.
88. Justification of financial instruments. The proposed financial instruments (loans and grants) were selected for
each of the components and activities according to the nature of the investments (whether they are public or private
goods), and the financing and co-financing capacity, both of the public sector and from the private sector (e.g.,
agricultural producer organizations). In this case, there is a balance between loans and grants for each of the
components, both GCF funds and CAF loan resources. The Government of Colombia, through the decision to take
senior loans for these investments in these public goods (USD 25 million from the GCF and USD 10.3 million from
the CAF), shows the level of commitment it has with this Project. Furthermore, the mix of loans and grants is justified
in the sensitivity analysis included in the Economic and Financial Analysis (Annex 3).
89. Justification of the level of concessionality. GCF offers a unique opportunity for blending low interest loans and
grants, reducing the financial cost of the project, and representing a specialized source of climate financing. The
project is structured in such a way that there is a minimum of concessionality to make the investments in the
proposed activities possible with the participation of the private sector and the public sector. As shown in the
Economic and Financial analysis (Annex 3), the reduction in the concessionality would make the project not viable.
When reducing the grant amount by only a third, would make the project non-viable for certain gremios (i.e. livestock
and sugar cane). At reduced levels of grants (75% reductionthe project is not viable for the majority of the gremios.
There are no commercial financing sources available in Colombia for the type of investments (gene banks and
seed improvement, big data, GHG emission measurement, etc.) considered by the project. That is, reimbursable
instruments to the producers (instead of grants) are not viable because these kinds of investments are usually not
financed to farmers. Also, around 10 percent of total project costs go to public infrastructure that do not have direct
revenue generation potential. Without GCF and CAF support, the government would need to look for another
unlikely available similar sources of funding. The concessionality in this case mainly benefits the producer
associations, which in turn are willing to provide co-financing so that the project's objectives are met. About a third
of the project are loans that the Government of Colombia is taking from the GCF (USD 25 million) and CAF (USD
10.3 million), as these are mainly investments in public goods. There is a total of USD 16.5 million of direct co-
financing from the farmer groups and CIAT, which represents about 17 percent of the total amount of the project.
The rest, approximately 48,3 percent of the total project budget is grants. In this case, the grants will benefit direct
activities with direct beneficiaries in the different production chains. The level of concessionality of the GCF
instruments is the minimum required to make the investments viable, with the proposed structure adjusted to the
minimum concessionality required for the project to be viable. Please refer to the detailed sensitivity analysis in
Annex 3 for different levels of concessionality and project viability. |  | 
 | B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 75
BB
90. CAF has a long history of supporting the Government of Colombia and the agricultural sector for the implementation
of innovative ideas. In this case, the proposed project has been designed in close consultation with the MADR, at
the national, regional and local levels, as well as with the participation of the farmer groups. These consultations
and discussions (detailed in Annex 7), combined with the experience of the pilot project and the technologies tested
in them that are detailed in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2) and evaluated ex-post (Annex 23), provide the project
with a solid approach and a set of interventions that they are implemented with strong participation from farmers'
groups and commitment from local officials. On this basis, the project ensures that investments, as well as the
results of interventions, are sustained beyond the project period and in the long term through the following elements
of project design and implementation.
91. A key innovative feature of the project is the strengthening of the capacities of the gremios, through inclusive and
participatory approaches. The active participation of these groups in each of the productive chains in the project
(Components 1 and 2, and Result 3.1), and the strengthening of agricultural extension systems (Results 1.1 and
3.2), including the active participation of Agrosavia, they represent changes towards the long-term sustainability
and replicability of the adaptation and mitigation measures introduced for each production chain. In the case of
public goods developed by the project (especially in Result 2.1), these will be incorporated into Agrosavia's
extension systems, as well as each of the farmer associations within the project. By internalizing these investments,
Agrosavia will be able to apply those tools and knowledge to other crops beyond the project term. Moreover, the
purposively engagement of key stakeholders beyond the agricultural sector such as the financial institutions will
enable achieving benefits by a wider number of beneficiaries beyond the project’s timeline as a mechanism to keep
de-risking the agricultural sector as tailored-made financial mechanisms are developed and scaled by using
project’s information.
92. The longer-term sustainability of the project's investments will be guaranteed through a combination of elements
and mechanisms that promote the ownership and technical, financial, operational and institutional capacities of the
national government through the MADR and Agrosavia and the farmer groups to maintain and obtain social,
economic, and environmental benefits from the proposed investments. In this case, the joint investments of the
farmer groups will be used for the activities proposed in the installation and operation and maintenance (O&M) of
the proposed solutions (an O&M Plan is described in Annex 25). In this way, the project will promote the
appropriation of the processes that are established and/or strengthened, and will catalyze greater financing from
the private sector through the farmer associations, to maintain and sustain the products and results beyond the
project execution period.
93. The gremios have been an active participant of the project formulation (as described in the Annex 7 of project
consultations). They have participated in the design of the activities, the resources required to implemented them,
the time required and the definition of the role of the different stakeholders. In that sense, the gremios know the
implied investment costs, the O&M of each activity during and after project completion. The current commitment of
the gremios for project implementation is financial (through cofinancing), and after project completion, they will take
control and operation of all the tools, technologies and processes developed under the project. In fact, project
design foresees that the gremios will take gradual control of all the activities for a smooth transition once the project
is completed. This transition will be supported by the instructional strengthening, through local consultants covered
by the project, which will support the gremios and other local institutions after the project is completed. The
knowledge and capacity of this locally trained personnel will strengthen the institutions capacity, ensuring the
sustainability of the project outcomes beyond project completion. Gremios will be responsible of the implementation
of project activities, and they will implement financial resources (loan and grant) from GCF and CAF, under which
they will sign agreements with their own financial resources (cofinancing).
94. At the end of the project, the equipment and infrastructure developed by the project will continue to be in the name
of MADR, but once the project is completed, they will be delivered to the gremios through a contract of bailment
(contrato de comodato) in which the gremios manage the assets and services (including data platforms) but
undertake to give it proper use and assume maintenance costs and responsibility (in compliance with national
regulations. This mechanism has been used in several projects between MADR and the gremios, including the pilot
project. A large part of the success of the pilot project lays in the strengthening of capacities and empowerment of
the gremios (Fedearroz and Fenalce), which continued and expanded the work carried out with them.

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 75
CC
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested GCF funding Total amount Currency
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 73.28 million USD ($)
GCF financial instrument Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
(i) Senior loans 25.00 20 years 5 years 0.75 %
(ii) Subordinated loans Enter amount Enter years Enter years Enter %
Enter % equity
(iii) Equity Enter amount return
(iv) Guarantees Enter amount Enter years
(v) Reimbursable grants Enter amount
(vi) Grants 48.28
(vii) Results-based payments Enter amount
Total amount Currency
(b) Co-financing information
26.63 million USD ($)
Financial Tenor &
Name of institution Amount Currency Pricing Seniority
instrument grace
20 years (Libor + senior
Senior million
CAF 10.30 60 months 1.8)%
Loans USD ($)
grace period
million
CIAT Grant 4.85
USD ($)
Grant million
AGROSAVIA 2.90
USD ($)
Grant million
CIPAV 0.23
USD ($)
Grant million
CIMMYT 0.80
USD ($)
million
FEDEARROZ Grant 1.99
USD ($)
Grant million
FENALCE 1.07
USD ($)
Grant million
FEDEPAPA 1.10
USD ($)
Grant million
FEDEPANELA 0.45
USD ($)
Grant million
FEDEGAN 0.28
USD ($)
ASBAMA/ AUGURA Grant million
1.49
ASOHOFRUCOL USD ($)
Grant million
ASOCAÑA 1.16
USD ($)
Amount Currency
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) 99.91 million USD ($)
Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from
(d) Other financing any type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).
arrangements and
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax
contributions (max. 250
exemptions and contributions of assets.
words, approximately 0.5
page)
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.

--- Table 1 on Page 35 ---
 | FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) Requested GCF funding |  |  |  |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) |  |  |  |  |  | 73.28 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF financial instrument |  |  |  |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  |  | Pricing |  | 
 | (i) |  |  | Senior loans |  | 25.00 |  |  |  |  | 20 years |  |  |  | 5 years |  |  |  |  | 0.75 % |  |  | 
(ii) |  |  | Subordinated loans |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  |  | 
(iii) |  |  | Equity |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Enter % equity
return |  |  | 
(iv) |  |  | Guarantees |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(v) |  |  | Reimbursable grants |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vi) |  |  | Grants |  |  | 48.28 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vii) |  |  | Results-based payments |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(b) Co-financing information |  |  |  |  |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 26.63 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Name of institution |  |  |  |  |  |  | Financial |  | Amount |  |  |  | Currency |  |  | Tenor & |  | Pricing |  |  |  | Seniority | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | grace |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
CAF |  |  |  |  |  | Senior
Loans |  |  | 10.30 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  | 20 years
60 months
grace period |  |  | (Libor +
1.8)% |  |  |  | senior | 
CIAT |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 4.85 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
AGROSAVIA |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 2.90 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
CIPAV |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 0.23 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
CIMMYT |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 0.80 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
FEDEARROZ |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 1.99 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
FENALCE |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 1.07 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
FEDEPAPA |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 1.10 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
FEDEPANELA |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 0.45 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
FEDEGAN |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 0.28 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ASBAMA/ AUGURA |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 1.49 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ASOHOFRUCOL |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
ASOCAÑA |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 1.16 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) |  |  |  |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 99.91 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(d) Other financing
arrangements and
contributions (max. 250
words, approximately 0.5
page) |  |  |  |  |  | Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from
any type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax
exemptions and contributions of assets.
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 35 ---
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b)

--- Table 3 on Page 35 ---
(d) Other financing
arrangements and
contributions (max. 250
words, approximately 0.5
page)

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 75
CC
95. Part of the co-financing of the farmer groups, will be in-kind contributions.
The farmer associations are expected to make investments in equipment,
hire new technicians for the implementation of the program, among other
investments. In the same way, existing personnel, supplies and other in-kind
contributions would also be part of their cofinancing.
96. As an international organization established in Colombia, CIAT has a special
tax-exempt status in that country.
C.2. Financing by component
97. The project is financed with a mix of financing resources from CAF (Development Bank of Latin America), the
Government of Colombia, agricultural research institutions (Alianza Bioversity CIAT, CYMMIT and CIPAV), and the
associations of agricultural producers in Colombia, and resources, both loan and concessional funds (grants) from
the GCF. The financing plan of the Project broken down by source of resources (loan, grant from the GCF and local
counterpart) is presented in the following table. The total project amount is USD 99.91 million, of which USD 73.28
million are GCF funds (USD 25 million in senior loan and USD 48.28 million in grant). CAF contributes to the Project
with a senior loan of USD 10.3 million The co-financing of the institutions and entities involved in the Project such
as the Alliance between Bioversity International and CIAT and the farmer groups is USD 16.3 million.
98. The Government of Colombia has provided space in its budget for funds for the implementation of the project,
through the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR). The Government of Colombia is taking loan
resources with the GCF for USD 25 million for a 20-year term with a 5-year grace period, at a rate of 0.75% and
with the CAF for a total of USD 10.3 million, a 20-year loan, with a 60-month grace period, at an interest rate of
LIBOR + 1.8%. The following table shows the detail by component and product of the GCF financing amounts
(loans and grants), as well as the co-financing of the project. Annex 14 provides details of the loan disbursement
and payment schedule.
99. The summary of the project costs for each of the Components and Products, by type of source (GCF or cofinancing)
and instrument (loan or grant) are presented in the following Table. The detail of the budget is presented in Annex
4 and its execution schedule is presented in Annex 5. In Annex 4, the budget provides the breakdown by type of
expenses. As the CSICAP project will be implemented in 22 departments and 219 municipalities, it requires the
deployment of local consultants and staff to support the implementation of the project activities. Thus, almost 37
percent of the total budget will go into local consultants that include personnel in the field (extension services and
technicians) that will work on the field to provide technical capacity building to local farmers to implement the
technologies (on average, 1.7 people in the field to cover each municipality and support 573 farms). Local staff
(such us scientific advisors and scientists), which represent 19 percent of the budget, will develop the local varieties
and their time dedicated to the project will be tied up to specific products and deliverables that will contribute to the
results and outcomes of the project. International consultants represent 2 percent of the budget. Local consultants
represent more than 90 percent of total personnel, with staff representing 3 percent and international consultants
represent 6 percent; Construction (10%) and equipment (7%) represent 17 percent; services (e.g., field preparation,
equipment installation, lab analysis, publications, etc.) represent 15 percent of total budget. Finally, training (3%)
and travel (7%), this last which is almost entirely local travel for the field work of local consultants and staff, represent
about 10 percent of total costs.
Component Result Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million USD
million USD Instrument million USD Instrument Institutions
($)
($) ($)
1.1. 9.135 Grants 5.230 Grants GOC, AB-
Strengthenin CIAT,
g and Gremios,
1. Digital
modernizing CYMMIT y
agriculture and
the CIPAV
climate services
agricultural
for rural 6.250 Senior Loan 2.575 Senior Loan CAF
extension 23.190
modernization
system with
with an emphasis
an emphasis
on adaptation
on
and mitigation
adaptation
and
mitigation

--- Table 1 on Page 36 ---
 |  | 95. Part of the co-financing of the farmer groups, will be in-kind contributions.
The farmer associations are expected to make investments in equipment,
hire new technicians for the implementation of the program, among other
investments. In the same way, existing personnel, supplies and other in-kind
contributions would also be part of their cofinancing.
96. As an international organization established in Colombia, CIAT has a special
tax-exempt status in that country. | 
 | C.2. Financing by component |  | 
97. The project is financed with a mix of financing resources from CAF (Development Bank of Latin America), the
Government of Colombia, agricultural research institutions (Alianza Bioversity CIAT, CYMMIT and CIPAV), and the
associations of agricultural producers in Colombia, and resources, both loan and concessional funds (grants) from
the GCF. The financing plan of the Project broken down by source of resources (loan, grant from the GCF and local
counterpart) is presented in the following table. The total project amount is USD 99.91 million, of which USD 73.28
million are GCF funds (USD 25 million in senior loan and USD 48.28 million in grant). CAF contributes to the Project
with a senior loan of USD 10.3 million The co-financing of the institutions and entities involved in the Project such
as the Alliance between Bioversity International and CIAT and the farmer groups is USD 16.3 million.
98. The Government of Colombia has provided space in its budget for funds for the implementation of the project,
through the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR). The Government of Colombia is taking loan
resources with the GCF for USD 25 million for a 20-year term with a 5-year grace period, at a rate of 0.75% and
with the CAF for a total of USD 10.3 million, a 20-year loan, with a 60-month grace period, at an interest rate of
LIBOR + 1.8%. The following table shows the detail by component and product of the GCF financing amounts
(loans and grants), as well as the co-financing of the project. Annex 14 provides details of the loan disbursement
and payment schedule.
99. The summary of the project costs for each of the Components and Products, by type of source (GCF or cofinancing)
and instrument (loan or grant) are presented in the following Table. The detail of the budget is presented in Annex
4 and its execution schedule is presented in Annex 5. In Annex 4, the budget provides the breakdown by type of
expenses. As the CSICAP project will be implemented in 22 departments and 219 municipalities, it requires the
deployment of local consultants and staff to support the implementation of the project activities. Thus, almost 37
percent of the total budget will go into local consultants that include personnel in the field (extension services and
technicians) that will work on the field to provide technical capacity building to local farmers to implement the
technologies (on average, 1.7 people in the field to cover each municipality and support 573 farms). Local staff
(such us scientific advisors and scientists), which represent 19 percent of the budget, will develop the local varieties
and their time dedicated to the project will be tied up to specific products and deliverables that will contribute to the
results and outcomes of the project. International consultants represent 2 percent of the budget. Local consultants
represent more than 90 percent of total personnel, with staff representing 3 percent and international consultants
represent 6 percent; Construction (10%) and equipment (7%) represent 17 percent; services (e.g., field preparation,
equipment installation, lab analysis, publications, etc.) represent 15 percent of total budget. Finally, training (3%)
and travel (7%), this last which is almost entirely local travel for the field work of local consultants and staff, represent
about 10 percent of total costs.
Component Result Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million USD
million USD Instrument million USD Instrument Institutions
($)
($) ($)
1.1. 9.135 Grants 5.230 Grants GOC, AB-
Strengthenin CIAT,
g and Gremios,
1. Digital
modernizing CYMMIT y
agriculture and
the CIPAV
climate services
agricultural
for rural 6.250 Senior Loan 2.575 Senior Loan CAF
extension 23.190
modernization
system with
with an emphasis
an emphasis
on adaptation
on
and mitigation
adaptation
and
mitigation |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 36 ---
Component | Result | Indicative
cost
million USD
($) |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Financial |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Name of
Institutions | Name of | 
 |  |  |  | million USD |  |  | Instrument |  |  | million USD |  |  |  | Institutions | 
 |  |  |  | ($) |  |  |  |  |  | ($) |  |  |  |  | 
1. Digital
agriculture and
climate services
for rural
modernization
with an emphasis
on adaptation
and mitigation | 1.1.
Strengthenin
g and
modernizing
the
agricultural
extension
system with
an emphasis
on
adaptation
and
mitigation | 23.190 | 9.135 |  |  | Grants |  |  | 5.230 |  |  | Grants | GOC, AB-
CIAT,
Gremios,
CYMMIT y
CIPAV |  | 
 |  |  | 6.250 |  |  | Senior Loan |  |  | 2.575 |  |  | Senior Loan | CAF |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 36 ---
Indicative
cost
million USD
($)

--- Table 4 on Page 36 ---
Financial
Instrument

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 75
CC
1.2 4.410 Grants 3.190 Grants GOC, AB-
Agroclimatic CIAT,
services in Gremios,
16.425
place and/ or CYMMIT y
strengthened CIPAV
6.250 Senior Loan 2.575 Senior Loan CAF
2.1. 10.345 Grants 4.008 Grants GOC, AB-
Strengthenin CIAT,
g the Gremios,
germplasm CYMMIT y
bank, new CIPAV
climate
6.250 Senior Loan 2.575 Senior Loan CAF
resilient 23.178
varieties
developed
2. Genetic
and their
improvement,
seeds
crop
massively
management
distributed
techniques and
2.2. More 14.517 Grants 2.494 Grants GOC, AB-
other
efficient use CIAT,
technological
of water Gremios,
options and their
resources, CYMMIT y
scaling-up to
restoring soil CIPAV
increase climate
properties,
resilience and 6.250 Senior Loan 1.586 Senior Loan CAF
and
promote low-
improving
carbon
GHG
agricultural
mitigation 24.848
development
practices by
farmers and
gremios
through the
adoption of
new climate
smart
practices and
technologies
3.1. 2.279 Grants 0.872 Grants GOC, AB-
Improved CIAT,
business Gremios,
models that CYMMIT y
provide CIPAV
farmers with
3.152 0.00 Senior Loan 0.00 Senior Loan CAF
reasonable
3. Innovative and
profits and
inclusive
improved
business models
GHG
through
mitigation
modernized
practices
innovation
systems and a 3.2. 4.890 Grants 0.530 Grants GOC, AB-
more engaged Modernized CIAT,
financial sector technical Gremios,
assistance CYMMIT y
and CIPAV
5.420
agricultural
0.00 Senior Loan 0.000 Senior Loan CAF
extension
services with
multi-tool
strategies,

--- Table 1 on Page 37 ---
 |  | 1.2
Agroclimatic
services in
place and/ or
strengthened | 16.425 | 4.410 | Grants | 3.190 | Grants | GOC, AB-
CIAT,
Gremios,
CYMMIT y
CIPAV | 
 |  |  |  | 6.250 | Senior Loan | 2.575 | Senior Loan | CAF | 
 | 2. Genetic
improvement,
crop
management
techniques and
other
technological
options and their
scaling-up to
increase climate
resilience and
promote low-
carbon
agricultural
development | 2.1.
Strengthenin
g the
germplasm
bank, new
climate
resilient
varieties
developed
and their
seeds
massively
distributed | 23.178 | 10.345 | Grants | 4.008 | Grants | GOC, AB-
CIAT,
Gremios,
CYMMIT y
CIPAV | 
 |  |  |  | 6.250 | Senior Loan | 2.575 | Senior Loan | CAF | 
 |  | 2.2. More
efficient use
of water
resources,
restoring soil
properties,
and
improving
GHG
mitigation
practices by
farmers and
gremios
through the
adoption of
new climate
smart
practices and
technologies | 24.848 | 14.517 | Grants | 2.494 | Grants | GOC, AB-
CIAT,
Gremios,
CYMMIT y
CIPAV | 
 |  |  |  | 6.250 | Senior Loan | 1.586 | Senior Loan | CAF | 
 | 3. Innovative and
inclusive
business models
through
modernized
innovation
systems and a
more engaged
financial sector | 3.1.
Improved
business
models that
provide
farmers with
reasonable
profits and
improved
GHG
mitigation
practices | 3.152 | 2.279 | Grants | 0.872 | Grants | GOC, AB-
CIAT,
Gremios,
CYMMIT y
CIPAV | 
 |  |  |  | 0.00 | Senior Loan | 0.00 | Senior Loan | CAF | 
 |  | 3.2.
Modernized
technical
assistance
and
agricultural
extension
services with
multi-tool
strategies, | 5.420 | 4.890 | Grants | 0.530 | Grants | GOC, AB-
CIAT,
Gremios,
CYMMIT y
CIPAV | 
 |  |  |  | 0.00 | Senior Loan | 0.000 | Senior Loan | CAF | 

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 75
CC
differentiated
and adapted
to specific
environment
al, social,
gender and
productive
contexts at
the national
level
Project 2.704 Grants 0.00 Grants GOC, AB-
Management CIAT,
Cost Gremios,
3.693
CYMMIT y
CIPAV
0.00 Senior Loan 0.988 Senior Loan CAF
Indicative total cost (USD) 73.283 26.627
99.910 25.000 Senior Loans 10.300 Senior Loans
48.283 Grants 16.327 Grants
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? Yes ☒ No
☐
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? Yes ☒ No
☐
100. One of the pillars of the project and areas of major focus of the CSICAP project is financing the development
and transfer of technology. Under Component 1, Product 1.2 of "Information services to reduce agroclimatic risk"
guaranteeing technical support in the implementation of adaptation and mitigation measures to about 123,000 of
these producers. Under Component 2, the generation (Result 2.1) and the transfer of technologies and sustainable
management practices in agriculture and livestock (Result 2.2) will be financed, which will be formulated and
implemented on a large scale; at least 30 new technologies will be developed, validated and implemented and 70
existing ones will be scaled up. The total amount of GCF funds for technology development and transfer is 64.02
million, of which USD 25.17 million correspond to Component 1 and USD 33.08 million to Component 2.
101. With regard to training, the project under Component 1, Result 1.1 "Strengthening and modernization of the
agricultural extension system aimed at adaptation and mitigation", training and training 2,200 technicians in the
management of extension tools to modernize and expand the coverage of agricultural extension in Colombia. Under
Component 3 of “Innovative and inclusive business models”, the project expects to strengthen capacities in at least
60 entities of the agricultural sector (considering Departmental and Municipal Agriculture Secretaries), 4,400
technicians and reinforcement of training for 54,000 agricultural producers. The training activities under Component
3, for USD 5.76 million.

--- Table 1 on Page 38 ---
 |  | differentiated
and adapted
to specific
environment
al, social,
gender and
productive
contexts at
the national
level |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Project
Management
Cost |  | 3.693 | 2.704 | Grants |  | 0.00 | Grants | GOC, AB-
CIAT,
Gremios,
CYMMIT y
CIPAV | 
 |  |  |  | 0.00 | Senior Loan |  | 0.988 | Senior Loan | CAF | 
 | Indicative total cost (USD) |  | 99.910 | 73.283
25.000 Senior Loans
48.283 Grants |  |  | 26.627
10.300 Senior Loans
16.327 Grants |  |  | 
 | C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? |  |  |  |  |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  |  | 
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? |  |  |  |  |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  |  | 
100. One of the pillars of the project and areas of major focus of the CSICAP project is financing the development
and transfer of technology. Under Component 1, Product 1.2 of "Information services to reduce agroclimatic risk"
guaranteeing technical support in the implementation of adaptation and mitigation measures to about 123,000 of
these producers. Under Component 2, the generation (Result 2.1) and the transfer of technologies and sustainable
management practices in agriculture and livestock (Result 2.2) will be financed, which will be formulated and
implemented on a large scale; at least 30 new technologies will be developed, validated and implemented and 70
existing ones will be scaled up. The total amount of GCF funds for technology development and transfer is 64.02
million, of which USD 25.17 million correspond to Component 1 and USD 33.08 million to Component 2.
101. With regard to training, the project under Component 1, Result 1.1 "Strengthening and modernization of the
agricultural extension system aimed at adaptation and mitigation", training and training 2,200 technicians in the
management of extension tools to modernize and expand the coverage of agricultural extension in Colombia. Under
Component 3 of “Innovative and inclusive business models”, the project expects to strengthen capacities in at least
60 entities of the agricultural sector (considering Departmental and Municipal Agriculture Secretaries), 4,400
technicians and reinforcement of training for 54,000 agricultural producers. The training activities under Component
3, for USD 5.76 million. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 75
DD
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
102. It is estimated that the Project will have positive impacts on more than 619,691 direct beneficiaries (producers
and their families),12 along the different gremios of cattle ranchers and producers of rice, cereals and legumes,
potatoes, coffee, sugar cane and panela cane, bananas and plantains. The direct beneficiaries include producers,
professionals from the farmer associations, and professionals from other entities of the agricultural sector. The
production area associated with these direct beneficiaries and that the project would cover is estimated at 967,997
hectares. The number of indirect beneficiaries is estimated at about 347,996 during the project execution period,13
and more than 500,000 during the useful life of the technologies.14 It is important to note that based on the figures
from the National Agricultural Census of Colombia,15 the direct beneficiaries are equivalent to 7.2 percent of the
total producers at the national level, while the total indirect beneficiaries would be equivalent to 4.1 percent of total
producers. Additionally, a total of 10,000 households are estimated to benefit from increased food security.16 As
previously mentioned, at the geographical level, the project will cover 22 departments (69% of the total departments
in Colombia) and 219 municipalities (20% of the total municipalities in Colombia). Table D.1.1 summarizes the
different beneficiaries (producers, professionals from the farmer associations, and professionals from other entities,
independent and students who will benefit from the Project) under each of the three components.
Table D.1.1. Number of direct beneficiaries by crop and total area (hectares) covered by the project
Component 1. Component 2. New Component 3.
Modernization of technological options Innovative and Total beneficiaries (a)
Agricultural activity
agriculture for to increase resilience inclusive business and hectares
adaptation and low carbon models
Beneficiaries 392,378 56,149 171,164 (b) 619,691
Rice 9,114 5,396 11,101 25,612
Potato 41,623 11,861 46,110 99,594
Sugar cane 1,137 5,247 2,544 8,928
Panela cane 22,260 17,150 38,160 77,570
Dairy farming 25,997 1,526 25,997 53,519
Livestock 25,997 1,526 25,997 53,519
Corn 11,384 12,625 19,080 43,089
Banana 467 817 2,175 3,459
Coffee 254,400 0 0 254,400
Area (hectares) 836,287 131,710 967,997
(a) The total number of beneficiary producers is the sum of Component 1 and 2; a part of these producers is subject to reinforcement in training in
Component 3.
(b) Producers who will be beneficiaries through the strengthening of capacities that were previously attended in component 1 and component 2, for
which they have already been considered in the total of beneficiaries, so as not to generate double counting.
103. Regarding the mitigation potential, the total emissions that the Project would reduce or avoid throughout its life
(25 years) will be 34,878,951 tCO2e, or 1,395,158 per year (Table D.1.2). Most of this emission reduction
corresponds to livestock (48%), panela cane (18%) and bananas (12%). This reduction in emissions is the result
of direct interventions in 8,750 hectares (rice (1,500 ha), corn (900 ha), panela cane (660 ha), potato (600 ha),
livestock (3,840 ha) and banana (1,250 ha)) and reduction of emissions in areas (245,368 ha) resulting from farmers
that only receive trainings and technical assistance as part of the project intervention. On the other hand, it is
expected that the reduction of additional indirect emissions that would be influenced by the project through work
12 The direct beneficiaries were estimated based on the agreements made by the farmer associations and the implementing entities, taking
into account the resources available for th e different activities, as well as expected adoption curves of the technologies based on consultations
with the farmer associations and experts, taking the more conservative figures. The details of the adoption curves for each crop are presented
in the economic analysis (Annex 3). The total number of producers (194,871) were then multiplied by the average rural household size of
3.18 people to obtain the total number of direct beneficiaries. Annex 24 provides further details on these calculations.
13 Indirect beneficiaries during the project period were based on the adoption curves of the different components, which were constructed with
parameters of experts participating in the project and/or secondary literature, and the percentage of producers who would use the technologies
was estimated until the last year of the project. This estimate does not include direct beneficiaries. See Annex 24 for further details.
14 The total indirect beneficiaries were estimated based on the adoption curves of the different technologies until their obsolescence, which in
many cases goes beyond the life of the project. This percentage excludes direct and indirect beneficiaries under the project.
15 According to the 2014 National Agricultural Census, in Colombia there are 2.7 million producers in the field, and of them 725,000 are
resident producers, which is equivalent to 26.7% of the total. Of those, 461,000 are men and 264,000 are women.
16 It is estimated that around 10% of agricultural households (out of a total of 100,000) would benefit from the project.

--- Table 1 on Page 39 ---
 | EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF’s Initial Investment Framework. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 102. It is estimated that the Project will have positive impacts on more than 619,691 direct beneficiaries (producers |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and their families),12 along the different gremios of cattle ranchers and producers of rice, cereals and legumes, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | potatoes, coffee, sugar cane and panela cane, bananas and plantains. The direct beneficiaries include producers, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | professionals from the farmer associations, and professionals from other entities of the agricultural sector. The |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | production area associated with these direct beneficiaries and that the project would cover is estimated at 967,997 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | hectares. The number of indirect beneficiaries is estimated at about 347,996 during the project execution period,13 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and more than 500,000 during the useful life of the technologies.14 It is important to note that based on the figures |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | from the National Agricultural Census of Colombia,15 the direct beneficiaries are equivalent to 7.2 percent of the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | total producers at the national level, while the total indirect beneficiaries would be equivalent to 4.1 percent of total |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | producers. Additionally, a total of 10,000 households are estimated to benefit from increased food security.16 As |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | previously mentioned, at the geographical level, the project will cover 22 departments (69% of the total departments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | in Colombia) and 219 municipalities (20% of the total municipalities in Colombia). Table D.1.1 summarizes the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | different beneficiaries (producers, professionals from the farmer associations, and professionals from other entities, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | independent and students who will benefit from the Project) under each of the three components. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Table D.1.1. Number of direct beneficiaries by crop and total area (hectares) covered by the project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Agricultural activity |  |  | Component 1.
Modernization of
agriculture for
adaptation |  |  | Component 2. New
technological options
to increase resilience
and low carbon |  |  | Component 3.
Innovative and
inclusive business
models |  |  | Total beneficiaries (a)
and hectares |  |  | 
 |  | Beneficiaries |  |  | 392,378 |  |  | 56,149 |  |  | 171,164 (b) |  |  | 619,691 |  | 
 |  | Rice |  |  | 9,114 |  |  | 5,396 |  |  | 11,101 |  |  | 25,612 |  | 
 |  | Potato |  |  | 41,623 |  |  | 11,861 |  |  | 46,110 |  |  | 99,594 |  | 
 |  | Sugar cane |  |  | 1,137 |  |  | 5,247 |  |  | 2,544 |  |  | 8,928 |  | 
 |  | Panela cane |  |  | 22,260 |  |  | 17,150 |  |  | 38,160 |  |  | 77,570 |  | 
 |  | Dairy farming |  |  | 25,997 |  |  | 1,526 |  |  | 25,997 |  |  | 53,519 |  | 
 |  | Livestock |  |  | 25,997 |  |  | 1,526 |  |  | 25,997 |  |  | 53,519 |  | 
 |  | Corn |  |  | 11,384 |  |  | 12,625 |  |  | 19,080 |  |  | 43,089 |  | 
 |  | Banana |  |  | 467 |  |  | 817 |  |  | 2,175 |  |  | 3,459 |  | 
 |  | Coffee |  |  | 254,400 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 254,400 |  | 
 |  | Area (hectares) |  |  | 836,287 |  |  | 131,710 |  |  |  |  |  | 967,997 |  | 
 | (a) The total number of beneficiary producers is the sum of Component 1 and 2; a part of these producers is subject to reinforcement in training in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component 3. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (b) Producers who will be beneficiaries through the strengthening of capacities that were previously attended in component 1 and component 2, for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | which they have already been considered in the total of beneficiaries, so as not to generate double counting. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 103. Regarding the mitigation potential, the total emissions that the Project would reduce or avoid throughout its life |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (25 years) will be 34,878,951 tCO2e, or 1,395,158 per year (Table D.1.2). Most of this emission reduction |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | corresponds to livestock (48%), panela cane (18%) and bananas (12%). This reduction in emissions is the result |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of direct interventions in 8,750 hectares (rice (1,500 ha), corn (900 ha), panela cane (660 ha), potato (600 ha), |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | livestock (3,840 ha) and banana (1,250 ha)) and reduction of emissions in areas (245,368 ha) resulting from farmers |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | that only receive trainings and technical assistance as part of the project intervention. On the other hand, it is |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | expected that the reduction of additional indirect emissions that would be influenced by the project through work |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 39 ---
Component 1.
Modernization of
agriculture for
adaptation

--- Table 3 on Page 39 ---
Component 2. New
technological options
to increase resilience
and low carbon

--- Table 4 on Page 39 ---
Component 3.
Innovative and
inclusive business
models

--- Table 5 on Page 39 ---
Total beneficiaries (a)
and hectares

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 75
DD
with each of the farmer associations through agricultural extension services would be 34.9 million tCO2e, associated
with a total of 981,471 hectares managed in a sustainable way, mostly from pasture management in livestock, from
where 83 percent of the reduction of emissions would come.
Table D.1.2. Reduction of direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions estimated per crop (tCO2e) and associated
area (hectares)
Direct emissions Indirect emissions
Agricultural activity Area (hectares) Area (hectares)
reductions (tCO2e) reductions (tCO2e)
Rice 417,323 38,861 1,505,226 148,724
Corn 86,495 17,574 282,121 66,696
Panela cane 708,425 16,671 2,518,508 64,045
Potato 116,500 6,677 328,706 24,310
Livestock 7,727,180 170,640 30,075,841 667,200
Banana 96,111 3,874 168,549 10,496
Total 9,152,034 254,118 34,878,951 981,471
Annual average 366,081 1,395,158
Source: Own elaboration based on calculations in Annex 22.
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
104. The project seeks to change the current trajectory of agricultural practices and technologies, which, for
example, have limited investment in innovative proposals such as the use of digital media to disseminate climate
information, the use of agroclimatic services to offer accurate and timely information to farmers. farmers, as well as
limitations on investments to develop varieties that are resilient to the climate or with low production of GHG
emissions and modernize the agricultural extension system so that it offers information to farmers so that they can
adapt their practices and technologies towards more investments. resilient and low carbon. In that sense, the project
is transformative as it is systematically integrating climate into decision-making processes from the national level
to the farm level. This project will invest in the implementation of adaptation measures of the agricultural sector in
prioritized crops and locations in Colombia that will be further expanded throughout the country, as the different
sectors begin to replicate the project experience.
105. Potential for scaling up and replication. MADR and CIAT have already implemented a pilot project that
includes rice and cotton in some regions of Colombia such as Villavicencio, Yopal, Aguazul, Ibagué, Saldaña,
Neiva, Aipe, Montería, Espinal, Ciénaga de Oro, Buga, Espinal and Cereté. The project will allow the scaling up
and replication to other crop regions and cover more products through the mechanisms of agricultural extension
and inter-institutional collaboration that the project will strengthen and / or establish between the private sector
farmer associations involved (Product 1.1), Agrosavia, and CGIAR institutions. and the experiences and lessons
learned from the project. Specifically, the project would currently cover a total of 22 departments (69% of the
country's departments) and 219 municipalities (20% of the Colombian municipalities). It is expected that once the
project is completed, and based on the previous experience of the pilots prior to 2020, the farmer associations, with
the support of MADR, Agrosavia and CIAT, will continue to expand the adoption of the technologies to other crops
and municipalities, reducing the risks for the adoption of these technologies, reducing their costs with increased
scaling-up and replication of those technologies. For example, due to the level of investment that will be made in
climate information systems, there will be a greater opportunity for producers of other crops within the same regions
to access this information. On the other hand, the extension program will allow the collection of lessons learned
that can be replicated among peers in other regions of the country and for other crops to facilitate the adoption of
technologies and best practices.
106. Potential for knowledge sharing and learning. The project will generate the necessary knowledge to build
new agricultural technological capabilities, empowering producers to launch similar projects on their own.
Specifically, Result 3.1 will be in charge of allowing the dissemination, access and use of the project results by the
key public and private actors to strengthen the capacities that allow influencing future improvements in public policy.
Management meetings are planned together with national institutions, development of communications with the
farmer associations to keep them updated on the progress of the project, presence in social networks and the
development of communication and knowledge products. CIAT is a good vehicle for knowledge management given
its solid track record and research capacity, worldwide presence and strategic alliances with the productive sector.
Specifically, the Technical Assistance and Learning Service that will be financed by the Project will be used to
disseminate successful experiences and show how to participate and take better advantage of this financial
opportunity. On the other hand, Product 3.2 of the monitoring and evaluation of the project will allow a rigorous
follow-up and evaluation of the interventions and measure the impact of these on the production and well-being of

--- Table 1 on Page 40 ---
 | with each of the farmer associations through agricultural extension services would be 34.9 million tCO2e, associated |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | with a total of 981,471 hectares managed in a sustainable way, mostly from pasture management in livestock, from |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | where 83 percent of the reduction of emissions would come. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Table D.1.2. Reduction of direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions estimated per crop (tCO2e) and associated |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | area (hectares) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Agricultural activity |  |  |  | Direct emissions |  | Area (hectares) |  |  |  | Indirect emissions |  | Area (hectares) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | reductions (tCO2e) |  |  |  |  |  | reductions (tCO2e) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Rice |  |  | 417,323 |  |  | 38,861 |  |  | 1,505,226 |  |  | 148,724 |  | 
 |  | Corn |  |  | 86,495 |  |  | 17,574 |  |  | 282,121 |  |  | 66,696 |  | 
 |  | Panela cane |  |  | 708,425 |  |  | 16,671 |  |  | 2,518,508 |  |  | 64,045 |  | 
 |  | Potato |  |  | 116,500 |  |  | 6,677 |  |  | 328,706 |  |  | 24,310 |  | 
 |  | Livestock |  |  | 7,727,180 |  |  | 170,640 |  |  | 30,075,841 |  |  | 667,200 |  | 
 |  | Banana |  |  | 96,111 |  |  | 3,874 |  |  | 168,549 |  |  | 10,496 |  | 
 |  | Total |  |  | 9,152,034 |  |  | 254,118 |  |  | 34,878,951 |  |  | 981,471 |  | 
 |  | Annual average |  |  | 366,081 |  |  |  |  |  | 1,395,158 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Source: Own elaboration based on calculations in Annex 22. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 104. The project seeks to change the current trajectory of agricultural practices and technologies, which, for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | example, have limited investment in innovative proposals such as the use of digital media to disseminate climate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | information, the use of agroclimatic services to offer accurate and timely information to farmers. farmers, as well as |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | limitations on investments to develop varieties that are resilient to the climate or with low production of GHG |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | emissions and modernize the agricultural extension system so that it offers information to farmers so that they can |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | adapt their practices and technologies towards more investments. resilient and low carbon. In that sense, the project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | is transformative as it is systematically integrating climate into decision-making processes from the national level |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | to the farm level. This project will invest in the implementation of adaptation measures of the agricultural sector in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | prioritized crops and locations in Colombia that will be further expanded throughout the country, as the different |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | sectors begin to replicate the project experience. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 105. Potential for scaling up and replication. MADR and CIAT have already implemented a pilot project that |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | includes rice and cotton in some regions of Colombia such as Villavicencio, Yopal, Aguazul, Ibagué, Saldaña, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Neiva, Aipe, Montería, Espinal, Ciénaga de Oro, Buga, Espinal and Cereté. The project will allow the scaling up |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and replication to other crop regions and cover more products through the mechanisms of agricultural extension |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and inter-institutional collaboration that the project will strengthen and / or establish between the private sector |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | farmer associations involved (Product 1.1), Agrosavia, and CGIAR institutions. and the experiences and lessons |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | learned from the project. Specifically, the project would currently cover a total of 22 departments (69% of the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | country's departments) and 219 municipalities (20% of the Colombian municipalities). It is expected that once the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | project is completed, and based on the previous experience of the pilots prior to 2020, the farmer associations, with |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the support of MADR, Agrosavia and CIAT, will continue to expand the adoption of the technologies to other crops |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and municipalities, reducing the risks for the adoption of these technologies, reducing their costs with increased |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | scaling-up and replication of those technologies. For example, due to the level of investment that will be made in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | climate information systems, there will be a greater opportunity for producers of other crops within the same regions |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | to access this information. On the other hand, the extension program will allow the collection of lessons learned |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | that can be replicated among peers in other regions of the country and for other crops to facilitate the adoption of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | technologies and best practices. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 106. Potential for knowledge sharing and learning. The project will generate the necessary knowledge to build |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | new agricultural technological capabilities, empowering producers to launch similar projects on their own. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Specifically, Result 3.1 will be in charge of allowing the dissemination, access and use of the project results by the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | key public and private actors to strengthen the capacities that allow influencing future improvements in public policy. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Management meetings are planned together with national institutions, development of communications with the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | farmer associations to keep them updated on the progress of the project, presence in social networks and the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | development of communication and knowledge products. CIAT is a good vehicle for knowledge management given |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | its solid track record and research capacity, worldwide presence and strategic alliances with the productive sector. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Specifically, the Technical Assistance and Learning Service that will be financed by the Project will be used to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | disseminate successful experiences and show how to participate and take better advantage of this financial |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | opportunity. On the other hand, Product 3.2 of the monitoring and evaluation of the project will allow a rigorous |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | follow-up and evaluation of the interventions and measure the impact of these on the production and well-being of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 75
DD
the farmers, which will allow a better understanding of the success mechanisms for the adoption and use of
practices and technologies.
107. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment. This Project is the main initiative of the MADR to
implement a resilient and low-carbon agriculture as the standard at the sector level of management practices and
agricultural technologies and to create an enabling environment for the application and expansion of technologies
at the national level. This will be done through the farmer’s organizations participating in the different production
chains and Agrosavia as a strategic partner of the project. As the national (MADR, Agrosavia, etc.) or local
governments promote the practices and technologies developed and/or improved by the project, the reduction of
technical, institutional and financial barriers will be facilitated, as well as the perception of the risk of investment in
such technologies, creating the right environment to expand the application of such technologies. The successful
development of projects and the evidence of technical, technological and scientific advances under Components 1
and 2, and disseminated under Result 3.2, will lead to a massive adoption of CSICAP, reducing the perceived
investment risk and lowering the costs of technologies, learning from experiences and adapting them to real needs
and conditions. The project will engage with the different stakeholders along the value chain (producers, gremios,
buyers and other actors such as financial institutions, industry, trade associations and service providers) in the co-
design, generation and validation of replicable and successful business models and an escalation strategy that
allows the results of the project to be later escalated. The project will leverage additional funds at the national level
to invest in technology packages, based on the evidence generated by the project. The lessons learned from the
project have the potential to leverage additional funds internal to the country through the creation of practical
evidence. The strengthening of agroclimatic information will generate an enabling environment for the use and
application of climate information to be integrated into the productive chains of the different producer associations.
108. Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies. As described in more detail in section D.5, the
project contributes to the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan for Climate Change Management of the
Agricultural sector (PIGCCS-Agropecuario) of the MADR, which identifies, evaluates and guides the incorporation
of measures for adaptation to climate change and mitigation of greenhouse gases in the policies and regulations
of the agricultural sector and is in turn aligned with the strategic line of "rural development resilient to the climate
and low in carbon" of the PNCC. Similarly, the project contributes to the Comprehensive Plan for Territorial Climate
Change Management (PIGCCT), which provides guidelines for the implementation of sectoral adaptation and
mitigation measures at the territorial level.
109. Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national
climate change adaptation strategies and plans. The project supports the achievement of the goals under the
National Development Plan 2018-2022, in particular those of the “Pact for Sustainability: produce while conserving
and conserve by producing” and the environmental goals of the Regional Pacts; It also contributes to the strategies
of the National Climate Change Policy, with the achievement of the objectives, strategies and lines of action of the
Green Growth Policy and with the achievement of the goals of the National Determined Contribution (NDC). More
details are presented in section D.5.
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
110. Economic co-benefits. Through the establishment of improved agricultural technology, incomes are expected
to increase, especially at the local level, with positive impacts for economic development and poverty reduction.
Food security will be improved while government investments will be reduced. In addition, the losses avoided will
mean lower costs to the government and lower insurance premium payments. As productivity increases, farmers
will have higher incomes, improving livelihoods. The Project can help increase the value of farmers' activities and
products through value chains. With capacity development, better-trained farmers will create greater job
opportunities for them. Increasing returns to labor, returns to capital inputs, and returns to environmental inputs will
increase sustainability. The economic analysis of the project (Annex 3) shows the quantification of the economic

--- Table 1 on Page 41 ---
 | the farmers, which will allow a better understanding of the success mechanisms for the adoption and use of | 
 | practices and technologies. | 
 | 107. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment. This Project is the main initiative of the MADR to | 
 | implement a resilient and low-carbon agriculture as the standard at the sector level of management practices and | 
 | agricultural technologies and to create an enabling environment for the application and expansion of technologies | 
 | at the national level. This will be done through the farmer’s organizations participating in the different production | 
 | chains and Agrosavia as a strategic partner of the project. As the national (MADR, Agrosavia, etc.) or local | 
 | governments promote the practices and technologies developed and/or improved by the project, the reduction of | 
 | technical, institutional and financial barriers will be facilitated, as well as the perception of the risk of investment in | 
 | such technologies, creating the right environment to expand the application of such technologies. The successful | 
 | development of projects and the evidence of technical, technological and scientific advances under Components 1 | 
 | and 2, and disseminated under Result 3.2, will lead to a massive adoption of CSICAP, reducing the perceived | 
 | investment risk and lowering the costs of technologies, learning from experiences and adapting them to real needs | 
 | and conditions. The project will engage with the different stakeholders along the value chain (producers, gremios, | 
 | buyers and other actors such as financial institutions, industry, trade associations and service providers) in the co- | 
 | design, generation and validation of replicable and successful business models and an escalation strategy that | 
 | allows the results of the project to be later escalated. The project will leverage additional funds at the national level | 
 | to invest in technology packages, based on the evidence generated by the project. The lessons learned from the | 
 | project have the potential to leverage additional funds internal to the country through the creation of practical | 
 | evidence. The strengthening of agroclimatic information will generate an enabling environment for the use and | 
 | application of climate information to be integrated into the productive chains of the different producer associations. | 
 | 108. Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies. As described in more detail in section D.5, the | 
 | project contributes to the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan for Climate Change Management of the | 
 | Agricultural sector (PIGCCS-Agropecuario) of the MADR, which identifies, evaluates and guides the incorporation | 
 | of measures for adaptation to climate change and mitigation of greenhouse gases in the policies and regulations | 
 | of the agricultural sector and is in turn aligned with the strategic line of "rural development resilient to the climate | 
 | and low in carbon" of the PNCC. Similarly, the project contributes to the Comprehensive Plan for Territorial Climate | 
 | Change Management (PIGCCT), which provides guidelines for the implementation of sectoral adaptation and | 
 | mitigation measures at the territorial level. | 
 | 109. Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national | 
 | climate change adaptation strategies and plans. The project supports the achievement of the goals under the | 
 | National Development Plan 2018-2022, in particular those of the “Pact for Sustainability: produce while conserving | 
 | and conserve by producing” and the environmental goals of the Regional Pacts; It also contributes to the strategies | 
 | of the National Climate Change Policy, with the achievement of the objectives, strategies and lines of action of the | 
 | Green Growth Policy and with the achievement of the goals of the National Determined Contribution (NDC). More | 
 | details are presented in section D.5. | 
 |  | 
 | D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 |  | 
 | 110. Economic co-benefits. Through the establishment of improved agricultural technology, incomes are expected | 
 | to increase, especially at the local level, with positive impacts for economic development and poverty reduction. | 
 | Food security will be improved while government investments will be reduced. In addition, the losses avoided will | 
 | mean lower costs to the government and lower insurance premium payments. As productivity increases, farmers | 
 | will have higher incomes, improving livelihoods. The Project can help increase the value of farmers' activities and | 
 | products through value chains. With capacity development, better-trained farmers will create greater job | 
 | opportunities for them. Increasing returns to labor, returns to capital inputs, and returns to environmental inputs will | 
 | increase sustainability. The economic analysis of the project (Annex 3) shows the quantification of the economic | 

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 75
DD
benefits of the project for both producers and consumers as a result of the adoption of technologies that increase
the productivity and reduce production costs, as well as the economic benefits from reduced CO2 emissions.
111. On the other hand, in the cost-benefit analysis of the project (see section D.6), additional expected results that
were not considered in the analysis include:
• Economic value of GHG emission reductions derived from the adoption of technologies proposed by CSICAP,
promoting sustainable and green development, and reducing the need to expand the agricultural frontier due
to increased productivity.
• Increase in the diversity of new crops and development of improved crops promoting food security, within
Colombia and worldwide.
• Improvement in the planning of the agricultural sector to avoid that the impacts of climatic events affect the final
price structure and, at the same time, create climate-resilient value chains.
• Greater efficiency in public-private action, by strengthening alliances for the creation of public goods.
• Support to three of the priority regions of the NDC for adaptation measures (Caribbean, Andean and Orinoquia
regions) and to the strategic lines of work outlined by Colombian adaptation policies.
112. Social Co-benefits. The project will positively influence the food security situation by increasing the availability
of food, improving access and its quality. In the event of natural disasters, the affected regions will be less vulnerable
and can guarantee food supplies. As the population becomes less vulnerable to climate change and extreme
weather events, health and safety will increase. Social inclusion will be sought, with emphasis on strengthening the
role of women in the adoption of new cultural approaches, and greater youth participation will be sought. Cultural
practices will be combined with new technologies.
113. Environmental Co-benefits. In addition to the environmental problems associated with the expansion of the
agricultural frontier, other problems such as the use of chemical products, deforestation, fires, conventional tillage,
the use of heavy machinery and intensive irrigation have caused that 40% of the territory present some degree of
erosion. Thus, 2.9% of the country's surface is in a severe and very severe degree of erosion, and moderate erosion
extends over 16.8% of the territory, while slight erosion is observed in 20% (DNP, 2015b). CFCA is essential for
the implementation of measures that reduce the vulnerability of production systems to weather-related events, since
their production systems are characterized by “being diversified, using a greater number of varieties (including
native or autochthonous), making less use of chemical inputs and apply soil and water conservation practices”
(MADR and ADR, 2017). In addition, “the adoption of sustainable technologies contributes to increasing its
productivity, while reducing production costs, with which sustainability and competitiveness go hand in hand”
(MADR and ADR, 2017).
114. Gender sensitive development impact. In Colombia, 5.3 million women inhabit the Colombian countryside
and play a central role in agricultural production, food security and resilience in communities to climate change
(IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017). 27.8% of rural households are headed by women, and 36.6%
of the country's agricultural production is in the hands of women. In addition, they lead a large part of community
life, weave social relations and build reconciliation and peace in their territories (FAO et al., 2018). However,
structural gaps still persist that, if not addressed, could be a barrier to the implementation of adaptation and
mitigation measures in the sector. The project, through its Gender Action Plan, seeks to reduce the barriers faced
by women producers who participate in the Project and will take advantage to identify opportunities, in an articulated
manner between different actors, to favor a greater participation of rural women in local development.
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
115. Vulnerability of Colombia and the beneficiary groups. Poverty levels are higher in rural areas of the country.
In 2017, the multidimensional poverty index in the populated and dispersed rural centers was 3.2 times higher than
that of the municipal capitals (36.6% vs. 11.4%). The proportion of the population below the poverty line is also
higher in dispersed rural areas (36%) than in the capital cities (24.2%) (DANE, 2018, p. 45), all of which reveals the
persistence of important gaps between the country and the city. Many of these departments are characterized by
high levels of rural poverty and small farmer systems.
116. Level of economic and social development. A challenge for the agricultural sector in social matters is
productive inclusion, since the average level of income per worker of the dispersed population is barely a third of
the legal minimum wage. Also noteworthy is the high-income inequality between residents of populated centers
and those in dispersed rural areas, evidenced by a Gini coefficient of 0.456 (DNP, 2015). Within the agricultural
sector, the role played by peasant, family and community agriculture (CFCA) stands out as it is responsible for 70%
of the food that is destined for local markets in Colombia. The Third National Agricultural Census shows that 75%
of the production units are in the hands of peasants, employing 57% of the sector's workforce (FAO et al., 2018).
Compared to other agricultural schemes, the CFCA is characterized by allocating a greater amount of its production
for self-consumption, as well as by its greater participation in community associations, greater use of traditional and

--- Table 1 on Page 42 ---
 | benefits of the project for both producers and consumers as a result of the adoption of technologies that increase | 
 | the productivity and reduce production costs, as well as the economic benefits from reduced CO2 emissions. | 
 | 111. On the other hand, in the cost-benefit analysis of the project (see section D.6), additional expected results that | 
 | were not considered in the analysis include: | 
 | • Economic value of GHG emission reductions derived from the adoption of technologies proposed by CSICAP, | 
 | promoting sustainable and green development, and reducing the need to expand the agricultural frontier due | 
 | to increased productivity. | 
 | • Increase in the diversity of new crops and development of improved crops promoting food security, within | 
 | Colombia and worldwide. | 
 | • Improvement in the planning of the agricultural sector to avoid that the impacts of climatic events affect the final | 
 | price structure and, at the same time, create climate-resilient value chains. | 
 | • Greater efficiency in public-private action, by strengthening alliances for the creation of public goods. | 
 | • Support to three of the priority regions of the NDC for adaptation measures (Caribbean, Andean and Orinoquia | 
 | regions) and to the strategic lines of work outlined by Colombian adaptation policies. | 
 | 112. Social Co-benefits. The project will positively influence the food security situation by increasing the availability | 
 | of food, improving access and its quality. In the event of natural disasters, the affected regions will be less vulnerable | 
 | and can guarantee food supplies. As the population becomes less vulnerable to climate change and extreme | 
 | weather events, health and safety will increase. Social inclusion will be sought, with emphasis on strengthening the | 
 | role of women in the adoption of new cultural approaches, and greater youth participation will be sought. Cultural | 
 | practices will be combined with new technologies. | 
 | 113. Environmental Co-benefits. In addition to the environmental problems associated with the expansion of the | 
 | agricultural frontier, other problems such as the use of chemical products, deforestation, fires, conventional tillage, | 
 | the use of heavy machinery and intensive irrigation have caused that 40% of the territory present some degree of | 
 | erosion. Thus, 2.9% of the country's surface is in a severe and very severe degree of erosion, and moderate erosion | 
 | extends over 16.8% of the territory, while slight erosion is observed in 20% (DNP, 2015b). CFCA is essential for | 
 | the implementation of measures that reduce the vulnerability of production systems to weather-related events, since | 
 | their production systems are characterized by “being diversified, using a greater number of varieties (including | 
 | native or autochthonous), making less use of chemical inputs and apply soil and water conservation practices” | 
 | (MADR and ADR, 2017). In addition, “the adoption of sustainable technologies contributes to increasing its | 
 | productivity, while reducing production costs, with which sustainability and competitiveness go hand in hand” | 
 | (MADR and ADR, 2017). | 
 | 114. Gender sensitive development impact. In Colombia, 5.3 million women inhabit the Colombian countryside | 
 | and play a central role in agricultural production, food security and resilience in communities to climate change | 
 | (IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017). 27.8% of rural households are headed by women, and 36.6% | 
 | of the country's agricultural production is in the hands of women. In addition, they lead a large part of community | 
 | life, weave social relations and build reconciliation and peace in their territories (FAO et al., 2018). However, | 
 | structural gaps still persist that, if not addressed, could be a barrier to the implementation of adaptation and | 
 | mitigation measures in the sector. The project, through its Gender Action Plan, seeks to reduce the barriers faced | 
 | by women producers who participate in the Project and will take advantage to identify opportunities, in an articulated | 
 | manner between different actors, to favor a greater participation of rural women in local development. | 
 |  | 
 | D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 |  | 
 | 115. Vulnerability of Colombia and the beneficiary groups. Poverty levels are higher in rural areas of the country. | 
 | In 2017, the multidimensional poverty index in the populated and dispersed rural centers was 3.2 times higher than | 
 | that of the municipal capitals (36.6% vs. 11.4%). The proportion of the population below the poverty line is also | 
 | higher in dispersed rural areas (36%) than in the capital cities (24.2%) (DANE, 2018, p. 45), all of which reveals the | 
 | persistence of important gaps between the country and the city. Many of these departments are characterized by | 
 | high levels of rural poverty and small farmer systems. | 
 | 116. Level of economic and social development. A challenge for the agricultural sector in social matters is | 
 | productive inclusion, since the average level of income per worker of the dispersed population is barely a third of | 
 | the legal minimum wage. Also noteworthy is the high-income inequality between residents of populated centers | 
 | and those in dispersed rural areas, evidenced by a Gini coefficient of 0.456 (DNP, 2015). Within the agricultural | 
 | sector, the role played by peasant, family and community agriculture (CFCA) stands out as it is responsible for 70% | 
 | of the food that is destined for local markets in Colombia. The Third National Agricultural Census shows that 75% | 
 | of the production units are in the hands of peasants, employing 57% of the sector's workforce (FAO et al., 2018). | 
 | Compared to other agricultural schemes, the CFCA is characterized by allocating a greater amount of its production | 
 | for self-consumption, as well as by its greater participation in community associations, greater use of traditional and | 

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 75
DD
uncertified seeds, less access to machinery and less use of systems. irrigation and chemical synthetical fertilizers
(MADR and ADR, 2017).
117. Absence of alternative sources of financing. As mentioned in section B.5, the nature of the initial
investments that are required are of a public nature, so that domestic markets and the private sector in Colombia
do not play an important role in that stage. On the other hand, despite the fact that the farmer associations see the
advantages in investments, they do not have the financial capacity to generate the required technologies. That is
why interventions are required to reduce the risk of investment in these technologies and in this case, it is the
Government of Colombia that is borrowing to achieve this change. In this case, the Government of Colombia seeks
a minimum level of concessionality, in the absence of alternative sources of financing that allow reducing risk to
more acceptable levels that catalyze investments by the private sector.
118. Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. There is a need to strengthen institutions
at the national and local level (Agrosavia, farmer associations, etc.) for scaling up practices and technologies that
are resilient to climate change and low in carbon, while at the same time strengthening the implementation capacity
of these institutions in those technologies. In this case, and as seen in the barrier analysis (section B.2) under the
three project components, especially under Result 3.1, the institutional capacities of various actors in the agricultural
sector will be strengthened. The focus on instructional strengthening is reflected in the budget, where 37 percent
of the budget is dedicated to local consultants and 19 percent to local staff, which will be part of the project during
its implementation and will support the gremios and other local institutions after the project is completed. In a sense,
these personnel, along with their gremios and institutions, become project beneficiaries, as their knowledge and
capacity will strengthen the institutions that they work with, ensuring the sustainability of the project outcomes
beyond project completion.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
119. Alignment with policies and strategies at the national and sectoral level. The project is included in the
GCF Country Program and is aligned with the 2018-2022 National Development Plan "Pact for Colombia, Pact
for Equity", in its goal for Agriculture and Rural Development to increase the area with prioritized agricultural
production systems that implement initiatives for adaptation to climate change. Objective 5 of the Pact for
Entrepreneurship and Productivity aims to encourage investment in the field through the reform of the
instruments of the National Agricultural Credit System and the management of market and climate risks, with
strategies such as implementation of the Policy for the Comprehensive Management of Agricultural Risks and the
Information System for the Management of Agricultural Risks. The project is aligned with the Pact for
Sustainability "producing conserving and conserving producing" that seeks a balance between the
conservation of natural resources and production, and which has proposed actions on the efficient use of water,
materials, energy and soil. It also promotes the development of the circular economy, through innovation and the
adoption of new technologies, and encouraging the control of deforestation and ecosystems degradation. Strategic
interventions are also identified to prevent and reduce disaster risk and achieve adaptation to climate change, for
which it proposes productive activities committed to sustainability and mitigation of climate change.
120. Likewise, it is aligned with the various climate change plans and strategies such as the National Determined
Contribution (NDC) and its 2020 update under the emission reduction goals in the agriculture, forestry and other
land use sectors and associated actions under the nationally appropriate mitigation actions (NAMA) for sustainable
cattle farming, the Coffee NAMA, the comprehensive strategy of the panela subsector, the reduction of emissions
in rice production, and the implementation of innovative adaptation actions in agriculture; the National Policy on
Climate Change (PNCC) and the strategic line of “low-carbon and climate-resilient rural development”; With the
National Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change (PNACC), and the prioritized actions of “agricultural production
and food security adapted to climate change”, which among others include: i) Identification of crops that will be
affected by temperature change and precipitation, as well as by floods, coastal and continental erosion, saline
intrusion, drought and other effects of climate change and climate variability; ii) Train and disseminate new
cultivation and irrigation technologies to small and large producers with tolerance to changes associated with
climate change; iii) Investigate technology and innovation for climate-smart agriculture; iv) Recover productive
systems of traditional knowledge that tend to maintain and/or increase resilience in the face of climate change.
Similarly, it is aligned with the Green Growth Policy (2019), under the objective of strengthening the mechanisms
and instruments to optimize the use of natural resources and energy in production and consumption; and with the
Colombian Strategy for Low Carbon Development (ECDBC), which includes as objectives: i) Empower and
motivate the sectors to make decisions that reduce their emissions in the future, achieving at the same time their
growth goals and generating social benefits. , economic and environmental; ii) Develop mitigation action plans in

--- Table 1 on Page 43 ---
 | uncertified seeds, less access to machinery and less use of systems. irrigation and chemical synthetical fertilizers | 
 | (MADR and ADR, 2017). | 
 | 117. Absence of alternative sources of financing. As mentioned in section B.5, the nature of the initial | 
 | investments that are required are of a public nature, so that domestic markets and the private sector in Colombia | 
 | do not play an important role in that stage. On the other hand, despite the fact that the farmer associations see the | 
 | advantages in investments, they do not have the financial capacity to generate the required technologies. That is | 
 | why interventions are required to reduce the risk of investment in these technologies and in this case, it is the | 
 | Government of Colombia that is borrowing to achieve this change. In this case, the Government of Colombia seeks | 
 | a minimum level of concessionality, in the absence of alternative sources of financing that allow reducing risk to | 
 | more acceptable levels that catalyze investments by the private sector. | 
 | 118. Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. There is a need to strengthen institutions | 
 | at the national and local level (Agrosavia, farmer associations, etc.) for scaling up practices and technologies that | 
 | are resilient to climate change and low in carbon, while at the same time strengthening the implementation capacity | 
 | of these institutions in those technologies. In this case, and as seen in the barrier analysis (section B.2) under the | 
 | three project components, especially under Result 3.1, the institutional capacities of various actors in the agricultural | 
 | sector will be strengthened. The focus on instructional strengthening is reflected in the budget, where 37 percent | 
 | of the budget is dedicated to local consultants and 19 percent to local staff, which will be part of the project during | 
 | its implementation and will support the gremios and other local institutions after the project is completed. In a sense, | 
 | these personnel, along with their gremios and institutions, become project beneficiaries, as their knowledge and | 
 | capacity will strengthen the institutions that they work with, ensuring the sustainability of the project outcomes | 
 | beyond project completion. | 
 |  | 
 | D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 |  | 
 | 119. Alignment with policies and strategies at the national and sectoral level. The project is included in the | 
 | GCF Country Program and is aligned with the 2018-2022 National Development Plan "Pact for Colombia, Pact | 
 | for Equity", in its goal for Agriculture and Rural Development to increase the area with prioritized agricultural | 
 | production systems that implement initiatives for adaptation to climate change. Objective 5 of the Pact for | 
 | Entrepreneurship and Productivity aims to encourage investment in the field through the reform of the | 
 | instruments of the National Agricultural Credit System and the management of market and climate risks, with | 
 | strategies such as implementation of the Policy for the Comprehensive Management of Agricultural Risks and the | 
 | Information System for the Management of Agricultural Risks. The project is aligned with the Pact for | 
 | Sustainability "producing conserving and conserving producing" that seeks a balance between the | 
 | conservation of natural resources and production, and which has proposed actions on the efficient use of water, | 
 | materials, energy and soil. It also promotes the development of the circular economy, through innovation and the | 
 | adoption of new technologies, and encouraging the control of deforestation and ecosystems degradation. Strategic | 
 | interventions are also identified to prevent and reduce disaster risk and achieve adaptation to climate change, for | 
 | which it proposes productive activities committed to sustainability and mitigation of climate change. | 
 | 120. Likewise, it is aligned with the various climate change plans and strategies such as the National Determined | 
 | Contribution (NDC) and its 2020 update under the emission reduction goals in the agriculture, forestry and other | 
 | land use sectors and associated actions under the nationally appropriate mitigation actions (NAMA) for sustainable | 
 | cattle farming, the Coffee NAMA, the comprehensive strategy of the panela subsector, the reduction of emissions | 
 | in rice production, and the implementation of innovative adaptation actions in agriculture; the National Policy on | 
 | Climate Change (PNCC) and the strategic line of “low-carbon and climate-resilient rural development”; With the | 
 | National Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change (PNACC), and the prioritized actions of “agricultural production | 
 | and food security adapted to climate change”, which among others include: i) Identification of crops that will be | 
 | affected by temperature change and precipitation, as well as by floods, coastal and continental erosion, saline | 
 | intrusion, drought and other effects of climate change and climate variability; ii) Train and disseminate new | 
 | cultivation and irrigation technologies to small and large producers with tolerance to changes associated with | 
 | climate change; iii) Investigate technology and innovation for climate-smart agriculture; iv) Recover productive | 
 | systems of traditional knowledge that tend to maintain and/or increase resilience in the face of climate change. | 
 | Similarly, it is aligned with the Green Growth Policy (2019), under the objective of strengthening the mechanisms | 
 | and instruments to optimize the use of natural resources and energy in production and consumption; and with the | 
 | Colombian Strategy for Low Carbon Development (ECDBC), which includes as objectives: i) Empower and | 
 | motivate the sectors to make decisions that reduce their emissions in the future, achieving at the same time their | 
 | growth goals and generating social benefits. , economic and environmental; ii) Develop mitigation action plans in | 

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 75
DD
each productive sector of the country with an impact on GHG emissions, as well as NAMA and emblematic
mitigation projects in each sector.
121. The project is aligned with the instruments that allow the development of policies at the sectoral and territorial
level, such as the Comprehensive Plan for Sectoral Climate Change Management of the Agricultural sector
(PIGCCS-Agropecuario), and the Comprehensive Plan for Territorial Climate Change Management
(PIGCCT), which provide guidelines for the implementation of sectoral adaptation and mitigation measures at the
territorial level. The PIGCCS-Agropecuario identifies, evaluates and guides the incorporation of greenhouse gas
mitigation measures and adaptation to climate change in the policies and regulations of the sector and is aligned
in turn with the strategic line of "rural development resilient to climate and low in carbon” of the PNCC.
122. The project is aligned with the Mission for the Transformation of the Countryside that proposed a set of
State policies to “promote integral development (economic, social and environmental) in the Colombian countryside,
built from the territory and with a view of the rural area more beyond agriculture”, including three strategies on
productive inclusion and family farming, agricultural competitiveness and environmental sustainability. The Mission
mentions that investment in science and technology has not found adequate solutions to the impacts of phenomena
that affect rural areas to a greater degree, such as those associated with climate change, and seeks to plan long-
term agricultural investments in crops in order to maintain and raise productivity. Similarly, there is alignment with
the Green Growth Mission, whose purpose was to define the inputs and guidelines to guide the development of
the country towards the year 2030 and which was adopted in 2018. Additionally, the strategy “Forests Territories
of Life - Comprehensive Strategy Deforestation Control and Forest Management” with the purpose of curbing
deforestation and forest degradation.
123. At the sectoral level, the project is aligned with the Sectoral Action Plan (PAS) for the Mitigation of
Greenhouse Gases (MADR, 2014) and its three strategic lines: implementation and sustainable intensification,
innovation and development, and incentives and financial instruments. Likewise, the project is aligned with the
Strategy for the adaptation of the agricultural sector to climatic phenomena, whose objective is to reduce the
vulnerability of agricultural production to climatic threats to minimize their impacts on the competitiveness of the
sector and to have sufficient and stable availability of quality food by strengthening climate risk management (DNP
and MADR, 2014). The strategy addresses three programmatic axes: i) strengthen the country's capacity to manage
agroclimatic information; ii) adapt the productive systems of the agricultural, fishing and forestry sectors to climatic
phenomena; and strengthen the institutions of the agricultural, fishing and forestry sector in their actions related to
adaptation to climate change.
124. Finally, the project is aligned with the National Agricultural Innovation System (SNIA), the Strategic Plan for
Agricultural Science, Technology and Innovation (PECTIA), the National Seed Plan (PNS), the National Policy for
Disaster Risk Management and the National Disaster Risk Management System, the National Policy for Sustainable
Land Management (PNGSS) (MADS, 2016), the National Policy for the Comprehensive Management of Water
Resources (2010-2022), and the Zoning Statute of Adequate Use of the Territory (EZUAT).
125. Implementation capacity of Executing Entity. The MADR will select through the direct contracting modality,
in accordance with literal e) of numeral 4 of article 2 of Law 1150 of 2007, in accordance with article 2.2.1.2.1.4.7
of Decree 1082 of 2015, articles 2 and 17 of Decree - Law 591 of 1991, article 33 of Law 1286 of 2009, to an
institution as the main procured party that will be in charge of the operational, technical and administrative execution
of the project. Prior to this process, a detailed profile will be structured that the entity to be selected must comply
with, and that will be in accordance with the technical and administrative competencies required by the operational
implementation of the MADR. The MADR foresees the signing of a technical and scientific cooperation agreement
with the entity that will act as the main procured party to formalize the relationship and regulate the administration
processes, execution mechanisms and transfer of resources between both institutions. Once the selection process
has been completed, the entity that assumes as the main procured party will carry out the contracts with the different
entities that participate in the execution of the technical activities, this will be done through an evaluation process
and through Derivative Agreements, both framework and derivative agreements will have the specific conditions or
guidelines required by Colombian regulations, CAF, and in consequence, GCF.
126. On a preliminary basis, the Consortium of International Agricultural Research Centers (CGIAR), through CIAT,
has been identified as the main procured party for the Project. The GCIAR is an international entity based in France
that operates worldwide and is one of the accredited entities to the GCF. The CGIAR includes a network of
international research centers such as CIAT, the Center for the Improvement of Corn and Wheat (CYMMIT), among
others. CIAT is an agricultural research institution that was formally established in 1967, and has strong
relationships with national research programs in Colombia in different crops with gremios such as FEDEARROZ,
FENALCE, FEDEGAN, CENICAÑA, ASBAMA, AGROSAVIA, CIPAV, and joint works with CGIAR international
research centers such as CIMMYT. On December 31, 2012, MADR and CIAT signed Agreement N ° 20120382 by
means of which they established that they will work together with the objective of “joining efforts, resources and
capacities to strengthen the adaptation capacity of the agricultural sector to variability and climate change and
improve the efficiency of the use of resources in the productive systems in prioritized regions, in accordance with
those Science Technology and Innovation (STI) instruments available to the parties ”.

--- Table 1 on Page 44 ---
 | each productive sector of the country with an impact on GHG emissions, as well as NAMA and emblematic | 
 | mitigation projects in each sector. | 
 | 121. The project is aligned with the instruments that allow the development of policies at the sectoral and territorial | 
 | level, such as the Comprehensive Plan for Sectoral Climate Change Management of the Agricultural sector | 
 | (PIGCCS-Agropecuario), and the Comprehensive Plan for Territorial Climate Change Management | 
 | (PIGCCT), which provide guidelines for the implementation of sectoral adaptation and mitigation measures at the | 
 | territorial level. The PIGCCS-Agropecuario identifies, evaluates and guides the incorporation of greenhouse gas | 
 | mitigation measures and adaptation to climate change in the policies and regulations of the sector and is aligned | 
 | in turn with the strategic line of "rural development resilient to climate and low in carbon” of the PNCC. | 
 | 122. The project is aligned with the Mission for the Transformation of the Countryside that proposed a set of | 
 | State policies to “promote integral development (economic, social and environmental) in the Colombian countryside, | 
 | built from the territory and with a view of the rural area more beyond agriculture”, including three strategies on | 
 | productive inclusion and family farming, agricultural competitiveness and environmental sustainability. The Mission | 
 | mentions that investment in science and technology has not found adequate solutions to the impacts of phenomena | 
 | that affect rural areas to a greater degree, such as those associated with climate change, and seeks to plan long- | 
 | term agricultural investments in crops in order to maintain and raise productivity. Similarly, there is alignment with | 
 | the Green Growth Mission, whose purpose was to define the inputs and guidelines to guide the development of | 
 | the country towards the year 2030 and which was adopted in 2018. Additionally, the strategy “Forests Territories | 
 | of Life - Comprehensive Strategy Deforestation Control and Forest Management” with the purpose of curbing | 
 | deforestation and forest degradation. | 
 | 123. At the sectoral level, the project is aligned with the Sectoral Action Plan (PAS) for the Mitigation of | 
 | Greenhouse Gases (MADR, 2014) and its three strategic lines: implementation and sustainable intensification, | 
 | innovation and development, and incentives and financial instruments. Likewise, the project is aligned with the | 
 | Strategy for the adaptation of the agricultural sector to climatic phenomena, whose objective is to reduce the | 
 | vulnerability of agricultural production to climatic threats to minimize their impacts on the competitiveness of the | 
 | sector and to have sufficient and stable availability of quality food by strengthening climate risk management (DNP | 
 | and MADR, 2014). The strategy addresses three programmatic axes: i) strengthen the country's capacity to manage | 
 | agroclimatic information; ii) adapt the productive systems of the agricultural, fishing and forestry sectors to climatic | 
 | phenomena; and strengthen the institutions of the agricultural, fishing and forestry sector in their actions related to | 
 | adaptation to climate change. | 
 | 124. Finally, the project is aligned with the National Agricultural Innovation System (SNIA), the Strategic Plan for | 
 | Agricultural Science, Technology and Innovation (PECTIA), the National Seed Plan (PNS), the National Policy for | 
 | Disaster Risk Management and the National Disaster Risk Management System, the National Policy for Sustainable | 
 | Land Management (PNGSS) (MADS, 2016), the National Policy for the Comprehensive Management of Water | 
 | Resources (2010-2022), and the Zoning Statute of Adequate Use of the Territory (EZUAT). | 
 | 125. Implementation capacity of Executing Entity. The MADR will select through the direct contracting modality, | 
 | in accordance with literal e) of numeral 4 of article 2 of Law 1150 of 2007, in accordance with article 2.2.1.2.1.4.7 | 
 | of Decree 1082 of 2015, articles 2 and 17 of Decree - Law 591 of 1991, article 33 of Law 1286 of 2009, to an | 
 | institution as the main procured party that will be in charge of the operational, technical and administrative execution | 
 | of the project. Prior to this process, a detailed profile will be structured that the entity to be selected must comply | 
 | with, and that will be in accordance with the technical and administrative competencies required by the operational | 
 | implementation of the MADR. The MADR foresees the signing of a technical and scientific cooperation agreement | 
 | with the entity that will act as the main procured party to formalize the relationship and regulate the administration | 
 | processes, execution mechanisms and transfer of resources between both institutions. Once the selection process | 
 | has been completed, the entity that assumes as the main procured party will carry out the contracts with the different | 
 | entities that participate in the execution of the technical activities, this will be done through an evaluation process | 
 | and through Derivative Agreements, both framework and derivative agreements will have the specific conditions or | 
 | guidelines required by Colombian regulations, CAF, and in consequence, GCF. | 
 | 126. On a preliminary basis, the Consortium of International Agricultural Research Centers (CGIAR), through CIAT, | 
 | has been identified as the main procured party for the Project. The GCIAR is an international entity based in France | 
 | that operates worldwide and is one of the accredited entities to the GCF. The CGIAR includes a network of | 
 | international research centers such as CIAT, the Center for the Improvement of Corn and Wheat (CYMMIT), among | 
 | others. CIAT is an agricultural research institution that was formally established in 1967, and has strong | 
 | relationships with national research programs in Colombia in different crops with gremios such as FEDEARROZ, | 
 | FENALCE, FEDEGAN, CENICAÑA, ASBAMA, AGROSAVIA, CIPAV, and joint works with CGIAR international | 
 | research centers such as CIMMYT. On December 31, 2012, MADR and CIAT signed Agreement N ° 20120382 by | 
 | means of which they established that they will work together with the objective of “joining efforts, resources and | 
 | capacities to strengthen the adaptation capacity of the agricultural sector to variability and climate change and | 
 | improve the efficiency of the use of resources in the productive systems in prioritized regions, in accordance with | 
 | those Science Technology and Innovation (STI) instruments available to the parties ”. | 

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 75
DD
127. Role of National Designated Authority (NDA). In Colombia, the National Planning Department (DNP) is the
Designated National Authority (NDA), which supports its decision-making in a Collegiate Body made up of the
Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MADS), the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (MHCP),
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MRE), the Presidential Agency for International Cooperation and the DNP, which
exercises the Technical Secretariat of the Collegiate Body. The Collegiate Body is an instance whose objective is
to promote the mobilization of financing resources from the GCF in accordance with its result areas, generating the
tools and mechanisms that support the analysis and decision-making of the NDA. In this case, the Project has
undergone a review by the Collegiate Body and has incorporated the comments provided. This process has verified
the alignment of the Project to the goals of the National Development Plan 2018-2022, the contribution to the
strategies and goals of the National Climate Change Policy, the Green Growth Policy, and the Predicted and
Determined Contribution at the national level. (NDC), as well as coverage at the municipal level (project scale), and
other criteria aligned with the investment criteria of the GCF.
128. Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous
peoples, women and other vulnerable groups. During project development, consultations were held with various
groups, including male and female producers, farmer associations officials, extension workers, ethnic groups, local
and national institutional actors. A total of 24 group work sessions were held with 86 officials from 14 national
institutions directly linked to the issue of adaptation and mitigation of climate change in the agricultural sector and
the participation of 39 CGIAR experts on different crops and topics. These sessions were complemented with
multiple bilateral working sessions to discuss specialized topics related to climate challenges and the technologies
to face them. Additionally, for the analysis of Environmental and Social Safeguards and Gender Analysis, 52
consultations and group sessions were held with extension agents, producers, ethnic groups and institutional actors
at the territorial and national level on perceptions and recommendations for the implementation of the project,
reaching a participation of 205 people, 131 men and 74 women, who were asked for recommendations to guarantee
success in including the gender approach in the project, among other aspects. The details of the recommendations
are found in section G.2 and in Annex 8. Under the Gender Action Plan, the project will implement several of the
actions that will be implemented with the direct beneficiaries (women producers), but also with indirect ones (for
example, from producers' households) in order to promote greater participation of rural women in the project. The
summary of the history of consultations that were carried out to develop the project is in Annex 7.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
129. Financial Structure. As mentioned in section B.5, the project proposes a combination of loans (assumed by
the Government of Colombia) for an amount of USD 35.3 million. On the other hand, the local counterpart amounts
to USD 16.56 million of direct co-financing from farmer associations and other institutions in Colombia. This means
that 48.3% of the total amount of the project are grants, minimizing the concessionality of the GCF funds. GCF
financing and its financial instruments including grants, combined with CAF funds, reduces the cost of loans for this
Project. On the other hand, it is expected that with the Project, and in addition to the co-financing of the farmer
associations of the various production chains, additional investments will be made (not counted as co-financing) by
the private sector, once there is a greater adoption of the practices and technologies developed and validated by
the project.
130. Efficiency and effectiveness. The ex-ante economic analysis for the implementation of the CSICAP project
considers eight agricultural activities: livestock (milk, beef), sugar cane, sugar cane, coffee, corn, rice and potatoes.
The economic benefits of the project for society (producers and consumers) are analyzed due to the increase in
production performance, the reduction of losses and the reduction of production costs as a result of: (i) adoption of
technologies for management agroclimatic risk and digital agriculture, (ii) genetic improvement and (iii) efficient use
of water resources. This analysis considers incremental benefits over 25 years, which is the useful life of the
technologies considered. This evaluation considered the most probable scenario of technological impact and two
opposite scenarios (maximum and minimum) of technology adoption by producers, as well as the probability of
success in the implementation.
131. The results in Annex 3 show an average IRR of 201%, which results from the high impact of making climate
smart technologies available at scale for producers and generating high returns at the producer level. It is worth
noting that despite this high rate of return in the targeted value chains. In this case, despite the high level of IRRs,
reimbursable instruments to the producers (instead of grants) are not viable because the kind of investments are
usually not financed to farmers (as most of them are public goods). That is, there are no commercial financing
sources available in Colombia for the type of investments (gene banks and seed improvement, big data, GHG
emission measurement, etc.) considered by the project. Since the project represents a public good investment, as
around 10 percent of total project costs go to public infrastructure that do not have direct revenue generation
potential, without GCF and CAF support, the government would need to look for another unlikely available similar
sources of funding. GCF offers a unique opportunity for blending low interest loans and grants, reducing the financial
cost of the project, and representing a specialized source, especially designed to enhance climate resilience and

--- Table 1 on Page 45 ---
 | 127. Role of National Designated Authority (NDA). In Colombia, the National Planning Department (DNP) is the | 
 | Designated National Authority (NDA), which supports its decision-making in a Collegiate Body made up of the | 
 | Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MADS), the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (MHCP), | 
 | the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MRE), the Presidential Agency for International Cooperation and the DNP, which | 
 | exercises the Technical Secretariat of the Collegiate Body. The Collegiate Body is an instance whose objective is | 
 | to promote the mobilization of financing resources from the GCF in accordance with its result areas, generating the | 
 | tools and mechanisms that support the analysis and decision-making of the NDA. In this case, the Project has | 
 | undergone a review by the Collegiate Body and has incorporated the comments provided. This process has verified | 
 | the alignment of the Project to the goals of the National Development Plan 2018-2022, the contribution to the | 
 | strategies and goals of the National Climate Change Policy, the Green Growth Policy, and the Predicted and | 
 | Determined Contribution at the national level. (NDC), as well as coverage at the municipal level (project scale), and | 
 | other criteria aligned with the investment criteria of the GCF. | 
 | 128. Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous | 
 | peoples, women and other vulnerable groups. During project development, consultations were held with various | 
 | groups, including male and female producers, farmer associations officials, extension workers, ethnic groups, local | 
 | and national institutional actors. A total of 24 group work sessions were held with 86 officials from 14 national | 
 | institutions directly linked to the issue of adaptation and mitigation of climate change in the agricultural sector and | 
 | the participation of 39 CGIAR experts on different crops and topics. These sessions were complemented with | 
 | multiple bilateral working sessions to discuss specialized topics related to climate challenges and the technologies | 
 | to face them. Additionally, for the analysis of Environmental and Social Safeguards and Gender Analysis, 52 | 
 | consultations and group sessions were held with extension agents, producers, ethnic groups and institutional actors | 
 | at the territorial and national level on perceptions and recommendations for the implementation of the project, | 
 | reaching a participation of 205 people, 131 men and 74 women, who were asked for recommendations to guarantee | 
 | success in including the gender approach in the project, among other aspects. The details of the recommendations | 
 | are found in section G.2 and in Annex 8. Under the Gender Action Plan, the project will implement several of the | 
 | actions that will be implemented with the direct beneficiaries (women producers), but also with indirect ones (for | 
 | example, from producers' households) in order to promote greater participation of rural women in the project. The | 
 | summary of the history of consultations that were carried out to develop the project is in Annex 7. | 
 | D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 |  | 
 | 129. Financial Structure. As mentioned in section B.5, the project proposes a combination of loans (assumed by | 
 | the Government of Colombia) for an amount of USD 35.3 million. On the other hand, the local counterpart amounts | 
 | to USD 16.56 million of direct co-financing from farmer associations and other institutions in Colombia. This means | 
 | that 48.3% of the total amount of the project are grants, minimizing the concessionality of the GCF funds. GCF | 
 | financing and its financial instruments including grants, combined with CAF funds, reduces the cost of loans for this | 
 | Project. On the other hand, it is expected that with the Project, and in addition to the co-financing of the farmer | 
 | associations of the various production chains, additional investments will be made (not counted as co-financing) by | 
 | the private sector, once there is a greater adoption of the practices and technologies developed and validated by | 
 | the project. | 
 | 130. Efficiency and effectiveness. The ex-ante economic analysis for the implementation of the CSICAP project | 
 | considers eight agricultural activities: livestock (milk, beef), sugar cane, sugar cane, coffee, corn, rice and potatoes. | 
 | The economic benefits of the project for society (producers and consumers) are analyzed due to the increase in | 
 | production performance, the reduction of losses and the reduction of production costs as a result of: (i) adoption of | 
 | technologies for management agroclimatic risk and digital agriculture, (ii) genetic improvement and (iii) efficient use | 
 | of water resources. This analysis considers incremental benefits over 25 years, which is the useful life of the | 
 | technologies considered. This evaluation considered the most probable scenario of technological impact and two | 
 | opposite scenarios (maximum and minimum) of technology adoption by producers, as well as the probability of | 
 | success in the implementation. | 
 | 131. The results in Annex 3 show an average IRR of 201%, which results from the high impact of making climate | 
 | smart technologies available at scale for producers and generating high returns at the producer level. It is worth | 
 | noting that despite this high rate of return in the targeted value chains. In this case, despite the high level of IRRs, | 
 | reimbursable instruments to the producers (instead of grants) are not viable because the kind of investments are | 
 | usually not financed to farmers (as most of them are public goods). That is, there are no commercial financing | 
 | sources available in Colombia for the type of investments (gene banks and seed improvement, big data, GHG | 
 | emission measurement, etc.) considered by the project. Since the project represents a public good investment, as | 
 | around 10 percent of total project costs go to public infrastructure that do not have direct revenue generation | 
 | potential, without GCF and CAF support, the government would need to look for another unlikely available similar | 
 | sources of funding. GCF offers a unique opportunity for blending low interest loans and grants, reducing the financial | 
 | cost of the project, and representing a specialized source, especially designed to enhance climate resilience and | 

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 75
DD
mitigate GHG emissions. As the sensitivity analysis shows (Table 6 in Annex 3), the project is not feasible if the
grant share is reduced by 75%. A 35% grant reduction will make the project unprofitable for two producer
associations (Fedegan and Asocaña-Cenicaña) and technically unfeasible given the importance of livestock in GHG
emission reductions. Reducing the grant will cause many activities not to be completed or even undertaken,
affecting the expected productivity increase, cost reduction, and technology adoption rate, undermining the overall
project´s success probability.
132. Annex 3 also provides a more realistic economic evaluation, where we have used the modified IRR (Marin-
Salazar, et al. 2019), which takes into account the actual reinvestment rate (usually lower than the regular IRR´s).
As a result, the revised overall project’s modified internal rate of return (MIRR), considering a return of 12% and a
real interest rate of 3.5%, is 24%, which still attractive enough to justify the public investments. For each crop,
depending on the technologies and the level of adoption (between 10% and 37%), the MIRR varies between 17%
and 29%. For most of the crops considered, the MIRR values are above 14%, which is the average rate for
agriculture projects in Latin America and the Caribbean. The net present value (NPV) of the investments for the
eight agricultural sectors would be around USD 3.3 billion under a conservative scenario of technology adoption.
These results show that the application of concrete measures, within the reach of producers and easily implemented
to promote the closing of productive gaps, will increase the competitiveness of the agricultural sector, having
tangible benefits in terms of economic returns from these investments. The benefit-cost ratio (BCR) of the
technologies is 103 for the project, varying between crops between 17.6 and 219.5, depending on the level of
adoption of the technologies (see detailed table in Annex 3).
133. Best available technologies and practices. The project will make use of best practices and innovative
technologies that have been previously tested and that have been validated in the reality of the Colombian
agricultural sector. Specifically, and as described in section B.3, a Big Data platform will be developed and operated
for the supply of analyzed and processed information and the empowerment of the farmer associations to achieve
the delivery of recommendations for adaptation and mitigation measures. to producers in a reliable, timely and site-
specific manner, resulting in agility and lower cost for the provision of the agricultural extension service (Product
1.1). The design and implementation of early warning platforms, the generation of climate predictions, the use of
simulation models and Big Data information, will provide accurate and timely information to farmers (Result 1.2).
Under Component 2 of genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options and
their scaling, new varieties tolerant or resistant to water deficit, waterlogging and diseases will be used, developed
and validated and seeds adapted to these conditions will be multiplied in a massive way (Product 2.1). Under Result
2.2, sustainable management practices will be formulated and implemented on a large scale, including the
incorporation of agroforestry arrangements, rational management of fertilizers and the use of bioproducts,
optimization of irrigation systems, conservation agriculture, and use of waste. harvesting, low-emission planting
materials, conservation and restoration of strategic areas at the landscape level, optimization of processing
systems, and water harvesting. In livestock farming, grassland management, animal welfare, and good livestock
practices will also be worked on.

--- Table 1 on Page 46 ---
 | mitigate GHG emissions. As the sensitivity analysis shows (Table 6 in Annex 3), the project is not feasible if the | 
 | grant share is reduced by 75%. A 35% grant reduction will make the project unprofitable for two producer | 
 | associations (Fedegan and Asocaña-Cenicaña) and technically unfeasible given the importance of livestock in GHG | 
 | emission reductions. Reducing the grant will cause many activities not to be completed or even undertaken, | 
 | affecting the expected productivity increase, cost reduction, and technology adoption rate, undermining the overall | 
 | project´s success probability. | 
 | 132. Annex 3 also provides a more realistic economic evaluation, where we have used the modified IRR (Marin- | 
 | Salazar, et al. 2019), which takes into account the actual reinvestment rate (usually lower than the regular IRR´s). | 
 | As a result, the revised overall project’s modified internal rate of return (MIRR), considering a return of 12% and a | 
 | real interest rate of 3.5%, is 24%, which still attractive enough to justify the public investments. For each crop, | 
 | depending on the technologies and the level of adoption (between 10% and 37%), the MIRR varies between 17% | 
 | and 29%. For most of the crops considered, the MIRR values are above 14%, which is the average rate for | 
 | agriculture projects in Latin America and the Caribbean. The net present value (NPV) of the investments for the | 
 | eight agricultural sectors would be around USD 3.3 billion under a conservative scenario of technology adoption. | 
 | These results show that the application of concrete measures, within the reach of producers and easily implemented | 
 | to promote the closing of productive gaps, will increase the competitiveness of the agricultural sector, having | 
 | tangible benefits in terms of economic returns from these investments. The benefit-cost ratio (BCR) of the | 
 | technologies is 103 for the project, varying between crops between 17.6 and 219.5, depending on the level of | 
 | adoption of the technologies (see detailed table in Annex 3). | 
 | 133. Best available technologies and practices. The project will make use of best practices and innovative | 
 | technologies that have been previously tested and that have been validated in the reality of the Colombian | 
 | agricultural sector. Specifically, and as described in section B.3, a Big Data platform will be developed and operated | 
 | for the supply of analyzed and processed information and the empowerment of the farmer associations to achieve | 
 | the delivery of recommendations for adaptation and mitigation measures. to producers in a reliable, timely and site- | 
 | specific manner, resulting in agility and lower cost for the provision of the agricultural extension service (Product | 
 | 1.1). The design and implementation of early warning platforms, the generation of climate predictions, the use of | 
 | simulation models and Big Data information, will provide accurate and timely information to farmers (Result 1.2). | 
 | Under Component 2 of genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options and | 
 | their scaling, new varieties tolerant or resistant to water deficit, waterlogging and diseases will be used, developed | 
 | and validated and seeds adapted to these conditions will be multiplied in a massive way (Product 2.1). Under Result | 
 | 2.2, sustainable management practices will be formulated and implemented on a large scale, including the | 
 | incorporation of agroforestry arrangements, rational management of fertilizers and the use of bioproducts, | 
 | optimization of irrigation systems, conservation agriculture, and use of waste. harvesting, low-emission planting | 
 | materials, conservation and restoration of strategic areas at the landscape level, optimization of processing | 
 | systems, and water harvesting. In livestock farming, grassland management, animal welfare, and good livestock | 
 | practices will also be worked on. | 

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 75
EE
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance
Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes
as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both.
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development
E.2. Core indicator targets
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme.
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in
section A.
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon
Annual 366,081 t CO2 eq
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to
be reduced or avoided (mitigation
and cross-cutting only)
Lifetime 9,152,034 t CO2 eq
(a) Total project financing 99,910,201 USD
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 (b) Requested GCF amount 73,283,080 USD
eq, defined as total investment
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions 9,152,034 t CO2eq
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross- (d) Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq (d = a / c) 10.9 USD / t CO 2 eq
cutting only)
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO eqremoved
(e = b / c)
2 8.01 USD / t CO
2
eq17
(f) Total finance leveraged 26,627,121 USD
E.2.3. Expected volume of
finance to be leveraged by the (g) Public source co-financed 10,300,000 USD
proposed project/programme as a
(h) Private source finance leveraged 16,327,121 USD
result of the Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 0.36
private sources (mitigation and (j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b) 0.14
cross-cutting only)
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 0.22
619,691
Direct
E.2.4. Expected total number of 20% of female
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 347,996
Indirect
(disaggregated by sex) 18 20% of female
1.21% (Expressed as %) of total population in Colombia
Direct
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries (51,273,917 people)
relative to total population
0.68% (Expressed as %) of total population in Colombia
(disaggregated by sex) Indirect
(51,273,917 people)
17 It is important to note that approximately 13% of the GCF contribution is considered within the mitigation results area (see section A4),
around USD 9,526,800. If we account on ly for this funding to estimate the GCF cost per t CO2eq, the cost is USD 1.04 per t CO2eq (USD
9,526,800 / 9,152,034 t CO2 eq = 1.04 USD / t CO2eq).
18 See section D1 and Annex 24 for further details regarding the calculations and assumptions for direct and indirect beneficiaries.

--- Table 1 on Page 47 ---
 | LOGICAL FRAMEWORK | 
 | This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance | 
 | Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes | 
 | as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing. | 
 | E.1. Paradigm shift objectives | 
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both.
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 47 ---
 | E.2. Core indicator targets |  |  |  |  |  | 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme.
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in
section A. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon |  | Annual |  | 366,081 t CO2 eq |  | 
 | dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | be reduced or avoided (mitigation |  | Lifetime |  | 9,152,034 t CO2 eq |  | 
 | and cross-cutting only) |  |  |  |  |  | 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2
eq, defined as total investment
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) |  |  |  | (a) Total project financing |  | 99,910,201 USD | 
 |  |  |  | (b) Requested GCF amount |  | 73,283,080 USD | 
 |  |  |  | (c) Expected lifetime emission reductions |  | 9,152,034 t CO2eq | 
 |  |  |  | (d) Estimated cost per t CO eq (d = a / c)
2 |  | 10.9 USD / t CO eq
2 | 
 |  |  |  | (e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO eqremoved
2
(e = b / c) |  | 8.01 USD / t CO eq17
2 | 
E.2.3. Expected volume of
finance to be leveraged by the
proposed project/programme as a
result of the Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and
private sources (mitigation and
cross-cutting only) |  |  |  | (f) Total finance leveraged |  | 26,627,121 USD | 
 |  |  |  | (g) Public source co-financed |  | 10,300,000 USD | 
 |  |  |  | (h) Private source finance leveraged |  | 16,327,121 USD | 
 |  |  |  | (i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) |  | 0.36 | 
 |  |  |  | (j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b) |  | 0.14 | 
 |  |  |  | (k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) |  | 0.22 | 
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
(disaggregated by sex) 18 |  |  | Direct |  | 619,691
20% of female |  | 
 |  |  | Indirect |  | 347,996
20% of female |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex) |  |  | Direct |  | 1.21% (Expressed as %) of total population in Colombia
(51,273,917 people) |  | 
 |  |  | Indirect |  | 0.68% (Expressed as %) of total population in Colombia
(51,273,917 people) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 47 ---
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2
eq, defined as total investment
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only)

--- Table 4 on Page 47 ---
E.2.3. Expected volume of
finance to be leveraged by the
proposed project/programme as a
result of the Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and
private sources (mitigation and
cross-cutting only)

--- Table 5 on Page 47 ---
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
(disaggregated by sex) 18

--- Table 6 on Page 47 ---
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex)

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 75
EE
E.3. Fund-level impacts
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and corresponding
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above. Add rows
as needed.
Means of Target
Expected Results Indicator Verification Baseline Mid- Assumptions
(MoV) term Final
Measurement of 0 98,961 498,190 Farmers adopt
emissions in the field technological packages
and estimation of No project and best practices in
emissions according interventio crop and livestock
M4.0 Reduced emissions to the area of ns management.
improved crops and
from land use,
M4.1 Tonnes of carbon livestock. Detailed assumptions
reforestation, reduced
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 regarding the
deforestation, and through
sustainable forest eq) reduced or avoided National GHG calculations are included
management and (including increased inventories for in Annex 22, including:
conservation and removals) - forest and land agriculture in - Project lifetime: 25
enhancement of forest use Colombia (if years
carbon stocks available for the - Annual emission
targeted value reductions: 366,081 t
chains). CO2 eq
- Lifetime emission
reductions: 9,152,034 t
CO2 eq
Monitoring platform, 0 16,200 54,000 The capacities created
field surveys, data 20 in the farmer
collection. No project (80% associations are
beneficiari male, (80% maintained and renewed
Secondary data: es 20% male, periodically and catalyze
annual datasets of female) 20% a better management of
some producer’s female) climate risks.
associations; i) Rice:
A1.2 Number of males and
A1.0 Increased resilience ENAM; ii) Fenalce,19 Support structures /
females benefiting from the
and enhanced livelihoods iii) Coffee Federation services for the
adoption of diversified,
of the most vulnerable datasets (annual implementation of best
climate resilient livelihood
people, communities and stats); iv) agricultural practices are
options (including fisheries,
regions Fedepanela. available and trained.
agriculture, tourism, etc.)
The male and female
breakdown is based on
the previous
experiences where only
5.4% of producers were
female heads of
household.
A2.0 Increased resilience A2.2 Number of food Monitoring platform, 1,113,514 1,115,5 1,123,5 Farmers implement
of health and well-being, secure households (in field surveys, data 22 secure 14 14 technology packages
and food and water areas/periods at risk of collection. household secure secure managing to be
security climate change impacts) s in the househ househ prepared for any
rural olds olds adverse weather event
19 ENAM is the National Mechanized Rice Survey (ENAM for its acronym in Spanish) carried out by FEDEARROZ and the National
Administrative Department of Statistics (D ANE for its acronym in Spanish) twice a year, sample size around 700- 800 producers. FENALCE
sample size around 700-800– annual. FEDEPANELA sample size around 400-500 farmers
20 To estimate the 54,000 people, we used number of direct beneficiaries (just producers, not family members), multiplied by the adoption
rates from the ex-ante evaluation (see Annex 23) and other studies which indicate the average level of agricultural technology adoption is
28%. In this case, we only count those producers that actually adopt the technologies and practices and benefit from them.
22 The households are calculated based on the rural population divided by the average size of people per household (3.1) and the percentage
of people with food insecurity in Colombia (ENSIN, 2015)

--- Table 1 on Page 48 ---
 | E.3. Fund-level impacts |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and corresponding
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above. Add rows
as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected Results |  | Indicator | Means of
Verification
(MoV) | Baseline |  | Target |  |  |  | Assumptions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Mid- |  | Final |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | term |  |  |  |  | 
M4.0 Reduced emissions
from land use,
reforestation, reduced
deforestation, and through
sustainable forest
management and
conservation and
enhancement of forest
carbon stocks |  | M4.1 Tonnes of carbon
dioxide equivalent (t CO2
eq) reduced or avoided
(including increased
removals) - forest and land
use | Measurement of
emissions in the field
and estimation of
emissions according
to the area of
improved crops and
livestock.
National GHG
inventories for
agriculture in
Colombia (if
available for the
targeted value
chains). | 0
No project
interventio
ns | 98,961 |  |  | 498,190 |  | Farmers adopt
technological packages
and best practices in
crop and livestock
management.
Detailed assumptions
regarding the
calculations are included
in Annex 22, including:
- Project lifetime: 25
years
- Annual emission
reductions: 366,081 t
CO2 eq
- Lifetime emission
reductions: 9,152,034 t
CO2 eq | 
A1.0 Increased resilience
and enhanced livelihoods
of the most vulnerable
people, communities and
regions |  | A1.2 Number of males and
females benefiting from the
adoption of diversified,
climate resilient livelihood
options (including fisheries,
agriculture, tourism, etc.) | Monitoring platform,
field surveys, data
collection.
Secondary data:
annual datasets of
some producer’s
associations; i) Rice:
ENAM; ii) Fenalce,19
iii) Coffee Federation
datasets (annual
stats); iv)
Fedepanela. | 0
No project
beneficiari
es | 16,200
(80%
male,
20%
female) |  |  | 54,000
20
(80%
male,
20%
female) |  | The capacities created
in the farmer
associations are
maintained and renewed
periodically and catalyze
a better management of
climate risks.
Support structures /
services for the
implementation of best
agricultural practices are
available and trained.
The male and female
breakdown is based on
the previous
experiences where only
5.4% of producers were
female heads of
household. | 
A2.0 Increased resilience
of health and well-being,
and food and water
security |  | A2.2 Number of food
secure households (in
areas/periods at risk of
climate change impacts) | Monitoring platform,
field surveys, data
collection. | 1,113,514
22 secure
household
s in the
rural | 1,115,5
14
secure
househ
olds |  |  | 1,123,5
14
secure
househ
olds |  | Farmers implement
technology packages
managing to be
prepared for any
adverse weather event | 

--- Table 2 on Page 48 ---
Verification
(MoV)

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 75
EE
departmen (23.8% (23.8% that may affect their
Secondary source:
ts where househ househ production and thus
National Budget of
project old led old led. increase their probability
Household
interventio by This of achieving food
expenses (ENPH)21-
ns will be women. implies security.
DANE.
carried This at the
out. implies end of Food security is the safe
(23.8% 2,000 the and permanent access
household househ project of the members of a
led by olds in 10,000 household to sufficient
women) food househ food in quantity and
security olds in quality, for a healthy and
) food active life. FAO.Escala
security Latinoamericana y
) Caribeña de Seg uridad
Alimentaria (ELCSA):
Manual de Uso y
Aplicaciones. 2012
Average
net
income
(USD per
hectare):23
Rice: 356
Farmers, aware of the
Sugarcane risks of climate
: 73 variability and change,
adopt technologies that
Baseline, Bananas: make them more
Social, environmental, intermediate and 1,911 resilient to any adverse
economic co-benefit event while increasing
final surveys
index/indicator at the their productivity and
Coffee:
Social, environmental, impact level being able to sell more,
Secondary source: 757 4.4% 14.6%24
economic co-benefit which leads to an
National Budget of
Percentage increase in increase in household
household income from Household Livestock income generated by
agricultural activities expenses (ENPH) - (meat): agricultural activities.
DANE. 127
Baseline values were
Livestock calculated from average
(milk): 21 yield and price data for
each crop
Corn: 407
Panela
Cane: 312
Potato:
629
E.4. Fund-level outcomes
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be
selected per expected outcome. Add rows as needed.
Means of Target
Expected Outcomes Indicator Verification Baseline Assumptions
(MoV) Mid-term) Final
21 Survey that provides information on the structure of spending and household income that allows establishing consumption patterns of the
inhabitants of Colombia, in which adequ ate food consumption indices can be constructed. Survey conducted every 10 years. Next survey
2026.
23 Estimated based on average yield (ton/ha), price (Colombian pesos /Ton), exchange rate with USD and cost per hectare.
24 Percentage change is based on average observed value from the ex-post analysis of previous interventions (see Annex 23).

--- Table 1 on Page 49 ---
 |  | Secondary source:
National Budget of
Household
expenses (ENPH)21-
DANE. | departmen
ts where
project
interventio
ns will be
carried
out.
(23.8%
household
led by
women) | (23.8%
househ
old led
by
women.
This
implies
2,000
househ
olds in
food
security
) | (23.8%
househ
old led.
This
implies
at the
end of
the
project
10,000
househ
olds in
food
security
) | that may affect their
production and thus
increase their probability
of achieving food
security.
Food security is the safe
and permanent access
of the members of a
household to sufficient
food in quantity and
quality, for a healthy and
active life. FAO.Escala
Latinoamericana y
Caribeña de Seg uridad
Alimentaria (ELCSA):
Manual de Uso y
Aplicaciones. 2012
Social, environmental,
economic co-benefit | Social, environmental,
economic co-benefit
index/indicator at the
impact level
Percentage increase in
household income from
agricultural activities | Baseline,
intermediate and
final surveys
Secondary source:
National Budget of
Household
expenses (ENPH) -
DANE. | Average
net
income
(USD per
hectare):23
Rice: 356
Sugarcane
: 73
Bananas:
1,911
Coffee:
757
Livestock
(meat):
127
Livestock
(milk): 21
Corn: 407
Panela
Cane: 312
Potato:
629 | 4.4% | 14.6%24 | Farmers, aware of the
risks of climate
variability and change,
adopt technologies that
make them more
resilient to any adverse
event while increasing
their productivity and
being able to sell more,
which leads to an
increase in household
income generated by
agricultural activities.
Baseline values were
calculated from average
yield and price data for
each crop

--- Table 2 on Page 49 ---
 | E.4. Fund-level outcomes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be
selected per expected outcome. Add rows as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected Outcomes |  | Indicator |  | Means of |  | Baseline | Target |  | Assumptions | 
 |  |  |  | Verification |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term) | Final |  | 
 |  |  |  | (MoV) |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 75
EE
57,373 ha.
This
implies
55,263 ha 2,119 ha 64,013 ha
(full invest)
Primary data: (It is under This implies
Monitoring equivalent sustainabl 8,750 ha (full Farmers adopt
platform, field to hectares e invest) under technological
surveys, data under managem sustainable packages and best
collection silvopastora ent management practices in crop and
l systems in practices practices livestock
Secondary data: cattle following following the management that
annual datasets of (38,390 ha) the guidelines of contribute to the
M9.0 Improved M9.1 Hectares of land or some producer’s and guidelines the project: reduction of CO2
management of land forests under improved and associations; i) hectares of the emissions
Rice: ENAM25; ii) Rice: 1500 ha
or forest areas effective management that under the project
Cattle: datasets Description of
c e o m n i t s r s ib io u n ti s n g re t d o u ctions c e o m n i t s r s ib io u n te r s e d to u c C ti O on 2 s from FEDEGAN; A 2. M 02 T 6 E C Rice: 363 Corn: 900 ha assumptions for
iii) Coffee system for ha Panela: 660 calculations are
Federation include in Annex 22,
rice (16,873 ha
datasets; iv) Corn: 218 and in section D1.
ha) of the
RENARE: department ha Potato: 600 ha
datasets from Means of verification
s where the
national platform Panela: Livestock:3,84 are described in
project
of GHG reduction 160 ha 0 ha Annex 11.
intervention
projects.
s will be Potato: Plantain:
carried out) 145 ha 1,250 ha
Livestock:
929 ha
Plantain:
303 ha
Annual Annual Annual Climate information
agriculture products and services
agriculture agriculture
sector plans sector sector plans are developed and
by gremios plans by by gremios adopted by the
are updated gremios to train
are updated gremios
using data are using data on extension technicians
on the updated the on time to provide
meteorologi using data meteorological information to farmers
Primary data: and early in the field. They use
cal and on the
Surveys and early meteorolo warning the technology
training activities warning gical and systems, and designed to reduce
A6.1 Use of climate to technicians. systems, early relevant possible losses due to
A6.0 Increased sectoral and climatic factors and
information and warning
generation and use of products/services in Secondary data: relevant systems, extension make them more
climate information in decision-making in climate Producers sectoral and officers are resilient.
decision-making associations’ trained in the
sensitive sectors and relevant
reports about the interpretation This assumes that
extension sectoral
use of their of agroclimatic gremios already have
officers are and
platforms. forecast, climate services
trained in extension
leading to a improve their capacity
the officers
reduction of regarding climate
interpretatio are trained
losses in services, and those
n of in the
agricultural gremios that do not
agroclimatic interpretati
production have systems in
forecast, on of
amounting to place, improve their
leading to a agroclimati
USD stance compared to
reduction of c forecast,
300,000/year. the baseline
losses in leading to
25 ENAM is the National Mechanized Rice Survey (ENAM for its acronym in Spanish) carried out by FEDEARROZ and the National
Administrative Department of Statistics (D ANE for its acronym in Spanish) twice a year.
26 AMTEC is the Mass Adoption of Technology designed and conceived by the National Rice Fund (FEDEARROZ for its acronym in Spanish)
to disseminate and transfer best-management practices for rice producers to increase yield and reduce cost of production (Ramirez and
Bedoya, 2019).

--- Table 1 on Page 50 ---
M9.0 Improved
management of land
or forest areas
contributing to
emissions reductions | M9.1 Hectares of land or
forests under improved and
effective management that
contributes to CO2
emission reductions | Primary data:
Monitoring
platform, field
surveys, data
collection
Secondary data:
annual datasets of
some producer’s
associations; i)
Rice: ENAM25; ii)
Cattle: datasets
from FEDEGAN;
iii) Coffee
Federation
datasets; iv)
RENARE:
datasets from
national platform
of GHG reduction
projects. | 55,263 ha
(It is
equivalent
to hectares
under
silvopastora
l systems in
cattle
(38,390 ha)
and
hectares
under the
AMTEC
2.026
system for
rice (16,873
ha) of the
department
s where the
project
intervention
s will be
carried out) |  | 57,373 ha. |  | 64,013 ha
This implies
8,750 ha (full
invest) under
sustainable
management
practices
following the
guidelines of
the project:
Rice: 1500 ha
Corn: 900 ha
Panela: 660
ha
Potato: 600 ha
Livestock:3,84
0 ha
Plantain:
1,250 ha |  |  | Farmers adopt
technological
packages and best
practices in crop and
livestock
management that
contribute to the
reduction of CO2
emissions
Description of
assumptions for
calculations are
include in Annex 22,
and in section D1.
Means of verification
are described in
Annex 11. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | This |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | implies |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 2,119 ha |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (full invest) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | under |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | sustainabl |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | e |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | managem |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | ent |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | practices |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | following |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | the |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | guidelines |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | of the |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | project |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Rice: 363 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | ha |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Corn: 218 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | ha |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Panela: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 160 ha |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Potato: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 145 ha |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Livestock: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 929 ha |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Plantain: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 303 ha |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A6.0 Increased
generation and use of
climate information in
decision-making | A6.1 Use of climate
information
products/services in
decision-making in climate
sensitive sectors | Primary data:
Surveys and
training activities
to technicians.
Secondary data:
Producers
associations’
reports about the
use of their
platforms. | Annual
agriculture
sector plans
by gremios
are updated
using data
on the
meteorologi
cal and
early
warning
systems,
and
relevant
sectoral
and
extension
officers are
trained in
the
interpretatio
n of
agroclimatic
forecast,
leading to a
reduction of
losses in | Annual
agriculture
sector
plans by
gremios
are
updated
using data
on the
meteorolo
gical and
early
warning
systems,
and
relevant
sectoral
and
extension
officers
are trained
in the
interpretati
on of
agroclimati
c forecast,
leading to |  |  |  | Annual |  |  | Climate information | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | agriculture |  |  | products and services | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | sector plans |  |  | are developed and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | by gremios |  |  | adopted by the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | are updated |  |  | gremios to train | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | using data on |  |  | extension technicians | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the |  |  | on time to provide | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | meteorological |  |  | information to farmers | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and early |  |  | in the field. They use | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | warning |  |  | the technology | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | systems, and |  |  | designed to reduce | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | relevant
sectoral and |  |  | possible losses due to
climatic factors and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | extension |  |  | make them more | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | officers are |  |  | resilient. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | trained in the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | interpretation
of agroclimatic |  |  | This assumes that
gremios already have | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | forecast, |  |  | climate services | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | leading to a |  |  | improve their capacity | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reduction of |  |  | regarding climate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | losses in |  |  | services, and those | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | agricultural |  |  | gremios that do not | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | production |  |  | have systems in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | amounting to |  |  | place, improve their | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | USD |  |  | stance compared to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 300,000/year. |  |  | the baseline | 

--- Table 2 on Page 50 ---
55,263 ha
(It is
equivalent
to hectares
under
silvopastora
l systems in
cattle
(38,390 ha)
and
hectares
under the
AMTEC
2.026
system for
rice (16,873
ha) of the
department
s where the
project
intervention
s will be
carried out)

--- Table 3 on Page 50 ---
64,013 ha
This implies
8,750 ha (full
invest) under
sustainable
management
practices
following the
guidelines of
the project:
Rice: 1500 ha
Corn: 900 ha
Panela: 660
ha
Potato: 600 ha
Livestock:3,84
0 ha
Plantain:
1,250 ha

--- Table 4 on Page 50 ---
Primary data:
Monitoring
platform, field
surveys, data
collection
Secondary data:
annual datasets of
some producer’s
associations; i)
Rice: ENAM25; ii)
Cattle: datasets
from FEDEGAN;
iii) Coffee
Federation
datasets; iv)
RENARE:
datasets from
national platform
of GHG reduction
projects.

--- Table 5 on Page 50 ---
Farmers adopt
technological
packages and best
practices in crop and
livestock
management that
contribute to the
reduction of CO2
emissions
Description of
assumptions for
calculations are
include in Annex 22,
and in section D1.
Means of verification
are described in
Annex 11.

--- Table 6 on Page 50 ---
M9.0 Improved
management of land
or forest areas
contributing to
emissions reductions

--- Table 7 on Page 50 ---
M9.1 Hectares of land or
orests under improved and
effective management that
ontributes to CO2
emission reductions

--- Table 8 on Page 50 ---
agriculture
sector plans
by gremios
are updated
using data
on the
meteorologi
cal and
early
warning
systems,
and
relevant
sectoral
and
extension
officers are
trained in
the
interpretatio
n of
agroclimatic
forecast,
leading to a
reduction of
losses in

--- Table 9 on Page 50 ---
agriculture
sector
plans by
gremios
are
updated
using data
on the
meteorolo
gical and
early
warning
systems,
and
relevant
sectoral
and
extension
officers
are trained
in the
interpretati
on of
agroclimati
c forecast,
leading to

--- Table 10 on Page 50 ---
Primary data:
Surveys and
training activities
to technicians.
Secondary data:
Producers
associations’
reports about the
use of their
platforms.

--- Table 11 on Page 50 ---
A6.0 Increased
generation and use of
climate information in

--- Table 12 on Page 50 ---
A6.1 Use of climate
nformation
products/services in
decision-making in climate
ensitive sectors

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 75
EE
agricultural a
production reduction
amounting of losses
to USD in
100,000/ye agricultura
ar27. l
production
amounting
to USD
150,000/y
ear.
16,077
are the
new users
of these 53,590 new
tools as a users of these
result of tools as a
the project result of the
are project are
composed composed as
as follows: follows:
Rice 653 Rice 2,175 The technologies,
tools, strategies are
Potato Potato 8,476 available and respond
2,543 to the needs of the
Sugar cane sector.
Sugar 758
Monitoring
cane 227 The information is
platform, field Panela cane disseminated and the
surveys, data Panela 6,586 organizations /
A7.1 Use by vulnerable collection 0 a r ( e a s n o th ere c 1 a ,9 n 7 e 6 Dairy farming institutions know it
households, communities, Secondary data: Fund- 4,544 At least 5 gremios
businesses and public- annual datasets of Dairy
A7.0 Strengthened supported strategies included
sector services of Fund- some producer’s farming Livestock
adaptive capacity and tools, information and some
reduced exposure to supported tools associations; i) instruments 1,363 4,544 tools of the project.
instruments, strategies and Rice: ENAM; ii)
climate risks activities to respond to Cattle: datasets , strategies Livestock Corn 3,659
and Based on the
c v l a im ria a b te il it c y h ange and f ii r i o ) m C o F ff E e D e EGAN; activities) 1,363 Banana 294 b a a n s d e f l i i n n a e l , p m ro id je -t c e t rm
F da e t d a e s r e a t t s io ; n iv ) Other C 1, o 0 r 9 n 8 Coffee 21,600 surveys, short
surveys after each
associations Banana Gremios: Four event the project will
88 (4) strategies monitor whether
participants use the
Coffee (80% male, tools, instruments,
6,480 20% female etc., generated by the
household project.
Gremios: heads)
Two (2)
strategies Farmers have
adapted and
(80% have an
male, 20% income
female increase of
household 14.6%
heads)
Farmers
have
27 Through the ex-post impact evaluation, we quantified and understood the effects of the activities carried out within the technical agreement
framework since 2013. These activities f ocused mainly on rice and maize. The analysis was based, on primary information collected in the
field using face-to-face surveys made to producers of the two crops. The survey instruments used allowed us to describe different dimensions
of the producers, like household composition, production decision-making, agronomic management, information-technical assistance,
exposure to adverse weather events, adoption of resilient practices, living conditions, among others. The results of the ex-post impact
evaluation showed that there are heterogeneous effects by type of crop and intervention. For more details see Annex 23 and Gallego, J.,
Wiesner, D., Jerez, K., Betancourth, A., Ortega, J., Bateman, A., González, C., Andrade, R., Ibarra, L., Álvarez, A. and Cubillos, N. (2021).
Intervenciones en Colombia - Cambio Climático: Evaluación de Impacto Informe final - resultados y recomendaciones. (Interventions in
Colombia – Climate Change: Impact Evaluation Final Report – Results and Recommendations). Unpublished

--- Table 1 on Page 51 ---
 |  |  | agricultural
production
amounting
to USD
100,000/ye
ar27. |  | a |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | reduction |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | of losses |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | in |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | agricultura |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | l |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | production |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | amounting |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | to USD |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 150,000/y |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | ear. |  |  | 
A7.0 Strengthened
adaptive capacity and
reduced exposure to
climate risks | A7.1 Use by vulnerable
households, communities,
businesses and public-
sector services of Fund-
supported tools
instruments, strategies and
activities to respond to
climate change and
variability | Monitoring
platform, field
surveys, data
collection
Secondary data:
annual datasets of
some producer’s
associations; i)
Rice: ENAM; ii)
Cattle: datasets
from FEDEGAN;
iii) Coffee
Federation
datasets; iv) Other
associations | 0 (as there
are no
Fund-
supported
tools,
instruments
, strategies
and
activities) |  | 16,077 |  | 53,590 new
users of these
tools as a
result of the
project are
composed as
follows:
Rice 2,175
Potato 8,476
Sugar cane
758
Panela cane
6,586
Dairy farming
4,544
Livestock
4,544
Corn 3,659
Banana 294
Coffee 21,600
Gremios: Four
(4) strategies
(80% male,
20% female
household
heads)
Farmers have
adapted and
have an
income
increase of
14.6% | The technologies,
tools, strategies are
available and respond
to the needs of the
sector.
The information is
disseminated and the
organizations /
institutions know it
At least 5 gremios
strategies included
information and some
tools of the project.
Based on the
baseline, mid-term
and final project
surveys, short
surveys after each
event the project will
monitor whether
participants use the
tools, instruments,
etc., generated by the
project.
 |  |  |  |  | are the |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | new users |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | of these |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | tools as a |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | result of |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | the project |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | are |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | composed |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | as follows: |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Rice 653 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Potato |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 2,543 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Sugar |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | cane 227 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Panela |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | cane |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 1,976 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Dairy |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | farming |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 1,363 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Livestock |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 1,363 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Corn
1,098 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Banana |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 88 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Coffee |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 6,480 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Gremios: |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Two (2) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | strategies |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (80% |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | male, 20% |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | female |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | household |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | heads) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Farmers |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | have |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 51 ---
agricultural
production
amounting
to USD
100,000/ye
ar27.

--- Table 3 on Page 51 ---
53,590 new
users of these
tools as a
result of the
project are
composed as
follows:
Rice 2,175
Potato 8,476
Sugar cane
758
Panela cane
6,586
Dairy farming
4,544
Livestock
4,544
Corn 3,659
Banana 294
Coffee 21,600
Gremios: Four
(4) strategies
(80% male,
20% female
household
heads)
Farmers have
adapted and
have an
income
increase of
14.6%

--- Table 4 on Page 51 ---
The technologies,
tools, strategies are
available and respond
to the needs of the
sector.
The information is
disseminated and the
organizations /
institutions know it
At least 5 gremios
strategies included
information and some
tools of the project.
Based on the
baseline, mid-term
and final project
surveys, short
surveys after each
event the project will
monitor whether
participants use the
tools, instruments,
etc., generated by the
project.

--- Table 5 on Page 51 ---
Monitoring
platform, field
surveys, data
collection
Secondary data:
annual datasets of
some producer’s
associations; i)
Rice: ENAM; ii)
Cattle: datasets
from FEDEGAN;
iii) Coffee
Federation
datasets; iv) Other
associations

--- Table 6 on Page 51 ---
A7.1 Use by vulnerable
households, communities,
businesses and public-
ector services of Fund-
upported tools
nstruments, strategies and
activities to respond to
limate change and
ariability

--- Table 7 on Page 51 ---
0 (as there
are no
Fund-
supported
tools,
instruments
, strategies
and
activities)

--- Table 8 on Page 51 ---
A7.0 Strengthened
adaptive capacity and
reduced exposure to

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 75
EE
adapted
and have
an income
increase
of 4.4%
Agro-climatic
information generated
is received effectively,
which maintains
farmers’ interest in
actively participating
Surveys and focal
in the project
groups
The tools are
Secondary data:
available and respond
annual datasets of
95,745 to the needs of
some producer’s 57,978 224,916
A8.0 Strengthened A8.1 Number of males and technicians and
associations; i) farmers and
awareness of climate females made aware of (80% producer
Rice: ENAM; ii) technitians (80% male,
threats and risk- climate threats and related male, 20% associations.
Cattle: datasets 28 20% women)
reduction processes appropriate responses women) Technicians
from FEDEGAN;
participate in the
iii) Coffee
training activities.
Federation
datasets; iv) Other
The same
associations
methodologies used
for ENAM and
AMTEC surveys shall
be applied to measure
the performance
every year.
A total of 9 A total of 20
new new measure
measures and 3 adopted
and 0 technologies
adopted
technology - Measures
(20):
- sustainable in
Measures livestock, The technologies,
(9): landscape tools, strategies are
Monitoring sustainabl restauration available and respond
platform, field e in planning to the needs of the
surveys, data livestock, (sugar cane sector.
collection landscape and livestock),
The information is
restauratio low water
Number of technologies Secondary data: n planning consumption disseminated and the
and innovative solutions annual datasets of (sugar (rice, potato, organizations /
transferred or licensed to some producer’s 0 cane and sugar cane institutions know it
support low-emission and associations; i)
livestock), and
climate resilient Rice: ENAM; ii) Farmers adopt
efficient musaceae),
development as a result of Cattle: datasets technological
fertilizer efficient
GCF support from FEDEGAN; packages and best
use fertilizer use
iii) Coffee practices in crop and
(potato (potato, corn,
Federation livestock
and rice). rice, panela
datasets; iv) Other management that
low water and
associations contribute to the
consumpti musaceae),
on (rice land
r
e
e
m
d
i
u
s
c
s
t
i
i
o
o
n
n
s
o f CO2
and restauration
potato), (musaceae,
land potato, sugar
restauratio cane and
n livestock), low
(musacea carbon
e and techniques
potato). (rice, corn,
potato,
28 ENAM and AMTEC surveys.

--- Table 1 on Page 52 ---
 |  |  |  |  | adapted |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | and have |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | an income |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | increase |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | of 4.4% |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A8.0 Strengthened
awareness of climate
threats and risk-
reduction processes | A8.1 Number of males and
females made aware of
climate threats and related
appropriate responses | Surveys and focal
groups
Secondary data:
annual datasets of
some producer’s
associations; i)
Rice: ENAM; ii)
Cattle: datasets
from FEDEGAN;
iii) Coffee
Federation
datasets; iv) Other
associations | 57,978
farmers and
technitians
28 | 95,745
(80%
male, 20%
women) |  |  | 224,916
(80% male,
20% women) |  |  |  | Agro-climatic | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | information generated | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | is received effectively, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | which maintains | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | farmers’ interest in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | actively participating | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | in the project | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | The tools are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | available and respond | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | to the needs of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | technicians and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | producer | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | associations. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Technicians | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | participate in the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | training activities. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | The same | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | methodologies used | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | for ENAM and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | AMTEC surveys shall | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | be applied to measure | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the performance | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | every year. | 
 | Number of technologies
and innovative solutions
transferred or licensed to
support low-emission and
climate resilient
development as a result of
GCF support | Monitoring
platform, field
surveys, data
collection
Secondary data:
annual datasets of
some producer’s
associations; i)
Rice: ENAM; ii)
Cattle: datasets
from FEDEGAN;
iii) Coffee
Federation
datasets; iv) Other
associations | 0 |  | A total of 9 |  |  | A total of 20 |  | The technologies,
tools, strategies are
available and respond
to the needs of the
sector.
The information is
disseminated and the
organizations /
institutions know it
Farmers adopt
technological
packages and best
practices in crop and
livestock
management that
contribute to the
reduction of CO2
emissions |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | new |  |  | new measure |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | measures |  |  | and 3 adopted |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | and 0 |  |  | technologies |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | adopted |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | technology |  |  | - Measures |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (20): |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | - |  |  | sustainable in |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Measures |  |  | livestock, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (9): |  |  | landscape |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | sustainabl |  |  | restauration |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | e in |  |  | planning |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | livestock, |  |  | (sugar cane |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | landscape |  |  | and livestock), |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | restauratio
n planning |  |  | low water
consumption |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (sugar |  |  | (rice, potato, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | cane and |  |  | sugar cane |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | livestock), |  |  | and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | efficient |  |  | musaceae), |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | fertilizer |  |  | efficient |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | use |  |  | fertilizer use |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (potato |  |  | (potato, corn, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | and rice). |  |  | rice, panela |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | low water |  |  | and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | consumpti |  |  | musaceae), |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | on (rice |  |  | land |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | and |  |  | restauration |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | potato), |  |  | (musaceae, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | land |  |  | potato, sugar |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | restauratio |  |  | cane and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | n |  |  | livestock), low |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (musacea |  |  | carbon |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | e and |  |  | techniques |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | potato). |  |  | (rice, corn, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | potato, |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 52 ---
Surveys and focal
groups
Secondary data:
annual datasets of
some producer’s
associations; i)
Rice: ENAM; ii)
Cattle: datasets
from FEDEGAN;
iii) Coffee
Federation
datasets; iv) Other
associations

--- Table 3 on Page 52 ---
95,745

(80%
male, 20%
women)

--- Table 4 on Page 52 ---
A8.0 Strengthened
awareness of climate
threats and risk-
reduction processes

--- Table 5 on Page 52 ---
A8.1 Number of males and
emales made aware of
limate threats and related
appropriate responses

--- Table 6 on Page 52 ---
57,978
farmers and
technitians
28

--- Table 7 on Page 52 ---
224,916

(80% male,
20% women)

--- Table 8 on Page 52 ---
The technologies,
tools, strategies are
available and respond
to the needs of the
sector.
The information is
disseminated and the
organizations /
institutions know it
Farmers adopt
technological
packages and best
practices in crop and
livestock
management that
contribute to the
reduction of CO
2
emissions

--- Table 9 on Page 52 ---
Monitoring
platform, field
surveys, data
collection
Secondary data:
annual datasets of
some producer’s
associations; i)
Rice: ENAM; ii)
Cattle: datasets
from FEDEGAN;
iii) Coffee
Federation
datasets; iv) Other
associations

--- Table 10 on Page 52 ---
Number of technologies
and innovative solutions
ransferred or licensed to
upport low-emission and
limate resilient
development as a result of
GCF support

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 75
EE
- panela,
Technolog livestock and
ies:0 musaceae)
-
Technologies
(3): new
varieties for
rice, corn and
sugar cane

--- Table 1 on Page 53 ---
 |  |  |  | -
Technolog
ies:0 |  | panela, |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | livestock and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | musaceae) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | - |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Technologies |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | (3): new |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | varieties for |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | rice, corn and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | sugar cane |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 53 ---
-
Technolog
ies:0

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 75
EE
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as
needed.
Means of Target
Expected Results Indicator Verification Baseline Assumptions
(MoV) Mid-term Final
The 2,200 farmers
remain interested
and actively
participate in the
Percentage of Monitoring project activities.
farmers/technicians who Platform (1)
1.1 Strengthened and
perceived that their and surveys Local producer
modernized agricultural
knowledge improved as a (3) directly organizations and
extension system with an N/A 15% 60%
result strengthened and with associations support
emphasis on adaptation and
modernized agriculture technicians the initiative and are
mitigation
extension system after training willing to participate.
differentiated by gender sessions
Values are based on
past observed
results from similar
experiences
Forecast information
is used by farmers
as a source for
management
decision making.
The target assumes
Percentage of farmers that an increase in 50%
Surveys and
1.1 Strengthened and use as source of information from the baseline of
user
modernized agricultural for agroclimatic services 32.25% the percentage of
information 21.5% of 25% of
extension system with an (bulletins, early warning text from the farmers29 farmers of farmers that use the
emphasis on adaptation and messages, online farmers agroclimatic
gremios’
mitigation information), those promoted services.
platforms
by the gremios
To account for
quality, the definition
of “use” will be that
“information received
is understood and it
was useful”
94,681 222,097
Agro-climatic
Number of farmers aware of information
This This
and who know how to generated is
includes includes
1.2 Agroclimatic services in differentiate climate risks, Surveys and 57,665 received effectively,
29,612 98,710
place and/or strengthened their effects and related focal groups farmers 30 which maintains
target target
mitigation measures, farmers’ interest in
farmers farmers
differentiated by gender actively participating
(20% (20%
in the project
women) women)
Surveys and
193,600 202.000
secondary
ha ha
data from
gremios.
This This
Secondary Field activities for
2.1. Strengthened germplasm Area planted (in hectares) includes includes
data: annual variety development
bank, new climate resilient under the variety or using 190.000 3,600 12,000
datasets of are not delayed by
varieties developed and their seeds recommended for the ha31 target ha
some severe weather
seeds massively distributed area hectares during
producer’s events
during the
associations;
project project
i) Rice:
implement implem
ENAM; ii)
ation entation
Fenalce, iii)
29 Gallego et al, 2021
30 ENAM and AMTEC surveys.
31 Impact Evaluation of the Pilot, 2021.

--- Table 1 on Page 54 ---
 | E.5. Project/programme performance indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as
needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected Results |  | Indicator |  | Means of |  | Baseline | Target |  |  |  |  |  | Assumptions |  | 
 |  |  |  | Verification
(MoV) |  |  |  | Mid-term |  |  | Final |  |  |  | 
1.1 Strengthened and
modernized agricultural
extension system with an
emphasis on adaptation and
mitigation |  | Percentage of
farmers/technicians who
perceived that their
knowledge improved as a
result strengthened and
modernized agriculture
extension system
differentiated by gender | Monitoring
Platform (1)
and surveys
(3) directly
with
technicians
after training
sessions |  |  | N/A | 15% |  |  | 60% |  |  |  | The 2,200 farmers | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | remain interested | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and actively | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | participate in the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | project activities. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Local producer | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | organizations and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | associations support | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the initiative and are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | willing to participate. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Values are based on | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | past observed | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | results from similar | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | experiences | 
1.1 Strengthened and
modernized agricultural
extension system with an
emphasis on adaptation and
mitigation |  | Percentage of farmers that
use as source of information
for agroclimatic services
(bulletins, early warning text
messages, online
information), those promoted
by the gremios | Surveys and
user
information
from the
gremios’
platforms |  |  | 21.5% of
farmers29 | 25% of
farmers |  |  | 32.25%
of
farmers |  |  |  | Forecast information | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | is used by farmers | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | as a source for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | management | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | decision making. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | The target assumes | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | an increase in 50% | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | from the baseline of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the percentage of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | farmers that use the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | agroclimatic | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | services. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | To account for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | quality, the definition | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | of “use” will be that | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | “information received | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | is understood and it | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | was useful” | 
1.2 Agroclimatic services in
place and/or strengthened |  | Number of farmers aware of
and who know how to
differentiate climate risks,
their effects and related
mitigation measures,
differentiated by gender | Surveys and
focal groups |  |  | 57,665
farmers 30 | i
t
f
( | 94,681 |  | i
t
f
( | 222,097 |  | Agro-climatic
information
generated is
received effectively,
which maintains
farmers’ interest in
actively participating
in the project |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | This |  |  | This |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ncludes |  |  | ncludes |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 29,612 |  |  | 98,710 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | arget |  |  | arget |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | armers |  |  | armers |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 20% |  |  | 20% |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | women) |  |  | women) |  |  |  | 
2.1. Strengthened germplasm
bank, new climate resilient
varieties developed and their
seeds massively distributed |  | Area planted (in hectares)
under the variety or using
seeds recommended for the
area |  | Surveys and |  | 190.000
ha31 | 193,600
ha
This
includes
3,600
target
hectares
during
project
implement
ation |  |  | 202.000
ha
This
includes
12,000
ha
during
the
project
implem
entation |  |  | Field activities for
variety development
are not delayed by
severe weather
events |  | 
 |  |  |  | secondary |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | data from |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | gremios. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Secondary |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | data: annual |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | datasets of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | some |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | producer’s |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | associations; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | i) Rice: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | ENAM; ii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Fenalce, iii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 54 ---
Percentage of
farmers/technicians who
perceived that their
knowledge improved as a
result strengthened and
modernized agriculture
extension system
differentiated by gender

--- Table 3 on Page 54 ---
Monitoring
Platform (1)
and surveys
(3) directly
with
technicians
after training
sessions

--- Table 4 on Page 54 ---
1.1 Strengthened and
modernized agricultural
extension system with an
emphasis on adaptation and
mitigation

--- Table 5 on Page 54 ---
Percentage of farmers that
use as source of information
for agroclimatic services
(bulletins, early warning text
messages, online
information), those promoted
by the gremios

--- Table 6 on Page 54 ---
Surveys and
user
information
from the
gremios’
platforms

--- Table 7 on Page 54 ---
1.1 Strengthened and
modernized agricultural
extension system with an
emphasis on adaptation and
mitigation

--- Table 8 on Page 54 ---
32.25%
of
farmers

--- Table 9 on Page 54 ---
21.5% of
farmers29

--- Table 10 on Page 54 ---
25% of
farmers

--- Table 11 on Page 54 ---
Agro-climatic
information
generated is
received effectively,
which maintains
farmers’ interest in
actively participating
in the project

--- Table 12 on Page 54 ---
Number of farmers aware of
and who know how to
differentiate climate risks,
their effects and related
mitigation measures,
differentiated by gender

--- Table 13 on Page 54 ---
1.2 Agroclimatic services in
place and/or strengthened

--- Table 14 on Page 54 ---
Surveys and
ocal groups

--- Table 15 on Page 54 ---
57,665
armers 30

--- Table 16 on Page 54 ---
193,600
ha

This
includes
3,600
target
hectares
during
project
implement
ation

--- Table 17 on Page 54 ---
202.000
ha

This
includes
12,000
ha
during
the
project
implem
entation

--- Table 18 on Page 54 ---
Field activities for
variety development
are not delayed by
severe weather
events

--- Table 19 on Page 54 ---
2.1. Strengthened germplasm
bank, new climate resilient
varieties developed and their
seeds massively distributed

--- Table 20 on Page 54 ---
Area planted (in hectares)
under the variety or using
eeds recommended for the
area

--- Table 21 on Page 54 ---
190.000
ha31

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 75
EE
Coffee
Federation
datasets
(annual stats);
iv)
Fedepanela
Surveys, GIS
tools.
Secondary
data: annual
datasets of Farmers remain
2.2. More efficient use of
some interested and
water resources, restoring soil
producer’s actively participate in
prop erties, and improving GHG
Area (in hectares) under associations; the project activities.
mitigation practices by farmers N/A 758 1,896
efficient water use practices i) Rice: Extension activities
and gremios through the
ENAM; ii) are effective and
adoption of new climate smart
Fenalce, iii) executed in a timely
practices and technologies
Coffee manner
Federation
datasets
(annual stats);
iv)
Fedepanela
3.1. Improved business Number of value chains Baseline, N/A 2 4 Gremios perceived
models that provide farmers developing novel and intermediate the strengthening of
with reasonable profits and inclusive business models to and final their capacities for
improved GHG mitigation boost climate resilient and low surveys implementing novel
practices emissions agriculture and inclusive
business models.
3.1 Improved business models Number of financial Baseline, N/A 7 10 Financial Institutions
that provide farmers with institutions aware of the intermediate (FIs) participated
reasonable profits and project benefits and and final actively in the
improved GHG mitigation opportunities and involved in interviews project.
practices projects activities In the framework of
this project, we will
focus in FIs with
current activities in
the agricultural
sector. By FIs we
refer to national
financial institutions
such as Finagro and
Fiduagraria,
commercial banks
(e.g., Banco Agrario,
Bancamía, Banco
W), microfinance
institutions (e.g.,
CONTACTAR,
FINANFUTURO),
cooperatives (e.g.,
CONFIAR,
CoopKennedy) and
insurance
companies (e.g.,
Mapfre).
16.7% Farmers adopt
3.2. Modernized technical
(equival recommendations
assistance and agricultural Baseline, 19.8%
ent to a and adopt
extension services with multi- intermediate (equivalen
reductio technologies to
tool strategies, differentiated Percentage of crop loss due and final t to a
20.9%32 n of increase their
and adapted to specific to climatic effects surveys reduction
20% resilience to adverse
environmental, social, gender Sendai of 5% from
from weather events and
and productive contexts at the Indicators baseline)
baselin thereby reduce crop
national level
e) losses.
32 Gallego et al, 2021 – Annex 23

--- Table 1 on Page 55 ---
 |  |  | Coffee |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Federation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | datasets |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | (annual stats); |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | iv) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Fedepanela |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
2.2. More efficient use of
water resources, restoring soil
prop erties, and improving GHG
mitigation practices by farmers
and gremios through the
adoption of new climate smart
practices and technologies | Area (in hectares) under
efficient water use practices |  | Surveys, GIS |  | N/A | 758 | 1,896 |  |  | Farmers remain
interested and
actively participate in
the project activities.
Extension activities
are effective and
executed in a timely
manner |  | 
 |  |  | tools. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Secondary |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | data: annual |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | datasets of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | some |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | producer’s |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | associations; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | i) Rice: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | ENAM; ii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Fenalce, iii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Coffee |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Federation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | datasets |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | (annual stats); |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | iv) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Fedepanela |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
3.1. Improved business
models that provide farmers
with reasonable profits and
improved GHG mitigation
practices | Number of value chains
developing novel and
inclusive business models to
boost climate resilient and low
emissions agriculture | Baseline,
intermediate
and final
surveys | Baseline, |  | N/A | 2 | 4 |  |  |  | Gremios perceived | 
 |  |  | intermediate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the strengthening of | 
 |  |  | and final |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | their capacities for | 
 |  |  | surveys |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementing novel | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and inclusive | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | business models. | 
3.1 Improved business models
that provide farmers with
reasonable profits and
improved GHG mitigation
practices | Number of financial
institutions aware of the
project benefits and
opportunities and involved in
projects activities | Baseline,
intermediate
and final
interviews |  |  | N/A | 7 | 10 |  |  |  | Financial Institutions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (FIs) participated | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | actively in the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | project. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | In the framework of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | this project, we will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | focus in FIs with | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | current activities in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the agricultural | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | sector. By FIs we | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | refer to national | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | financial institutions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | such as Finagro and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Fiduagraria, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | commercial banks | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (e.g., Banco Agrario, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Bancamía, Banco | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | W), microfinance | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | institutions (e.g., | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | CONTACTAR, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | FINANFUTURO), | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | cooperatives (e.g., | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | CONFIAR, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | CoopKennedy) and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | insurance | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | companies (e.g., | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mapfre). | 
3.2. Modernized technical
assistance and agricultural
extension services with multi-
tool strategies, differentiated
and adapted to specific
environmental, social, gender
and productive contexts at the
national level | Percentage of crop loss due
to climatic effects | Baseline,
intermediate
and final
surveys
Sendai
Indicators |  |  | 20.9%32 | 19.8%
(equivalen
t to a
reduction
of 5% from
baseline) |  | 16.7% |  |  | Farmers adopt | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (equival |  |  | recommendations | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ent to a |  |  | and adopt | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reductio |  |  | technologies to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | n of |  |  | increase their | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 20% |  |  | resilience to adverse | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | from |  |  | weather events and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | baselin |  |  | thereby reduce crop | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | e) |  |  | losses. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 55 ---
Farmers remain
interested and
actively participate in
the project activities.
Extension activities
are effective and
executed in a timely
manner

--- Table 3 on Page 55 ---
2.2. More efficient use of
water resources, restoring soil
prop erties, and improving GHG
mitigation practices by farmers
and gremios through the
adoption of new climate smart
practices and technologies

--- Table 4 on Page 55 ---
Area (in hectares) under
efficient water use practices

--- Table 5 on Page 55 ---
3.1. Improved business
models that provide farmers
with reasonable profits and
improved GHG mitigation
practices

--- Table 6 on Page 55 ---
Number of value chains
developing novel and
nclusive business models to
boost climate resilient and low
emissions agriculture

--- Table 7 on Page 55 ---
3.1 Improved business models
that provide farmers with
reasonable profits and
improved GHG mitigation
practices

--- Table 8 on Page 55 ---
Number of financial
nstitutions aware of the
project benefits and
opportunities and involved in
projects activities

--- Table 9 on Page 55 ---
Baseline,
intermediate
and final
interviews

--- Table 10 on Page 55 ---
3.2. Modernized technical
assistance and agricultural
extension services with multi-
tool strategies, differentiated
and adapted to specific
environmental, social, gender
and productive contexts at the
national level

--- Table 11 on Page 55 ---
Baseline,
intermediate
and final
surveys
Sendai
Indicators

--- Table 12 on Page 55 ---
19.8%
(equivalen
t to a
reduction
of 5% from
baseline)

--- Table 13 on Page 55 ---
Percentage of crop loss due
o climatic effects

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 75
EE
Farmers adopt the
3.2. Modernized technical
4.6% recommendations of
assistance and agricultural 5.5%
(equival experts in precision
extension services with multi- Baseline, (equivalen
ent to agriculture where
tool strategies, differentiated Reduced incidence of climate intermediate t to a
5.8%33 20% they manage to
and adapted to specific induced pests and diseases and final reduction
from reduce the impact of
environmental, social, gender surveys of 5% from
baselin climate induced
and productive contexts at the baseline)
e) pests and diseases
national level
on their crops.
E.6. Activities
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.
Activity Description Sub-activities Deliverables
Result 1.1. Strengthened and modernized agricultural extension system with an emphasis on adaptation and mitigation
SA1. Development of a
strategy for data collection
associated with
environmental, social,
technological, production and
economic indicators.
SA2. Development of a
protocol for the integration of Site-specific management
databases with existing crop recommendations for 381,000
information. hectares / 46,056 producers
Organize the information from SA3. Processing and for seven (7) crops (rice,
the different repositories and cleansing of database maize, potato, panela
producer association information. sugarcane, livestock, banana
databases (public and free- SA4. Consolidation of and plantain) in 213
access systems) to connect processed information in a municipalities.
Activity 1.1.1
them with updated information database management Seven (7) Big Data platforms
available from existing free- system. providing site-specific
access platforms through SA5. Data analysis using recommendations for 381,000
remote sensing or other methods based on machine hectares / 46,056 producers
sources. learning and computational for seven (7) crops (rice,
optimization. maize, potato, sugarcane,
SA6. Dissemination of the livestock, banana and
results to validate plantain) in 213 municipalities
recommendations in the field.
SA7. Development of
algorithms for data analysis.
SA8. Design or adjustment of
platforms for capturing, storing
and disseminating
information.
Develop a bot-based digital SA1. Development of mass
instrument to strengthen the dissemination systems based
extension service. There are on a bot (automatic response
plans to develop interaction system) to
communication tools that strengthen the extension
Bot service providing
facilitate human-machine services of the producer
recommendations to 15,256
Activity 1.1.2 interaction to provide associations.
producers for three (3) crops
automatic answers to SA2. Engaging with potential
(rice, maize and potato).
frequently asked questions in users to collect a baseline of
conversations between the information more
farmers and technicians. This frequently required for
will facilitate sharing the decision making through
recommendations derived workshops, interviews,
33 Gallego et al, 2021 – Annex 23

--- Table 1 on Page 56 ---
3.2. Modernized technical
assistance and agricultural
extension services with multi-
tool strategies, differentiated
and adapted to specific
environmental, social, gender
and productive contexts at the
national level |  | Reduced incidence of climate
induced pests and diseases |  | Baseline,
intermediate
and final
surveys |  | 5.8%33 | 5.5%
(equivalen
t to a
reduction
of 5% from
baseline) |  | 4.6%
(equival
ent to
20%
from
baselin
e) |  | Farmers adopt the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | recommendations of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | experts in precision | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | agriculture where | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | they manage to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reduce the impact of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | climate induced | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | pests and diseases | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | on their crops. | 
 | E.6. Activities |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity |  |  | Description |  | Sub-activities |  |  | Deliverables |  |  |  | 
Result 1.1. Strengthened and modernized agricultural extension system with an emphasis on adaptation and mitigation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 1.1.1 |  |  | Organize the information from
the different repositories and
producer association
databases (public and free-
access systems) to connect
them with updated information
available from existing free-
access platforms through
remote sensing or other
sources. |  | SA1. Development of a
strategy for data collection
associated with
environmental, social,
technological, production and
economic indicators.
SA2. Development of a
protocol for the integration of
databases with existing crop
information.
SA3. Processing and
cleansing of database
information.
SA4. Consolidation of
processed information in a
database management
system.
SA5. Data analysis using
methods based on machine
learning and computational
optimization.
SA6. Dissemination of the
results to validate
recommendations in the field.
SA7. Development of
algorithms for data analysis.
SA8. Design or adjustment of
platforms for capturing, storing
and disseminating
information. |  |  | Site-specific management
recommendations for 381,000
hectares / 46,056 producers
for seven (7) crops (rice,
maize, potato, panela
sugarcane, livestock, banana
and plantain) in 213
municipalities.
Seven (7) Big Data platforms
providing site-specific
recommendations for 381,000
hectares / 46,056 producers
for seven (7) crops (rice,
maize, potato, sugarcane,
livestock, banana and
plantain) in 213 municipalities |  |  |  | 
Activity 1.1.2 |  |  | Develop a bot-based digital
instrument to strengthen the
extension service. There are
plans to develop
communication tools that
facilitate human-machine
interaction to provide
automatic answers to
frequently asked questions in
conversations between
farmers and technicians. This
will facilitate sharing the
recommendations derived |  | SA1. Development of mass
dissemination systems based
on a bot (automatic response
interaction system) to
strengthen the extension
services of the producer
associations.
SA2. Engaging with potential
users to collect a baseline of
the information more
frequently required for
decision making through
workshops, interviews, |  |  | Bot service providing
recommendations to 15,256
producers for three (3) crops
(rice, maize and potato). |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 56 ---
3.2. Modernized technical
assistance and agricultural
extension services with multi-
tool strategies, differentiated
and adapted to specific
environmental, social, gender
and productive contexts at the
national level

--- Table 3 on Page 56 ---
4.6%
(equival
ent to
20%
from
baselin
e)

--- Table 4 on Page 56 ---
5.5%
(equivalen
t to a
reduction
of 5% from
baseline)

--- Table 5 on Page 56 ---
Baseline,
intermediate
and final
surveys

--- Table 6 on Page 56 ---
Reduced incidence of climate
nduced pests and diseases

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 75
EE
from data analysis, as well as questionnaires and possibly
agroclimatic forecasts. focus groups.
SA3. Creating an automatic
wizard to exchange
agroclimatic information with
producers, through chats or
text messages on planting
dates, choice of varieties and
rain forecasts, among others.
SA1. Identification of variables
to improve site-specific
analysis and
Design and develop the entire
recommendations.
data mining and analysis
SA2. Instrumentation to
operating system that will
capture information using
allow interconnecting all
remote sensors (drones) and 1,215 professionals and
available information. In turn,
non-remote sensors (yield technicians linked to seven (7)
systems will be developed to
Activity 1.1.3 sensors, soil moisture, crops (rice, maize, potato,
enable the automatization of
electroconductivity, leaf panela sugarcane, livestock,
analysis and modeling
wetness sensors, etc.). banana and plantain) trained.
processes, in an effort to
SA3. Development of a data
encourage more robust
management routine to allow
recommendations and more
the integration of the
agile and efficient processes
information collected by the
instrumentation to Big Data
platforms.
Train technicians in the use
and application of advanced
SA1. Design and
data analysis methods,
implementation of a training,
including: i) holding in-person
dissem ination and promotion
and virtual training workshops,
program on the use,
and short-term stays of
requirements and advantages
professionals from producer
of using the Big Data platform
associations at CIAT and
aimed at technicians of the
other centers of excellence, to
producer associations, other
develop skills in the use of
practitioners, producers and
data mining, evolutionary
other relevant stakeholders.
computing and remote
sensors to generate SA2. Developing, 1,215 professionals and
information for decision- validating and technicians linked to seven (7)
Activity 1.1.4 making in the field; ii) implementing a module crops (rice, maize, potato,
Developing, validating and based on graphical panela sugarcane, livestock,
implementing a module based interfaces to facilitate data banana and plantain) trained.
on graphical interfaces to
analysis and consultation,
facilitate data analysis and
aimed at producer
consultation, aimed at
association technicians
producer association
SA3. Training of trainers
technicians; iii) Training of
trainers on Information on Information Literacy for
Literacy for producers with an producers with an ethnic
ethnic and gender focus and and gender focus and
develop and implement develop and implement
dissemination means, dissemination means
including communication
platforms.
Result 1.2. Agroclimatic services in place and/or strengthened
Design and/or strengthen SA1. Evaluation of climate Four (4) improved
agroclimatic information forecasts at different time agroclimatic platforms with
Activity 1.2.1
services. It seeks to expand scales (e.g., seasonal, sub- better forecasting
the coverage of information seasonal) exploring the performance (sugarcane,

--- Table 1 on Page 57 ---
 | from data analysis, as well as
agroclimatic forecasts. | questionnaires and possibly
focus groups.
SA3. Creating an automatic
wizard to exchange
agroclimatic information with
producers, through chats or
text messages on planting
dates, choice of varieties and
rain forecasts, among others. | 
Activity 1.1.3 | Design and develop the entire
data mining and analysis
operating system that will
allow interconnecting all
available information. In turn,
systems will be developed to
enable the automatization of
analysis and modeling
processes, in an effort to
encourage more robust
recommendations and more
agile and efficient processes | SA1. Identification of variables
to improve site-specific
analysis and
recommendations.
SA2. Instrumentation to
capture information using
remote sensors (drones) and
non-remote sensors (yield
sensors, soil moisture,
electroconductivity, leaf
wetness sensors, etc.).
SA3. Development of a data
management routine to allow
the integration of the
information collected by the
instrumentation to Big Data
platforms. | 1,215 professionals and
technicians linked to seven (7)
crops (rice, maize, potato,
panela sugarcane, livestock,
banana and plantain) trained.
Activity 1.1.4 | Train technicians in the use
and application of advanced
data analysis methods,
including: i) holding in-person
and virtual training workshops,
and short-term stays of
professionals from producer
associations at CIAT and
other centers of excellence, to
develop skills in the use of
data mining, evolutionary
computing and remote
sensors to generate
information for decision-
making in the field; ii)
Developing, validating and
implementing a module based
on graphical interfaces to
facilitate data analysis and
consultation, aimed at
producer association
technicians; iii) Training of
trainers on Information
Literacy for producers with an
ethnic and gender focus and
develop and implement
dissemination means,
including communication
platforms. | SA1. Design and
implementation of a training,
dissem ination and promotion
program on the use,
requirements and advantages
of using the Big Data platform
aimed at technicians of the
producer associations, other
practitioners, producers and
other relevant stakeholders.
SA2. Developing,
validating and
implementing a module
based on graphical
interfaces to facilitate data
analysis and consultation,
aimed at producer
association technicians
SA3. Training of trainers
on Information Literacy for
producers with an ethnic
and gender focus and
develop and implement
dissemination means | 1,215 professionals and
technicians linked to seven (7)
crops (rice, maize, potato,
panela sugarcane, livestock,
banana and plantain) trained.
Result 1.2. Agroclimatic services in place and/or strengthened |  |  | 
Activity 1.2.1 | Design and/or strengthen
agroclimatic information
services. It seeks to expand
the coverage of information | SA1. Evaluation of climate
forecasts at different time
scales (e.g., seasonal, sub-
seasonal) exploring the | Four (4) improved
agroclimatic platforms with
better forecasting
performance (sugarcane,

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 75
EE
services to reduce the influence of meteorological coffee, rice and maize)
agroclimatic risk for new factors (e.g., tropical activity in serving 89,000 producers.
productive systems (potatoes, the Atlantic Ocean) on Five (5) new agroclimatic
panela sugarcane, livestock, seasonal climate behavior and platforms in operation (potato,
banana and plantain) and include their effect in seasonal panela sugarcane, livestock,
strengthen existing projections. banana and plantain) serving
agroclimatic information SA2. Developing a network to 37,123 producers.
services which function collect climate information
independently for rice, corn, (mete orological stations
sugarcane and coffee. network) in prioritized sites .
SA3. Identifying and mapping
areas that are vulnerable to
experience water and
biological stress, based on
their water supply.
SA4. Creating, structuring and
implementing the Cenicaña
AgroClimate Service for the
Cauca River Valley, including
the automation of the
productivity prediction system
for sugarcane and the
analysis of climatic variables.
SA5. Adjusting and validating
climate prediction models in
coffee and its relationship with
diseases, and making
recommendations.
SA1. Evaluation of climate
forecasts at different time
scales (e.g., seasonal, sub-
seasonal) exploring the
influence of meteorological Calibrated simulation models
factors (e.g., tropical activity in for eight crops (rice, maize,
the Atlantic Ocean) on potato, panela sugarcane,
seasonal climate behavior and livestock, coffee, banana and
include their effect in seasonal plantain) for 24 sets of genetic
Develop more accurate and
projections for eight crops materials.
precise climate and weather
(rice, maize, potato, panela
prediction models and
sugarcane, livestock, coffee, Bioclimatic evaluation and
complementary improved crop
banana and plantain). characterization of livestock
simulation models by using
SA2. Develop and implement production regions in
new-generation climate
new methods for calibration of Colombia.
models, improving the
simulation models (e.g.,
Activity 1.2.2 performance of climate
generic variety groups), as Development and calibration
prediction models, modeling
well as protocols for data of pest and disease alert
crop physiological processes,
capture during experimental prediction models (based on
including alerts for pests,
evaluations (i.e., crop climate) for three (3) crops
diseases and other abiotic
improvement group, and crop (rice, coffee and panela
factors (for example, frosts),
monitoring). Set-up of sugarcane).
and irrigation planning and
experimental plots to collect
optimization.
information useful for model A 1–10-day time-scale
calibration. forecasting service for rice.
SA3. Calibration of simulation
models under different A 1-to-3-week sub-seasonal
agronomic management forecasting service for rice.
conditions (irrigation and
fertilization) through the
evaluation of water and
nitrogen balance modules.

--- Table 1 on Page 58 ---
 | services to reduce the
agroclimatic risk for new
productive systems (potatoes,
panela sugarcane, livestock,
banana and plantain) and
strengthen existing
agroclimatic information
services which function
independently for rice, corn,
sugarcane and coffee. | influence of meteorological
factors (e.g., tropical activity in
the Atlantic Ocean) on
seasonal climate behavior and
include their effect in seasonal
projections.
SA2. Developing a network to
collect climate information
(mete orological stations
network) in prioritized sites .
SA3. Identifying and mapping
areas that are vulnerable to
experience water and
biological stress, based on
their water supply.
SA4. Creating, structuring and
implementing the Cenicaña
AgroClimate Service for the
Cauca River Valley, including
the automation of the
productivity prediction system
for sugarcane and the
analysis of climatic variables.
SA5. Adjusting and validating
climate prediction models in
coffee and its relationship with
diseases, and making
recommendations. | coffee, rice and maize)
serving 89,000 producers.
Five (5) new agroclimatic
platforms in operation (potato,
panela sugarcane, livestock,
banana and plantain) serving
37,123 producers.
Activity 1.2.2 | Develop more accurate and
precise climate and weather
prediction models and
complementary improved crop
simulation models by using
new-generation climate
models, improving the
performance of climate
prediction models, modeling
crop physiological processes,
including alerts for pests,
diseases and other abiotic
factors (for example, frosts),
and irrigation planning and
optimization. | SA1. Evaluation of climate
forecasts at different time
scales (e.g., seasonal, sub-
seasonal) exploring the
influence of meteorological
factors (e.g., tropical activity in
the Atlantic Ocean) on
seasonal climate behavior and
include their effect in seasonal
projections for eight crops
(rice, maize, potato, panela
sugarcane, livestock, coffee,
banana and plantain).
SA2. Develop and implement
new methods for calibration of
simulation models (e.g.,
generic variety groups), as
well as protocols for data
capture during experimental
evaluations (i.e., crop
improvement group, and crop
monitoring). Set-up of
experimental plots to collect
information useful for model
calibration.
SA3. Calibration of simulation
models under different
agronomic management
conditions (irrigation and
fertilization) through the
evaluation of water and
nitrogen balance modules. | Calibrated simulation models
for eight crops (rice, maize,
potato, panela sugarcane,
livestock, coffee, banana and
plantain) for 24 sets of genetic
materials.
Bioclimatic evaluation and
characterization of livestock
production regions in
Colombia.
Development and calibration
of pest and disease alert
prediction models (based on
climate) for three (3) crops
(rice, coffee and panela
sugarcane).
A 1–10-day time-scale
forecasting service for rice.
A 1-to-3-week sub-seasonal
forecasting service for rice.

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 75
EE
SA4. Performance evaluation
of simulation models at the
level of commercial plots.
SA5. Determine the
uncertainty resulting from
climatic and agronomic
modeling and their coupling.
SA6. Analysis of climatic and
biophysical variables in
livestock production areas.
SA1. Integration of
agroclimatic information to
mass dissemination systems
(bot).
One million producers receive
SA2. Usability tests with
agro-climatic
producers of agroclimatic
recommendations through
Connect agroclimatic platforms and mass
agro-climatic platforms and
forecasts with artificial dissemination systems.
Activity 1.2.3 bot services for seven (7)
intelligence models (Result SA3. Adjustments in outputs
crops (rice, maize, potato,
1.1). and generation of new
panela sugarcane, banana,
services based on needs.
plantain and sugarcane) and
SA4. Generation of
livestock production.
visualization interfaces
targeted at different users
according to agroclimatic
information needs.
SA1. Design and
implementation of a training,
dissemination and promotion
program on the use,
requirements and advantages
of using the agroclimatic
961 people trained in six (6)
platforms, targeted at
crops (rice, maize, potato,
technicians of the producer
sugarcane, banana and
associations, other
plantain) and livestock
Strengthen mechanisms to practitioners, producers and
production.
disseminate agroclimatic other relevant actors.
Activity 1.2.4
information and transfer SA2. Strengthening of the
Operation of all existing MTAs
capacities . mechanisms for co-
(13 MTAs).
production, translation,
transfer and use of
Creation and operation of at
agroclimatic information in the
least 2 MTAs.
existing Agroclimatic
Technical Committees
(MTAs).
SA3. Operation and creation
of new Agroclimatic Technical
Committees (MTAs).
SA1. Model, through the use
Development of a model of
of information generated by
nutritional alerts (based on
Cenicafe and new research,
climate) for coffee.
the inputs and outputs of
Other activities related to
nutrients in coffee production
producing, transferring or Exploration of climate change
systems in the face of climate
using agroclimatic information signals in the CRV (1994-
variability.
Activity 1.2.5 (automation of meteorological 2020) for the plain region of
SA2. Analysis of historical
information, analysis of the Valle del Cauca
climate information from the
climate change signals, department.
network of stations in the
nutrient balance models).
sugarcane sector.
Water balance and fertilization
SA3. Evaluate the water
modules for rice models
balance and fertilization
developed.
modules of the rice crop

--- Table 1 on Page 59 ---
 |  | SA4. Performance evaluation
of simulation models at the
level of commercial plots.
SA5. Determine the
uncertainty resulting from
climatic and agronomic
modeling and their coupling.
SA6. Analysis of climatic and
biophysical variables in
livestock production areas. | 
Activity 1.2.3 | Connect agroclimatic
forecasts with artificial
intelligence models (Result
1.1). | SA1. Integration of
agroclimatic information to
mass dissemination systems
(bot).
SA2. Usability tests with
producers of agroclimatic
platforms and mass
dissemination systems.
SA3. Adjustments in outputs
and generation of new
services based on needs.
SA4. Generation of
visualization interfaces
targeted at different users
according to agroclimatic
information needs. | One million producers receive
agro-climatic
recommendations through
agro-climatic platforms and
bot services for seven (7)
crops (rice, maize, potato,
panela sugarcane, banana,
plantain and sugarcane) and
livestock production.
Activity 1.2.4 | Strengthen mechanisms to
disseminate agroclimatic
information and transfer
capacities . | SA1. Design and
implementation of a training,
dissemination and promotion
program on the use,
requirements and advantages
of using the agroclimatic
platforms, targeted at
technicians of the producer
associations, other
practitioners, producers and
other relevant actors.
SA2. Strengthening of the
mechanisms for co-
production, translation,
transfer and use of
agroclimatic information in the
existing Agroclimatic
Technical Committees
(MTAs).
SA3. Operation and creation
of new Agroclimatic Technical
Committees (MTAs). | 961 people trained in six (6)
crops (rice, maize, potato,
sugarcane, banana and
plantain) and livestock
production.
Operation of all existing MTAs
(13 MTAs).
Creation and operation of at
least 2 MTAs.
Activity 1.2.5 | Other activities related to
producing, transferring or
using agroclimatic information
(automation of meteorological
information, analysis of
climate change signals,
nutrient balance models). | SA1. Model, through the use
of information generated by
Cenicafe and new research,
the inputs and outputs of
nutrients in coffee production
systems in the face of climate
variability.
SA2. Analysis of historical
climate information from the
network of stations in the
sugarcane sector.
SA3. Evaluate the water
balance and fertilization
modules of the rice crop | Development of a model of
nutritional alerts (based on
climate) for coffee.
Exploration of climate change
signals in the CRV (1994-
2020) for the plain region of
the Valle del Cauca
department.
Water balance and fertilization
modules for rice models
developed.

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 75
EE
models, in order to broaden
their application in decision
making and in the optimization
of natural and agro-industrial
resources.
Result 2.1. Strengthened germplasm bank, new climate resilient varieties developed and their seeds massively
distributed
SA1. Install, calibrate and test
growth chambers designed to
simulate future climatic
conditions by manipulating
lighting, temperature and
relative humidity.
SA2. Install and test field
Develop a state-of-the-art
equipment that supports
phenotyping platform
image and sensor data A phenotyping platform
designed to identify low
Activity 2.1.1. capture developed and at the service
carbon production and
SA3. Calibrate and test of crops
climate-resistant genetic
cameras and sensors to
resources .
quantify the impact of abiotic
stresses on photosynthesis.
SA4. Sequencing of parental
genetic material and/or
progeny.
SA5. Application of a genomic
selection model.
SA1. Detect physiological
traits using the phenotyping
platform established in Activity
2.1.1.
SA2. DNA sequencing to
Identify heat, drought and identify regions of the genome
5 accessions with tolerance to
excess water tolerant that control the evaluated
heat and drought identified for
Activity 2.1.2. accessions for rice, maize, traits.
rice, forage, banana, corn and
potatoes, Musaceae, and SA3. Identify traits to increase
sugar cane crops
livestock (forages). crop resilience.
SA4. Selection and evaluation
under controlled conditions for
water deficit, low nitrogen and
waterlogging of elite parental
lines.
SA1. Establishment of
experimental plots for the
evaluation and selection of
Develop new varieties from materials.
advanced lines for climate SA2. Characterization and
change adaptation and selection of lines, hybrids or
mitigation for rice, maize, varieties with tolerance to high
livestock, banana (varieties night temperatures, low
8 new materials at the service
that are tolerant or resistant to radiation and high CO2
of producers for rice, banana,
Activity 2.1.3. water deficit and diseases that concentrations.
fodder, corn and sugar cane
demand high use of chemical SA3. New crosses with
crops
fungicides, such as black promising lines
Sigatoka) and sugarcane SA4. Validation and
(water deficit, waterlogging performance evaluation of
and greater efficiency in materials developed in other
nitrogen use). countries but that have not
been tested in Colombia.
SA5. Selection of lines with
better performance

--- Table 1 on Page 60 ---
 |  | models, in order to broaden
their application in decision
making and in the optimization
of natural and agro-industrial
resources. | 
Result 2.1. Strengthened germplasm bank, new climate resilient varieties developed and their seeds massively
distributed |  |  | 
Activity 2.1.1. | Develop a state-of-the-art
phenotyping platform
designed to identify low
carbon production and
climate-resistant genetic
resources . | SA1. Install, calibrate and test
growth chambers designed to
simulate future climatic
conditions by manipulating
lighting, temperature and
relative humidity.
SA2. Install and test field
equipment that supports
image and sensor data
capture
SA3. Calibrate and test
cameras and sensors to
quantify the impact of abiotic
stresses on photosynthesis.
SA4. Sequencing of parental
genetic material and/or
progeny.
SA5. Application of a genomic
selection model. | A phenotyping platform
developed and at the service
of crops
Activity 2.1.2. | Identify heat, drought and
excess water tolerant
accessions for rice, maize,
potatoes, Musaceae, and
livestock (forages). | SA1. Detect physiological
traits using the phenotyping
platform established in Activity
2.1.1.
SA2. DNA sequencing to
identify regions of the genome
that control the evaluated
traits.
SA3. Identify traits to increase
crop resilience.
SA4. Selection and evaluation
under controlled conditions for
water deficit, low nitrogen and
waterlogging of elite parental
lines. | 5 accessions with tolerance to
heat and drought identified for
rice, forage, banana, corn and
sugar cane crops
Activity 2.1.3. | Develop new varieties from
advanced lines for climate
change adaptation and
mitigation for rice, maize,
livestock, banana (varieties
that are tolerant or resistant to
water deficit and diseases that
demand high use of chemical
fungicides, such as black
Sigatoka) and sugarcane
(water deficit, waterlogging
and greater efficiency in
nitrogen use). | SA1. Establishment of
experimental plots for the
evaluation and selection of
materials.
SA2. Characterization and
selection of lines, hybrids or
varieties with tolerance to high
night temperatures, low
radiation and high CO2
concentrations.
SA3. New crosses with
promising lines
SA4. Validation and
performance evaluation of
materials developed in other
countries but that have not
been tested in Colombia.
SA5. Selection of lines with
better performance | 8 new materials at the service
of producers for rice, banana,
fodder, corn and sugar cane
crops

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 75
EE
SA6. Evaluation of
greenhouse gas emissions of
different genetic materials.
SA7. Materials registration
process and release of new
materials.
SA1. Establish thermotherapy
protocol
SA2. Cleaning by
four propagation protocols for
Massive seed multiplication cryopreservation.
potato, banana, coffee, sugar
for coffee, sugarcane, panela SA3. Multiplication of material.
cane, and panela cane crops.
sugarcane, potato, banana SA4. Virus and disease
Activity 2.1.4. Seedbeds of the species
and plantain through in vitro detection.
propagated to establish trials
culture or the buds method for SA5. Implementation of the in-
in 230 hectares for the same
distribution to farmers . vitro technique of Somatic
crops.
Embryogenesis (SE).
SA6. Implement the use of
bioreactors for scaling up.
Result 2.2. More efficient use of water resources, restoring soil properties, and improving GHG mitigation practices by
farmers and gremios through the adoption of new climate smart practices and technologies
SA1. Definition and/or
installation of crop plots for
measurements.
Water consumption values
SA2. Purchase, installation
measured for the conventional
and calibration of equipment.
management of five (5) crops
SA3. Data collection and
(potato, panela sugarcane,
recording of other variables of
Quantifying the baseline water sugarcane, plantain, banana)
interest.
footprint in six (6) crops and livestock production in
SA4. Measurement of water
(potato, sugarcane, panela sixteen (16) areas of the
consumption for different
Activity 2.2.1. sugarcane bananas, country.
technologies and
plantains, and livestock) and Water footprints calculated for
management techniques for
in the industrial phase of the conventional management
the crops prioritized by the
sugar production . of four (4) crops (potato,
project.
panela sugarcane, plantain,
SA5. Collection of
banana) and livestock
complementary information.
production in sixteen (16)
SA6. Measurement of water
locations.
footprints for different crops
under different production
models.
SA1. Definition and/or
installation of crop plots for
measurements.
TIER 2 emission factors for
SA2. Purchase, installation
conventional management
and calibration of equipment
technologies or techniques for
to measure GHG.
eight (8) crops (rice, maize,
SA3. Collection of information
Quantifying the baseline potato, panela sugarcane,
and recording of data on the
carbon footprint for seven (7) sugarcane, banana, plantain,
measurement of GHG and
crops (rice, potato, sugarcane, coffee) and livestock
other variables of interest.
panela cane, bananas, production in 22 zones of the
Activity 2.2.2. SA4. Quantification of GHG
plantain, and livestock), country.
for different genetic materials,
fertilizer use and industrial Carbon footprints calculated
management technologies
processing in sugarcane for conventional management
and techniques for the crops
cultivation. technologies or techniques for
prioritized by the project.
seven (7) crops (rice, potato,
SA5. Compilation of
panela sugarcane, sugarcane,
complementary information.
banana, plantain) and
SA6. Quantification of the
livestock production.
carbon footprint for different
crops under different
production models.

--- Table 1 on Page 61 ---
 |  | SA6. Evaluation of
greenhouse gas emissions of
different genetic materials.
SA7. Materials registration
process and release of new
materials. | 
Activity 2.1.4. | Massive seed multiplication
for coffee, sugarcane, panela
sugarcane, potato, banana
and plantain through in vitro
culture or the buds method for
distribution to farmers . | SA1. Establish thermotherapy
protocol
SA2. Cleaning by
cryopreservation.
SA3. Multiplication of material.
SA4. Virus and disease
detection.
SA5. Implementation of the in-
vitro technique of Somatic
Embryogenesis (SE).
SA6. Implement the use of
bioreactors for scaling up. | four propagation protocols for
potato, banana, coffee, sugar
cane, and panela cane crops.
Seedbeds of the species
propagated to establish trials
in 230 hectares for the same
crops.
Result 2.2. More efficient use of water resources, restoring soil properties, and improving GHG mitigation practices by
farmers and gremios through the adoption of new climate smart practices and technologies |  |  | 
Activity 2.2.1. | Quantifying the baseline water
footprint in six (6) crops
(potato, sugarcane, panela
sugarcane bananas,
plantains, and livestock) and
in the industrial phase of
sugar production . | SA1. Definition and/or
installation of crop plots for
measurements.
SA2. Purchase, installation
and calibration of equipment.
SA3. Data collection and
recording of other variables of
interest.
SA4. Measurement of water
consumption for different
technologies and
management techniques for
the crops prioritized by the
project.
SA5. Collection of
complementary information.
SA6. Measurement of water
footprints for different crops
under different production
models. | Water consumption values
measured for the conventional
management of five (5) crops
(potato, panela sugarcane,
sugarcane, plantain, banana)
and livestock production in
sixteen (16) areas of the
country.
Water footprints calculated for
the conventional management
of four (4) crops (potato,
panela sugarcane, plantain,
banana) and livestock
production in sixteen (16)
locations.
Activity 2.2.2. | Quantifying the baseline
carbon footprint for seven (7)
crops (rice, potato, sugarcane,
panela cane, bananas,
plantain, and livestock),
fertilizer use and industrial
processing in sugarcane
cultivation. | SA1. Definition and/or
installation of crop plots for
measurements.
SA2. Purchase, installation
and calibration of equipment
to measure GHG.
SA3. Collection of information
and recording of data on the
measurement of GHG and
other variables of interest.
SA4. Quantification of GHG
for different genetic materials,
management technologies
and techniques for the crops
prioritized by the project.
SA5. Compilation of
complementary information.
SA6. Quantification of the
carbon footprint for different
crops under different
production models. | TIER 2 emission factors for
conventional management
technologies or techniques for
eight (8) crops (rice, maize,
potato, panela sugarcane,
sugarcane, banana, plantain,
coffee) and livestock
production in 22 zones of the
country.
Carbon footprints calculated
for conventional management
technologies or techniques for
seven (7) crops (rice, potato,
panela sugarcane, sugarcane,
banana, plantain) and
livestock production.

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 75
EE
SA1. Collect spatial and
hydroclimatic information in
the watershed.
SA2. Construction and
validation of the hydrological
model and generation of
scenarios of changes in
coverage and climate
Hydrological modeling of forecasts.
Implementation of planning
basins to identify water SA3. Mapping, identification
models for water efficient use
harvesting points in rice, and validation of water
Activity 2.2.3. in four (4) water supply basins
panela cane, bananas, and harvesting points.
for four (4) crops (rice, panela
coffee production systems . SA4. Generation of water
sugarcane and banana).
conduction routes.
SA5. Construction of water
reservoirs (panela cane,
plantain and coffee).
SA6. Training workshops for
practitioners of the sector.
SA7. Efficient planning of
water uses at the level of
irrigation districts.
SA1. Identifying and Water consumption values
formulating agronomic measured for ten sustainable
management practices and management technologies or
industrial transformation. techniques for five (5) crops
SA2. Selecting and (potato, panela, sugarcane,
implementing conventional plantain, banana, coffee) and
Evaluation of efficient water productive plots with efficient livestock production in sixteen
use practices in agronomic use practices. (16) areas of the country.
management and SA3. Installing equipment to Evaluation of the performance
transformation processes monitor moisture balance. of wastewater and sludge
Activity 2.2.4.
(e.g., milling of panela cane) SA4. Creating moisture treatment systems in four (4)
in potato, panela cane, balance and monitoring water locations.
plantain, banana, coffee crops quality. Eight (8) water footprints
and livestock . SA5. Quantifying the water calculated for eight (8)
footprint in conventional sustainable management
systems and efficient water technologies or techniques in
use practices. four (4) crops (potato, panela
SA6. Training workshops on sugarcane, plantain, banana)
monitoring and managing and livestock production in
efficient water use systems. sixteen (16) locations.
SA1. Definition and/or TIER 2 emission factors for
installation of crop plots for one hundred and fifteen (115)
measurements. genetic materials, eighteen
SA2. Purchase, installation (18) management
and calibration of equipment technologies or techniques for
to measure GHG. eight (8) crops (rice, maize,
Evaluation of GHG emission SA3. Collection of information potato, panela sugarcane,
mitigation practices in and recording of data on the sugarcane, banana, plantain,
agronomic management and measurement of GHG and coffee) and livestock
transformation processes in other variables of interest. production, and six (6) cattle
Activity 2.2.5.
rice, maize, potato, panela SA4. Quantification of GHG feed supplementation diets in
cane, plantain, banana, for different genetic materials, 22 zones of the country.
coffee, sugarcane crops, and technologies and Fourteen (14) carbon
livestock . management techniques for footprints calculated for 10
the crops prioritized by the sustainable crop management
project. technologies or techniques in
SA5. Collection of six (6) crops (rice, potato,
complementary information panela sugarcane, sugarcane,
SA6. Quantification of the banana, plantain) and
carbon footprint for different livestock production.

--- Table 1 on Page 62 ---
Activity 2.2.3. | Hydrological modeling of
basins to identify water
harvesting points in rice,
panela cane, bananas, and
coffee production systems . | SA1. Collect spatial and
hydroclimatic information in
the watershed.
SA2. Construction and
validation of the hydrological
model and generation of
scenarios of changes in
coverage and climate
forecasts.
SA3. Mapping, identification
and validation of water
harvesting points.
SA4. Generation of water
conduction routes.
SA5. Construction of water
reservoirs (panela cane,
plantain and coffee).
SA6. Training workshops for
practitioners of the sector.
SA7. Efficient planning of
water uses at the level of
irrigation districts. | Implementation of planning
models for water efficient use
in four (4) water supply basins
for four (4) crops (rice, panela
sugarcane and banana).
Activity 2.2.4. | Evaluation of efficient water
use practices in agronomic
management and
transformation processes
(e.g., milling of panela cane)
in potato, panela cane,
plantain, banana, coffee crops
and livestock . | SA1. Identifying and
formulating agronomic
management practices and
industrial transformation.
SA2. Selecting and
implementing conventional
productive plots with efficient
use practices.
SA3. Installing equipment to
monitor moisture balance.
SA4. Creating moisture
balance and monitoring water
quality.
SA5. Quantifying the water
footprint in conventional
systems and efficient water
use practices.
SA6. Training workshops on
monitoring and managing
efficient water use systems. | Water consumption values
measured for ten sustainable
management technologies or
techniques for five (5) crops
(potato, panela, sugarcane,
plantain, banana, coffee) and
livestock production in sixteen
(16) areas of the country.
Evaluation of the performance
of wastewater and sludge
treatment systems in four (4)
locations.
Eight (8) water footprints
calculated for eight (8)
sustainable management
technologies or techniques in
four (4) crops (potato, panela
sugarcane, plantain, banana)
and livestock production in
sixteen (16) locations.
Activity 2.2.5. | Evaluation of GHG emission
mitigation practices in
agronomic management and
transformation processes in
rice, maize, potato, panela
cane, plantain, banana,
coffee, sugarcane crops, and
livestock . | SA1. Definition and/or
installation of crop plots for
measurements.
SA2. Purchase, installation
and calibration of equipment
to measure GHG.
SA3. Collection of information
and recording of data on the
measurement of GHG and
other variables of interest.
SA4. Quantification of GHG
for different genetic materials,
technologies and
management techniques for
the crops prioritized by the
project.
SA5. Collection of
complementary information
SA6. Quantification of the
carbon footprint for different | TIER 2 emission factors for
one hundred and fifteen (115)
genetic materials, eighteen
(18) management
technologies or techniques for
eight (8) crops (rice, maize,
potato, panela sugarcane,
sugarcane, banana, plantain,
coffee) and livestock
production, and six (6) cattle
feed supplementation diets in
22 zones of the country.
Fourteen (14) carbon
footprints calculated for 10
sustainable crop management
technologies or techniques in
six (6) crops (rice, potato,
panela sugarcane, sugarcane,
banana, plantain) and
livestock production.

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 75
EE
crops under different
production models.
SA1. Identification of potential
areas for intervention and
landscape units.
Landscape restoration in Sustainable livestock systems
SA2. Implementation of a
Activity 2.2.6. sugarcane cultivation and implemented in 3,840 ha in 16
nursery for the propagation of
livestock systems . areas of the country.
native species.
SA3. Land cover mapping
SA4. Implementation
SA1. Selection of beneficiary
Massive implementation of farms and lots.
agronomic management SA2. Training for producers. 5,750 ha in sustainable
technologies and SA3. Implementation of production models for rice,
transformation processes that sustainable production models maize, potato, panela
enable more efficient use of in seven (7) crops prioritized sugarcane, banana and
Activity 2.2.7.
water and promote low-carbon by the project. plantain to reduce GHG
development in rice, maize, SA4. Generating emissions and water
potato, sugarcane, plantain, dissemination material. consumption in 33 production
banana, and livestock SA5. Implementing areas of the country.
production. sustainable systems/practices
at the regional level.
Result 3.1. Improved business models that provide farmers with reasonable profits and improved GHG mitigation
practices
SA1. Assessment of gremios
capabilities and needs, as well
as, opportunities to better-
inform their allocation of
resources (human, financial)
to respond to farmers
demands and help them to
manage climate to their
Strengthen gremios capacities
advantage.
to use digitally enabled tools
SA2. Co-design of
that improve the provision of
implementation plans for Eight (8) gremios
services to farmers with
Activity 3.1.1 gremios to the decision- strengthened in the decision-
emphasis on profitable
making processes to cost- making processes
production system that also
effectively enhance their
reduce GHG emissions and
provision of climate-related
increase climate-resilience
services to farmers.
SA3. Co-develop feedback
loop mechanisms to provide
information to the gremios to
inform allocation of
resources/efforts (human,
financial) for climate-related
services provision to farmers.
SA1. Systematization of the
results generated by the
Eight (8) strategies for scaling
components of the project on
up climate resilience and
digital agriculture, climate-
GHG emission reduction
smart and low-carbon
Implement inclusive climate- practices for selected value
practices to guide its inclusion
resilient and low-carbon chains.
into business models.
Activity 3.1.2 business models for
SA2. Coordinate producers,
agricultural products and Eight (8) business models
gremios, buyers and other
services . with a focus on adaptation
actors in the value chains, to
and GHG emissions reduction
prioritize opportunities for
(designed, implemented and
improvement, as well as
evaluated)
barriers that limit the
escalation of climate

--- Table 1 on Page 63 ---
 |  | crops under different
production models. | 
Activity 2.2.6. | Landscape restoration in
sugarcane cultivation and
livestock systems . | SA1. Identification of potential
areas for intervention and
landscape units.
SA2. Implementation of a
nursery for the propagation of
native species.
SA3. Land cover mapping
SA4. Implementation | Sustainable livestock systems
implemented in 3,840 ha in 16
areas of the country.
Activity 2.2.7. | Massive implementation of
agronomic management
technologies and
transformation processes that
enable more efficient use of
water and promote low-carbon
development in rice, maize,
potato, sugarcane, plantain,
banana, and livestock
production. | SA1. Selection of beneficiary
farms and lots.
SA2. Training for producers.
SA3. Implementation of
sustainable production models
in seven (7) crops prioritized
by the project.
SA4. Generating
dissemination material.
SA5. Implementing
sustainable systems/practices
at the regional level. | 5,750 ha in sustainable
production models for rice,
maize, potato, panela
sugarcane, banana and
plantain to reduce GHG
emissions and water
consumption in 33 production
areas of the country.
Result 3.1. Improved business models that provide farmers with reasonable profits and improved GHG mitigation
practices |  |  | 
Activity 3.1.1 | Strengthen gremios capacities
to use digitally enabled tools
that improve the provision of
services to farmers with
emphasis on profitable
production system that also
reduce GHG emissions and
increase climate-resilience | SA1. Assessment of gremios
capabilities and needs, as well
as, opportunities to better-
inform their allocation of
resources (human, financial)
to respond to farmers
demands and help them to
manage climate to their
advantage.
SA2. Co-design of
implementation plans for
gremios to the decision-
making processes to cost-
effectively enhance their
provision of climate-related
services to farmers.
SA3. Co-develop feedback
loop mechanisms to provide
information to the gremios to
inform allocation of
resources/efforts (human,
financial) for climate-related
services provision to farmers. | Eight (8) gremios
strengthened in the decision-
making processes
Activity 3.1.2 | Implement inclusive climate-
resilient and low-carbon
business models for
agricultural products and
services . | SA1. Systematization of the
results generated by the
components of the project on
digital agriculture, climate-
smart and low-carbon
practices to guide its inclusion
into business models.
SA2. Coordinate producers,
gremios, buyers and other
actors in the value chains, to
prioritize opportunities for
improvement, as well as
barriers that limit the
escalation of climate | Eight (8) strategies for scaling
up climate resilience and
GHG emission reduction
practices for selected value
chains.
Eight (8) business models
with a focus on adaptation
and GHG emissions reduction
(designed, implemented and
evaluated)

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 75
EE
resilience and low emission
practices.
SA3. Design of an escalation
strategy (with gremios,
producers and other actors)
that allows the integration of
digital agriculture elements
and climate services to the
value chains, to increase
climate resilience and mitigate
GHG emissions.
SA4. Implement business
models for producers and
buyers, to enhance climate
mitigation practices and
evaluate market opportunities
for differential products.
SA5. Evaluate changes in the
business models of producers
and buyers, and identify
lessons learned and success
factors in scaling up digital
agriculture mechanisms and
low-carbon practices in the
value chains.
SA 1. Implementation of a
capacity building program to
raise awareness of financial
sector institutions (banks,
MFIs, financial cooperatives,
insurance companies, etc.) on
mid and long-term de-risking
mechanisms that the project
will implement throughout its
components (e.g., DCIPs,
climate-smart practices and
technologies).
SA2. Facilitate participation Evidence of at least four (4)
and involvement of financial financial institutions that
institutions in the MTAs for participate in MTAs and use
Enhance financial sector
accessing local and tailored information provided by the
engagement with farmers and
information on climate-smart project to inform their
Activity 3.1.3. their needs and efforts on
actions implemented by the businesses contributing to
climate-resilience and climate
agricultural sector to reduce wide implementation of
mitigation activities
climate risks, which will climate-resilient and low-
reduce uncertainty and may carbon options in agricultural
incentivize the design of sector.
tailored financial products for
the agricultural sector.
SA3. Identify opportunities
with financial institutions and
prioritize cases studies to
provide technical support for
incorporating climate-resilient
and low-carbon criteria to their
agricultural financial products
in compliance with the
environmental, social, and
governance (ESG) criteria.
SA1. explore and identify A new venture identified and
Fostering agri-digital
Activity 3.1.4. potential opportunities for new created based on new digital
entrepreneurship ecosystems
ventures. technologies.

--- Table 1 on Page 64 ---
 |  | resilience and low emission
practices.
SA3. Design of an escalation
strategy (with gremios,
producers and other actors)
that allows the integration of
digital agriculture elements
and climate services to the
value chains, to increase
climate resilience and mitigate
GHG emissions.
SA4. Implement business
models for producers and
buyers, to enhance climate
mitigation practices and
evaluate market opportunities
for differential products.
SA5. Evaluate changes in the
business models of producers
and buyers, and identify
lessons learned and success
factors in scaling up digital
agriculture mechanisms and
low-carbon practices in the
value chains. | 
Activity 3.1.3. | Enhance financial sector
engagement with farmers and
their needs and efforts on
climate-resilience and climate
mitigation activities | SA 1. Implementation of a
capacity building program to
raise awareness of financial
sector institutions (banks,
MFIs, financial cooperatives,
insurance companies, etc.) on
mid and long-term de-risking
mechanisms that the project
will implement throughout its
components (e.g., DCIPs,
climate-smart practices and
technologies).
SA2. Facilitate participation
and involvement of financial
institutions in the MTAs for
accessing local and tailored
information on climate-smart
actions implemented by the
agricultural sector to reduce
climate risks, which will
reduce uncertainty and may
incentivize the design of
tailored financial products for
the agricultural sector.
SA3. Identify opportunities
with financial institutions and
prioritize cases studies to
provide technical support for
incorporating climate-resilient
and low-carbon criteria to their
agricultural financial products
in compliance with the
environmental, social, and
governance (ESG) criteria. | Evidence of at least four (4)
financial institutions that
participate in MTAs and use
information provided by the
project to inform their
businesses contributing to
wide implementation of
climate-resilient and low-
carbon options in agricultural
sector.
Activity 3.1.4. | Fostering agri-digital
entrepreneurship ecosystems | SA1. explore and identify
potential opportunities for new
ventures. | A new venture identified and
created based on new digital
technologies.

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 75
EE
SA2 support creation of new
ventures and transforming
existing businesses by
developing new digital
technologies.
Result 3.2. Modernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services with multi-tool strategies, differentiated
and adapted to specific environmental, social, gender and productive contexts at the national level
SA1. Linking plans directed by
Agrosavia, for Musaceae ,
potato and panela sugarcane;
HUB innovation model applied
by CIMMYT for maize;
Knowledge Management
Model in Sustainable
Livestock by Fedegan;
Dissemination campaigns of
the National Extension
Service of the National
Federation of Coffee Growers;
Foster inclusion of two-way AMTEC mass adoption model
54,000 producers
digitally enabled tools for in rice; The technical
strengthened in the
enhancing models for cooperation and technology
Activity 3.2.1 implementation of resilient
technology transfer technical transfer service (SCTT) with
and low-carbon technologies.
assistance within an the network of Technology
innovations system approach Transfer Groups (GTT) in
sugarcane; Rural School
Methodology (ECAS) by
Asohofrucol – Musaseas.
SA2. Exchange of
experiences.
SA3. Use of voice (IVR) and
text (SMS) messaging,
WhatsApp networks and
chatbot.
SA4 Gremios digitally enabled
platforms or available mobile
applications.
SA1. Carry out events to
disseminate the project and its
content.
SA2. General training
30 awareness materials
sessions by Result.
(booklets, brochures, flyers,
Capability development on SA3. Work meetings.
factsheets, videos, etc.) to
innovation systems approach SA4. Development of written
Activity 3.2.2 support training (standardized
and its inclusion into updated material, in physical and
in language and concepts) for
technology transfer plans digital form.
different types of audiences
SA5. Development of videos
with 6,000 pieces (copies).
with the project topics.
SA6. Follow-up and joint work
with the Agroclimatic
Technical Committees.
SA1. Conduct topic-specific
4,400 technicians
workshops.
strengthened in capacities on
Strengthen gremios and SA2. Hold operation planning
implementation of climate
farmers capacities on climate meetings.
change adaptation and
Activity 3.2.3 adaptation and mitigation and SA3. Dedicate working
mitigation actions.
nurture knowledge exchanges sessions for co-creation of
across farmers groups. procedures, implementation of 3 communities of practice
experiments, analysis of created and in operation.
results.

--- Table 1 on Page 65 ---
 |  | SA2 support creation of new
ventures and transforming
existing businesses by
developing new digital
technologies. | 
Result 3.2. Modernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services with multi-tool strategies, differentiated
and adapted to specific environmental, social, gender and productive contexts at the national level |  |  | 
Activity 3.2.1 | Foster inclusion of two-way
digitally enabled tools for
enhancing models for
technology transfer technical
assistance within an
innovations system approach | SA1. Linking plans directed by
Agrosavia, for Musaceae ,
potato and panela sugarcane;
HUB innovation model applied
by CIMMYT for maize;
Knowledge Management
Model in Sustainable
Livestock by Fedegan;
Dissemination campaigns of
the National Extension
Service of the National
Federation of Coffee Growers;
AMTEC mass adoption model
in rice; The technical
cooperation and technology
transfer service (SCTT) with
the network of Technology
Transfer Groups (GTT) in
sugarcane; Rural School
Methodology (ECAS) by
Asohofrucol – Musaseas.
SA2. Exchange of
experiences.
SA3. Use of voice (IVR) and
text (SMS) messaging,
WhatsApp networks and
chatbot.
SA4 Gremios digitally enabled
platforms or available mobile
applications. | 54,000 producers
strengthened in the
implementation of resilient
and low-carbon technologies.
Activity 3.2.2 | Capability development on
innovation systems approach
and its inclusion into updated
technology transfer plans | SA1. Carry out events to
disseminate the project and its
content.
SA2. General training
sessions by Result.
SA3. Work meetings.
SA4. Development of written
material, in physical and
digital form.
SA5. Development of videos
with the project topics.
SA6. Follow-up and joint work
with the Agroclimatic
Technical Committees. | 30 awareness materials
(booklets, brochures, flyers,
factsheets, videos, etc.) to
support training (standardized
in language and concepts) for
different types of audiences
with 6,000 pieces (copies).
Activity 3.2.3 | Strengthen gremios and
farmers capacities on climate
adaptation and mitigation and
nurture knowledge exchanges
across farmers groups. | SA1. Conduct topic-specific
workshops.
SA2. Hold operation planning
meetings.
SA3. Dedicate working
sessions for co-creation of
procedures, implementation of
experiments, analysis of
results. | 4,400 technicians
strengthened in capacities on
implementation of climate
change adaptation and
mitigation actions.
3 communities of practice
created and in operation.

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 75
EE
SA4. Communities of practice
on Digital Agriculture and
Data Analysis, Generation of
climate forecasts, and
Communication and outreach;
SA5. Conduct open training
courses on specific topics on
virtual education platforms;
SA6. Strengthening of
academic programs, graduate
theses and internships.
SA1. Management meetings
with national institutions.
SA2. Executive reports to
producer associations on Sixty (60) entities of the
Develop a strategy that allows
progress and needs towards agricultural sector
dissemination, access and
sustainability of services. strengthened in climate
Activity 3.2.4 use of project results by key
SA3. Communication through change adaptation and
public and private
traditional and digital media, mitigation actions.
stakeholders
social media channels, project
website.
SA4. Development of
infographics (Project identity).
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
134. Monitoring and evaluation system. The monitoring and evaluation of the impact of the CSICAP Project will
consider the different levels (producer, farmer associations and other relevant actors) that will be participating in
the interventions. The Impact and Results i ndicators proposed by the GCF will be taken as a basis, however, some
specific indicators by farmer associations will also be added. To carry out the implementation of the Monitoring
system, a joint work of the teams of the different institutions involved will be coordinated. In this way, the system
will be implemented by the CIAT Bioversity Alliance, led by the Prospects, Applied Economics and Impact team
(FAE4Impact) in coordination with Agrosavia. This group will be in charge of collecting information from different
sources and conducting periodic monitoring analyzes. In methodological terms, the appropriate methods will be
applied for this type of intervention, such as differences in differences, matching and instrumental variables,
complemented with qualitative analyzes. In the first phase, a baseline will be designed and built, taking advantage
of databases already built or new data will be collected depending on their availability. In the last year, the final line
will be developed so that the final impact of the Project can be measured.
135. In the technologies / alternatives that seek an efficient use of water resources and low carbon (emission
reduction and carbon capture), the water footprint and the carbon footprint of the proposed systems will be
measured versus the conventional systems used by the producers, comparing also productivity and costs of both
systems so that the comparative advantages of the proposed system can be demonstrated. The recommendation
domains of each alternative will be analyzed and based on this, a network of demonstration farms will be designed
and implemented that will allow the creation of technology transfer nodes and offer technical support to producers
who adopt the technology.
136. Monitoring by CAF. The CAF will carry out administrative missions or inspection visits, depending on the
importance and complexity of the project execution, according to the monitoring plan developed each year by the
CAF project team. In addition to the field visits, biannual meetings will be held in conjunction with the Executing
Unit and the CAF to discuss, update and review the progress of the Project management tools, among other
aspects, such as: i) progress of the identified activities in the annual plan of activities; ii) level of compliance with
the indicators established in the Monitoring Plan for each component; (iii) Annual Operations Plan for the following
year and updating of the Project Execution Plan; (iv) Procurement Plan for the next 12 months; (v) financial
progress; (vi) update of the Risk Matrix; and (vii) possible modifications to the budget allocations by component.
The Executing Unit undertakes to maintain a Monitoring and Evaluation System for each component, the basis of
which will be used to develop the reports and data submitted to the CAF. These aspects will be presented at the
portfolio review meetings that CAF organizes every six months.
137. Reports. During project implementation, the monitoring strategy will be applied with the following reporting
system:
138. Semiannu al reports. The semi-annual reports will allow feedback on the different activities and make
corrections if necessary while the project is in progress. These reports will be made with the information collected
from the sources mentioned above and with a guide of indicators already established. These reports will have a

--- Table 1 on Page 66 ---
 |  |  | SA4. Communities of practice
on Digital Agriculture and
Data Analysis, Generation of
climate forecasts, and
Communication and outreach;
SA5. Conduct open training
courses on specific topics on
virtual education platforms;
SA6. Strengthening of
academic programs, graduate
theses and internships. |  | 
Activity 3.2.4 |  | Develop a strategy that allows
dissemination, access and
use of project results by key
public and private
stakeholders | SA1. Management meetings
with national institutions.
SA2. Executive reports to
producer associations on
progress and needs towards
sustainability of services.
SA3. Communication through
traditional and digital media,
social media channels, project
website.
SA4. Development of
infographics (Project identity). | Sixty (60) entities of the
agricultural sector
strengthened in climate
change adaptation and
mitigation actions. | 
 | E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  | 
 | 134. Monitoring and evaluation system. The monitoring and evaluation of the impact of the CSICAP Project will |  |  |  | 
 | consider the different levels (producer, farmer associations and other relevant actors) that will be participating in |  |  |  | 
 | the interventions. The Impact and Results i ndicators proposed by the GCF will be taken as a basis, however, some |  |  |  | 
 | specific indicators by farmer associations will also be added. To carry out the implementation of the Monitoring |  |  |  | 
 | system, a joint work of the teams of the different institutions involved will be coordinated. In this way, the system |  |  |  | 
 | will be implemented by the CIAT Bioversity Alliance, led by the Prospects, Applied Economics and Impact team |  |  |  | 
 | (FAE4Impact) in coordination with Agrosavia. This group will be in charge of collecting information from different |  |  |  | 
 | sources and conducting periodic monitoring analyzes. In methodological terms, the appropriate methods will be |  |  |  | 
 | applied for this type of intervention, such as differences in differences, matching and instrumental variables, |  |  |  | 
 | complemented with qualitative analyzes. In the first phase, a baseline will be designed and built, taking advantage |  |  |  | 
 | of databases already built or new data will be collected depending on their availability. In the last year, the final line |  |  |  | 
 | will be developed so that the final impact of the Project can be measured. |  |  |  | 
 | 135. In the technologies / alternatives that seek an efficient use of water resources and low carbon (emission |  |  |  | 
 | reduction and carbon capture), the water footprint and the carbon footprint of the proposed systems will be |  |  |  | 
 | measured versus the conventional systems used by the producers, comparing also productivity and costs of both |  |  |  | 
 | systems so that the comparative advantages of the proposed system can be demonstrated. The recommendation |  |  |  | 
 | domains of each alternative will be analyzed and based on this, a network of demonstration farms will be designed |  |  |  | 
 | and implemented that will allow the creation of technology transfer nodes and offer technical support to producers |  |  |  | 
 | who adopt the technology. |  |  |  | 
 | 136. Monitoring by CAF. The CAF will carry out administrative missions or inspection visits, depending on the |  |  |  | 
 | importance and complexity of the project execution, according to the monitoring plan developed each year by the |  |  |  | 
 | CAF project team. In addition to the field visits, biannual meetings will be held in conjunction with the Executing |  |  |  | 
 | Unit and the CAF to discuss, update and review the progress of the Project management tools, among other |  |  |  | 
 | aspects, such as: i) progress of the identified activities in the annual plan of activities; ii) level of compliance with |  |  |  | 
 | the indicators established in the Monitoring Plan for each component; (iii) Annual Operations Plan for the following |  |  |  | 
 | year and updating of the Project Execution Plan; (iv) Procurement Plan for the next 12 months; (v) financial |  |  |  | 
 | progress; (vi) update of the Risk Matrix; and (vii) possible modifications to the budget allocations by component. |  |  |  | 
 | The Executing Unit undertakes to maintain a Monitoring and Evaluation System for each component, the basis of |  |  |  | 
 | which will be used to develop the reports and data submitted to the CAF. These aspects will be presented at the |  |  |  | 
 | portfolio review meetings that CAF organizes every six months. |  |  |  | 
 | 137. Reports. During project implementation, the monitoring strategy will be applied with the following reporting |  |  |  | 
 | system: |  |  |  | 
 | 138. Semiannu al reports. The semi-annual reports will allow feedback on the different activities and make |  |  |  | 
 | corrections if necessary while the project is in progress. These reports will be made with the information collected |  |  |  | 
 | from the sources mentioned above and with a guide of indicators already established. These reports will have a |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 75
EE
specific template and will be concise in the information of interest. The reports will be presented to the MADR, CAF
and GCF. These monitoring reports must specify:
• The progress of the activities carried out compared to those programmed in the work plan for that period,
indicating the achievements of the products.
• Presentation of the difficulties (if any) of the implementation process of the activities, especially of a technical
nature, explaining the justification for these difficulties.
• Recommendations for solutions to the difficulties that were identified in the structure that manages the project
and how the global agenda would be adjusted.
• Next steps and expectations for the next semester.
139. Annual Reports. These reports will be accompanied by semi-annual monitoring, these will be more of an
evaluation of the activities that were carried out in the year and are complemented with other indicators more aimed
at results. In addition, it will express the lessons learned from the year based on the monitoring and activities that
each component highlights as achievements during that period, being a document of great help in decision-making.
140. Final Report. At the end of the project, a report will be developed that includes the results achieved versus
those planned by crops and disaggregated by gender where appropriate.
141. Evaluation. A n evaluation is planned at the end of the project to measure the final results of the main indicators
defined. It is proposed to carry out the evaluation at three levels: i) micro or household level (producers and their
household); ii) at the meso or organizational level with a focus on farmer associations; and, iii) at the macro level,
in terms of influence on policies related to climate change.

--- Table 1 on Page 67 ---
 | specific template and will be concise in the information of interest. The reports will be presented to the MADR, CAF | 
 | and GCF. These monitoring reports must specify: | 
 | • The progress of the activities carried out compared to those programmed in the work plan for that period, | 
 | indicating the achievements of the products. | 
 | • Presentation of the difficulties (if any) of the implementation process of the activities, especially of a technical | 
 | nature, explaining the justification for these difficulties. | 
 | • Recommendations for solutions to the difficulties that were identified in the structure that manages the project | 
 | and how the global agenda would be adjusted. | 
 | • Next steps and expectations for the next semester. | 
 | 139. Annual Reports. These reports will be accompanied by semi-annual monitoring, these will be more of an | 
 | evaluation of the activities that were carried out in the year and are complemented with other indicators more aimed | 
 | at results. In addition, it will express the lessons learned from the year based on the monitoring and activities that | 
 | each component highlights as achievements during that period, being a document of great help in decision-making. | 
 | 140. Final Report. At the end of the project, a report will be developed that includes the results achieved versus | 
 | those planned by crops and disaggregated by gender where appropriate. | 
 | 141. Evaluation. A n evaluation is planned at the end of the project to measure the final results of the main indicators | 
 | defined. It is proposed to carry out the evaluation at three levels: i) micro or household level (producers and their | 
 | household); ii) at the meso or organizational level with a focus on farmer associations; and, iii) at the macro level, | 
 | in terms of influence on policies related to climate change. | 

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 75
FF
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
Selected Risk Factor 1
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Stakeholder risk: In general, the community of farmers and ranchers tends to be very conservative when adapting to
new technologies, varieties or crops, presenting a very important but passive resistance to the introduction of new
profitable procedures or systems.
Mitigation Measure(s)
This risk can be mitigated by establishing close relationships with relevant stakeholders, including the Government and
stakeholders at the end of the production chain. These measures decrease the probability that the risk will occur, to a
lower level.
Selected Risk Factor 2
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Technical performance risk: This risk is related to possible incorrect design or management of trials and pilot projects,
or failures in partnership agreements or institutional settings. The probability of these risks occurring is very low
despite the high level of impact they represent.
Mitigation Measure(s)
To mitigate this risk, CIAT will establish a Project Coordination Team with the capacity to travel to monitor progress and
detect mismanagement and non-compliance risks early, and take action on time.
Selected Risk Factor 3
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Risk of delay and cancellation of costs: There is an inherent risk of delay in planned scheduled works, including the
acquisition of inputs, human resources, materials and tools. This risk is likely to occur with a medium impact. In the
event of a time delay, a possible result is increased costs.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Contingencies should be included in the project's budget estimates, as a mitigation measure for this risk. Another
measure is a close budgetary and financial monitoring to avoid possible delays or cancellations. A CIAT coordinator
will be in charge of the operational aspects to detect early risks and act on time.
Selected Risk Factor 4
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium Medium
Description
Sustainability risk: The lack of governance or mechanisms that limit the sustainability of the project is a risk of medium
probability and high impact.

--- Table 1 on Page 68 ---
 | RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  |  | 
 | F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 1 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Medium | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Stakeholder risk: In general, the community of farmers and ranchers tends to be very conservative when adapting to
new technologies, varieties or crops, presenting a very important but passive resistance to the introduction of new
profitable procedures or systems. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
This risk can be mitigated by establishing close relationships with relevant stakeholders, including the Government and
stakeholders at the end of the production chain. These measures decrease the probability that the risk will occur, to a
lower level. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Low | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Technical performance risk: This risk is related to possible incorrect design or management of trials and pilot projects,
or failures in partnership agreements or institutional settings. The probability of these risks occurring is very low
despite the high level of impact they represent. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
To mitigate this risk, CIAT will establish a Project Coordination Team with the capacity to travel to monitor progress and
detect mismanagement and non-compliance risks early, and take action on time. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 3 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Medium | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Risk of delay and cancellation of costs: There is an inherent risk of delay in planned scheduled works, including the
acquisition of inputs, human resources, materials and tools. This risk is likely to occur with a medium impact. In the
event of a time delay, a possible result is increased costs. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
Contingencies should be included in the project's budget estimates, as a mitigation measure for this risk. Another
measure is a close budgetary and financial monitoring to avoid possible delays or cancellations. A CIAT coordinator
will be in charge of the operational aspects to detect early risks and act on time. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 4 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Governance |  | Medium | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Sustainability risk: The lack of governance or mechanisms that limit the sustainability of the project is a risk of medium
probability and high impact. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 75
FF
Mitigation Measure(s)
From the beginning of the project, each actor will have clear responsibilities assigned during the execution period, as
well as after the project ends, and will be assumed by the farmers themselves. Strengthening producer associations
will help mitigate this risk as they will provide technical and financial support to their members. Once the project is
completed, maintenance and operation plans will be established to provide adequate maintenance to the infrastructure
and guarantee a long useful life.
Selected Risk Factor 5
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Location risk: the project will carry out activities in remote areas with difficult access, which represents a risk for the
execution of the project in terms of delays and costs.
Mitigation Measure(s)
To mitigate the risk, the location will be a criterion for the selection of pilots, and those closest to the logistics structure
will be preferred. CIAT will have the capacity to provide supervision at all implementation sites, with regular visits and
reports.
Selected Risk Factor 6
Category Probability Impact
Forex Medium Medium
Description
Foreign exchange risk: financial planning can be affected by currency fluctuations in the future.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Coverage and good planning can help mitigate this risk. This would not change the probability, but it would mitigate the
impact that the exchange rate may have on project costs.
Selected Risk Factor 7
Category Probability Impact
ML/FT Low High
Description
Probability and impact for money laundering, terrorist financing and prohibited practices risks.
Mitigation Measure(s)
CAF has established an AML program, customer screening, monitoring and related due diligence procedures that are
designed to prevent doing business with entities and/or persons that engage in illegal activities, sanctions screening
which includes lists of sanctions and restricted persons issued by countries or by international organizations (UE, UN,
US- OFAC, UK, France, Canada, World Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, and a designated Compliance
Officer.
The contract (legal agreement) signed among CAF and executive agency and other relevant parties, there are
obligations to comply with AML and FT regulations and to prevent prohibited practices. Additionally, the business
manager performs due diligence through the AMLCFT risk profile and KYC checklist. They also carry out the screening
of the MHCP, MADR and related parties against the international sanctions lists. The information is updated according
to the risk profile, once a year for low-risk clients and twice a year for medium risk.
Selected Risk Factor 8
Category Probability Impact

--- Table 1 on Page 69 ---
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
From the beginning of the project, each actor will have clear responsibilities assigned during the execution period, as
well as after the project ends, and will be assumed by the farmers themselves. Strengthening producer associations
will help mitigate this risk as they will provide technical and financial support to their members. Once the project is
completed, maintenance and operation plans will be established to provide adequate maintenance to the infrastructure
and guarantee a long useful life. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 5 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Location risk: the project will carry out activities in remote areas with difficult access, which represents a risk for the
execution of the project in terms of delays and costs. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
To mitigate the risk, the location will be a criterion for the selection of pilots, and those closest to the logistics structure
will be preferred. CIAT will have the capacity to provide supervision at all implementation sites, with regular visits and
reports. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 6 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Forex | Medium | Medium
Description |  | 
Foreign exchange risk: financial planning can be affected by currency fluctuations in the future. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Coverage and good planning can help mitigate this risk. This would not change the probability, but it would mitigate the
impact that the exchange rate may have on project costs. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 7 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
ML/FT | Low | High
Description |  | 
Probability and impact for money laundering, terrorist financing and prohibited practices risks. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
CAF has established an AML program, customer screening, monitoring and related due diligence procedures that are
designed to prevent doing business with entities and/or persons that engage in illegal activities, sanctions screening
which includes lists of sanctions and restricted persons issued by countries or by international organizations (UE, UN,
US- OFAC, UK, France, Canada, World Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, and a designated Compliance
Officer.
The contract (legal agreement) signed among CAF and executive agency and other relevant parties, there are
obligations to comply with AML and FT regulations and to prevent prohibited practices. Additionally, the business
manager performs due diligence through the AMLCFT risk profile and KYC checklist. They also carry out the screening
of the MHCP, MADR and related parties against the international sanctions lists. The information is updated according
to the risk profile, once a year for low-risk clients and twice a year for medium risk. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 8 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 75
FF
Other Medium Medium
Description
Volatility of agricultural commodities prices.
Mitigation Measure(s)
As part of its implementation, the CSICAP project will contribute to the reduction of crop price volatility, often associated
with climatic events, with the improved information from big data, agroclimatic services, and improved crop
management, which will allow farmers to improve decision making, lowering uncertainty and better coupling production
with markets to reduce crop price variation. Regarding the prices of the supplies, in the event of a high increase of the
prices of them, it is possible to reach an agreement with the producers´ association (which are strategic partners of the
project) who usually have stock and the quantity required by the project is quite small.
Selected Risk Factor 9
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
The ability to find suitable contractors to undertake the work at the expected pricepoint.
Mitigation Measure(s)
There is a pool of human talent that has worked in previous/similar experiences as the CSICAP project in Colombia so
the risk to find suitable contractors to undertake the work at the expected price point is low. The risk will be mitigated
by using this pool of human talent, as well as pursuing new talent from qualified rosters of candidates that can meet
the minimum experience and the expected price point. Additional mitigation measure considered was during the
formulation process of the project because the producers´ associations were active actors and they will be strategic
partners for the implementation, so their human talent skills have been considered in the whole process.
Selected Risk Factor 10
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low High
Description
Vertical dissemination to farmers of the technologies and good practices under components 1 and 2.
Mitigation Measure(s)
During the formulation process of the CSICAP project with the farmers associations (gremios) and the MADR, it During
the formulation process of the CSICAP project with the farmers associations (gremios) and the MADR, the transfer of
technology and its dissemination has been included as a key aspect in each component of the project considering the
lessons learned from the pilot. As a result, there are dissemination and training activities with the technicians and with
farmers in each component to strengthen the adoption of the technologies and its use by farmers. In addition, there will
be signed agreements between Gremios – Farmers/ producers based on previous experiences of projects between
MADR-CIAT-Gremios that involve technology transfer to producers. These agreements will include three main sections:
(i) protocol for technology delivery, control, and follow-up; (ii) guideline for the implementation and use of the technology
and; (iii) certificate of Delivery which will be signed by the producer and gremio including a photographic record.

--- Table 1 on Page 70 ---
Other | Medium | Medium
Description |  | 
Volatility of agricultural commodities prices. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
As part of its implementation, the CSICAP project will contribute to the reduction of crop price volatility, often associated
with climatic events, with the improved information from big data, agroclimatic services, and improved crop
management, which will allow farmers to improve decision making, lowering uncertainty and better coupling production
with markets to reduce crop price variation. Regarding the prices of the supplies, in the event of a high increase of the
prices of them, it is possible to reach an agreement with the producers´ association (which are strategic partners of the
project) who usually have stock and the quantity required by the project is quite small. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 9 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
The ability to find suitable contractors to undertake the work at the expected pricepoint. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
There is a pool of human talent that has worked in previous/similar experiences as the CSICAP project in Colombia so
the risk to find suitable contractors to undertake the work at the expected price point is low. The risk will be mitigated
by using this pool of human talent, as well as pursuing new talent from qualified rosters of candidates that can meet
the minimum experience and the expected price point. Additional mitigation measure considered was during the
formulation process of the project because the producers´ associations were active actors and they will be strategic
partners for the implementation, so their human talent skills have been considered in the whole process. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 10 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | High
Description |  | 
Vertical dissemination to farmers of the technologies and good practices under components 1 and 2. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
During the formulation process of the CSICAP project with the farmers associations (gremios) and the MADR, it During
the formulation process of the CSICAP project with the farmers associations (gremios) and the MADR, the transfer of
technology and its dissemination has been included as a key aspect in each component of the project considering the
lessons learned from the pilot. As a result, there are dissemination and training activities with the technicians and with
farmers in each component to strengthen the adoption of the technologies and its use by farmers. In addition, there will
be signed agreements between Gremios – Farmers/ producers based on previous experiences of projects between
MADR-CIAT-Gremios that involve technology transfer to producers. These agreements will include three main sections:
(i) protocol for technology delivery, control, and follow-up; (ii) guideline for the implementation and use of the technology
and; (iii) certificate of Delivery which will be signed by the producer and gremio including a photographic record. |  | 

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 75
GG
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
Provide the environmental and social risk category
142. Environmental and Social risk category. Taking into account the CAF safeguards evaluation exercise and
the guidelines established by the GCF, this Project has been classified in Category B, that is, it presents moderate
environmental and social impacts in the project's intervention areas. The project will specifically intervene in areas
where prioritized production chains are already established and seeks to reduce their impact on natural resources
through the implementation of good agricultural practices such as reducing the water and carbon footprint, as well
as reducing GHG emissions through the implementation of new technologies that allow adaptation to climatic
conditions and benefit producers. The identification of environmental and social risks was carried out in which it is
evidenced that the possible impacts of the implementation of the project are reversible and can be controlled
through the proposed mitigation measures, especially in relation to the inclusion of women in the activities and
benefits of the project, the production of new varieties of plants resistant to climate variability, and the production
systems that currently exist in paramo areas, among others.
143. Environmental and Social Management Framework. An environmental and social assessment (ESA) was
developed and included in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that was also prepared
for CSICAP, in line with the requirements demanded by the GCF for a project Category B. In paramo ecosystems,
according to the guidelines of this law, it is important that CSICAP strengthen initiatives for agricultural reconversion,
especially when it comes to livestock activities, as well as measures to reduce the use of agrochemicals. In addition,
it is of great relevance for the Project and the agricultural sector to promote spaces for participation and discussion
in which the existing challenges are addressed in the implementation of agricultural practices in moorland
ecosystems. The CSICAP Project has much to contribute in these aspects, including supporting the national
government, especially the MADR, to promote, document and implement sustainable production practices with low
environmental and social impact. Regarding the use of agrochemicals, it is suggested that the farmer associations
review the existing protocols, in order to promote greater adoption of good practices by producers, in such a way
that not only environmental but also environmental risks can be reduced. in human health.
144. The social analysis showed that most of the producers in the chains and territories prioritized by the project are
older than 60 years of age. This imposes challenges, not only in terms of generational change with greater youth
participation, but also in relation to the promotion of change, the adoption of knowledge and new technologies, and
the communication and implementation methods used. In addition, peasant producers and those belonging to
ethnic groups currently implement production and conservation practices that have cultural roots, several of which
must be recognized and incorporated into the Project in order to generate trust and at the same time promote
appropriation and construction. social knowledge. Added to the above is the low digital connectivity of the territories
participating in the Project and the fact that the changes entail economic risks that can be difficult for small
producers to manage. These and other factors put at risk the adoption by the beneficiaries of the knowledge,
technology, practices and models that are expected to be disseminated through CSICAP.
145. Given this scenario, the ESMF recommends, among other aspects, a more participatory approach, in which a
strategy for the social appropriation of knowledge and a communications plan are formulated. This approach must
respond, in a differentiated way, to the specific characteristics of the producers of each production chain and the
conditions of the territories, and must recognize and incorporate traditional and local knowledge and practices,
using an inclusive and easily understood language.
146. In summary, the ESMF established, among others, the development of the following plans and strategies:
• Risk management plan associated with security issues.
• Strategy for the social appropriation of knowledge.
• Communications plan.
• Risk management plan for natural disasters and environmental emergencies.
• Comprehensive solid waste management plan and development and implementation of roadmaps.
• Environmental plans that incorporate matters related to Payments for Environmental Services, restoration,
landscape management tools, conservation agreements, among others.
• Updating of occupational health and safety plans, measures and protocols related to the use of pesticides
and agrochemicals.
• Educación económica y financiera para pequeños productores/as agropecuarios.
147. Regarding the administration of the ESMF, it was defined that the Project Management Unit will be the
maximum responsible for the ESMF of CSICAP, and its fulfillment and implementation will be through CIAT, the
farmer associations, Agrosavia and other entities that carry out project activities. The Unit will have an
Environmental, Social and Gender Support Team, which will respond to the directives of the General Director of
the project who will be its leader. The Project Management Unit, through the Environmental, Social and Gender
Team, will provide guidelines and technical advice for compliance with the ESMF. The Environmental, Social and

--- Table 1 on Page 71 ---
 | GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS | 
 | G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) | 
Provide the environmental and social risk category
142. Environmental and Social risk category. Taking into account the CAF safeguards evaluation exercise and
the guidelines established by the GCF, this Project has been classified in Category B, that is, it presents moderate
environmental and social impacts in the project's intervention areas. The project will specifically intervene in areas
where prioritized production chains are already established and seeks to reduce their impact on natural resources
through the implementation of good agricultural practices such as reducing the water and carbon footprint, as well
as reducing GHG emissions through the implementation of new technologies that allow adaptation to climatic
conditions and benefit producers. The identification of environmental and social risks was carried out in which it is
evidenced that the possible impacts of the implementation of the project are reversible and can be controlled
through the proposed mitigation measures, especially in relation to the inclusion of women in the activities and
benefits of the project, the production of new varieties of plants resistant to climate variability, and the production
systems that currently exist in paramo areas, among others.
143. Environmental and Social Management Framework. An environmental and social assessment (ESA) was
developed and included in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that was also prepared
for CSICAP, in line with the requirements demanded by the GCF for a project Category B. In paramo ecosystems,
according to the guidelines of this law, it is important that CSICAP strengthen initiatives for agricultural reconversion,
especially when it comes to livestock activities, as well as measures to reduce the use of agrochemicals. In addition,
it is of great relevance for the Project and the agricultural sector to promote spaces for participation and discussion
in which the existing challenges are addressed in the implementation of agricultural practices in moorland
ecosystems. The CSICAP Project has much to contribute in these aspects, including supporting the national
government, especially the MADR, to promote, document and implement sustainable production practices with low
environmental and social impact. Regarding the use of agrochemicals, it is suggested that the farmer associations
review the existing protocols, in order to promote greater adoption of good practices by producers, in such a way
that not only environmental but also environmental risks can be reduced. in human health.
144. The social analysis showed that most of the producers in the chains and territories prioritized by the project are
older than 60 years of age. This imposes challenges, not only in terms of generational change with greater youth
participation, but also in relation to the promotion of change, the adoption of knowledge and new technologies, and
the communication and implementation methods used. In addition, peasant producers and those belonging to
ethnic groups currently implement production and conservation practices that have cultural roots, several of which
must be recognized and incorporated into the Project in order to generate trust and at the same time promote
appropriation and construction. social knowledge. Added to the above is the low digital connectivity of the territories
participating in the Project and the fact that the changes entail economic risks that can be difficult for small
producers to manage. These and other factors put at risk the adoption by the beneficiaries of the knowledge,
technology, practices and models that are expected to be disseminated through CSICAP.
145. Given this scenario, the ESMF recommends, among other aspects, a more participatory approach, in which a
strategy for the social appropriation of knowledge and a communications plan are formulated. This approach must
respond, in a differentiated way, to the specific characteristics of the producers of each production chain and the
conditions of the territories, and must recognize and incorporate traditional and local knowledge and practices,
using an inclusive and easily understood language.
146. In summary, the ESMF established, among others, the development of the following plans and strategies:
• Risk management plan associated with security issues.
• Strategy for the social appropriation of knowledge.
• Communications plan.
• Risk management plan for natural disasters and environmental emergencies.
• Comprehensive solid waste management plan and development and implementation of roadmaps.
• Environmental plans that incorporate matters related to Payments for Environmental Services, restoration,
landscape management tools, conservation agreements, among others.
• Updating of occupational health and safety plans, measures and protocols related to the use of pesticides
and agrochemicals.
• Educación económica y financiera para pequeños productores/as agropecuarios.
147. Regarding the administration of the ESMF, it was defined that the Project Management Unit will be the
maximum responsible for the ESMF of CSICAP, and its fulfillment and implementation will be through CIAT, the
farmer associations, Agrosavia and other entities that carry out project activities. The Unit will have an
Environmental, Social and Gender Support Team, which will respond to the directives of the General Director of
the project who will be its leader. The Project Management Unit, through the Environmental, Social and Gender
Team, will provide guidelines and technical advice for compliance with the ESMF. The Environmental, Social and |  | 

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 75
GG
Gender Team will be in charge of designing ESMF guidelines, plans and strategies, providing support during
implementation, monitoring progress and compliance as stipulated in ESMF, and supporting the revision and
updating of ESMF. In addition, if is required, it is possible for the stakeholder’s access to the GCF’s Independent
Redress Mechanism (IRM).
148. Finally, action, product and result indicators were established to monitor and follow up on the ESMF (including
the Gender Action Plan (GAP)). The action period of each activity was defined (before, during and after
implementation). Those responsible for compliance and monitoring of each action were established (MADR, CAF,
CIAT, farmer associations, extensionists). The methods and reporting periods for monitoring and reporting (annual,
monthly, as required) were also defined.
149. Capacity of the procured parties to implement the ESMP. In summary, two groups of farmer associations
are evident: The first group has a medium capacity (they require formulating or updating the entity's environmental
management plans, strengthening its information systems and monitoring of affiliates and environmental issues,
improving the accompaniment of producers / thus, develop protocols for the attention of complaints and claims,
seek greater approaches with the environmental authorities) and is integrated by Fedepapa, Fenalce and
Fedepanela. The second group is made up of farmer associations with a high capacity (they have developed the
above measures but require reviewing specific aspects of them) for environmental and social management:
Asbama, Asocaña, Fedearroz, the National Federation of Coffee Growers and Fedegan. However, it is important
to point out that the capacities are not homogeneous within these associations. For this reason, the ESMF defined
that each farmer association must develop a plan to strengthen their capacities for environmental, social and gender
management, which responds to their current status.
150. Project-level grievance redress mechanism. For the registration and reporting of Petitions, Complaints,
Claims, Suggestions and Denunciations (PCCSD), the following measures are considered:
• Online platform: The ESMP includes the design and operation of an online platform for the project, which will
include a section for registering the PCCSD that may be submitted. Users will be able to directly submit the
PCCSD for attention by project staff.
• Document management: Each PCCSD will have a file number. The PCCSD can also be carried out directly
through field personnel or through calls, physical mail, etc. The person in charge of document management of
the ESMP team will register in the system.
• Response and follow-up: The communication will be forwarded in a timely manner to the competent authority
for processing and response. In the case of communications and PCCSD referred by women and ethnic groups,
special attention will be paid. Periodic reports will be made on the main PCCSDs that are presented.
151. The PCCSD Resolution Mechanism includes a classification of the complaint, according to its level of urgency,
giving priority to the attention of complaints and claims that put the life and health of the most vulnerable population
at risk. According to the classification, the official/contractor who has the competence to attend to it will be reported
immediately, who will identify the measures and corrective actions to address the situation. Subsequently, a formal
response to the claim will be given, specifying the actions and the person / s responsible for carrying them out. The
maximum response times to the PCCSD will be 15 business days after receipt. If necessary, roundtables will be
convened. Each PCCSD will be followed up and formally closed.
152. Regarding stakeholder participation, 52 interviews and group sessions were carried out. Taking into account
that the project is still in the structuring stage and that at the time of the consultations the formulation of the
components and activities was still in the process of technical discussion, during the interviews a general description
of CSICAP was made and subsequently inquired about the main strengths, possible obstacles and opportunities
of the project, as well as recommendations for socializing the project information and for efficient communication
between actors, and to guarantee success in the inclusion of a gender approach and environmental management
strategies in the project, among other aspects.
153. To maintain interaction with the different stakeholders during project implementation, a stakeholder
participation plan was formulated, which includes:
• Start-up workshop.
• Strategies in the GAP and ESMF that include participatory exercises (strategy of social appropriation of
knowledge, work tables and spaces for discussion and collective construction of knowledge with producers,
participatory work sessions with women) and interaction with interested parties (Communications Plan, project
web platform, biannual socialization events).
• Complementary measures: definition of criteria for the selection of beneficiaries, celebration of initiation acts
with rights and commitments of the beneficiaries, participation of beneficiaries in decision-making bodies of the
project, management of alliances with strategic actors.
154. Potential impacts on indigenous populations. The CSICAP project will not have a direct impact on collective
territories (indigenous reservations and community councils), therefore it is not considered necessary to carry out
prior consultation processes. However, with the aim of promoting the participation of ethnic producers in the project,
the ethnic differential approach was included in the diagnosis and analysis of risks, as well as in the mitigation

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 75
GG
measures and in the dissemination and relationship processes that the Project will implement. CSICAP.
Specifically, it is considered pertinent to take the following provisions:
• Within the framework of the strategy for the social appropriation of knowledge and the communications plan,
recommendations will be incorporated to promote the participation of producers belonging to ethnic
communities in the agricultural value chains analyzed.
• Include in the technical team of the project, especially in the group of extension workers, people belonging to
ethnic communities in the project intervention areas, in such a way that trust is generated, work with the
communities is facilitated at the same time local capacity.
• In the chains that apply, it is recommended to propose a minimum participation percentage of producers
belonging to ethnic communities in the project.
• Incorporate the identification of producers who belong to ethnic communities in the information collection
formats and in the farmer associations' databases.
• An orientation guide will be formulated with guidelines to advance in the incorporation of the differential
approach in the internal policies and guidelines of the farmer associations that participate in the project.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
measures and in the dissemination and relationship processes that the Project will implement. CSICAP.
Specifically, it is considered pertinent to take the following provisions:
• Within the framework of the strategy for the social appropriation of knowledge and the communications plan,
recommendations will be incorporated to promote the participation of producers belonging to ethnic
communities in the agricultural value chains analyzed.
• Include in the technical team of the project, especially in the group of extension workers, people belonging to
ethnic communities in the project intervention areas, in such a way that trust is generated, work with the
communities is facilitated at the same time local capacity.
• In the chains that apply, it is recommended to propose a minimum participation percentage of producers
belonging to ethnic communities in the project.
• Incorporate the identification of producers who belong to ethnic communities in the information collection
formats and in the farmer associations' databases.
• An orientation guide will be formulated with guidelines to advance in the incorporation of the differential
approach in the internal policies and guidelines of the farmer associations that participate in the project. |  | 
 | G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 75
GG
155. Development of the Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan. The Gender Analysis carried out a
comprehensive diagnosis with a gender perspective of the territories, the population and the agricultural value
chains that are the focus of the CSICAP project, as well as the institutional, normative and policy framework
associated with gender equality. The Gender Analysis was obtained from mixed research methods and the
triangulation of secondary and statistical information (population census, agricultural census, and quality of life,
labor market and time use surveys), with primary information. The latter included the completion by the farmer
associations of an institutional capacity analysis form, as well as the development of interviews and group sessions
with farmer associations officials, extension workers, producers and affiliated producers (including people belonging
to ethnic groups) and actors. institutional institutions of the national and local order.
156. For the formulation of the Gender Action Plan, the gender approach was analyzed and mainstreamed in each
of the components, axes and activities that comprise the CSICAP project. Based on the results of the Gender
Analysis, the risks associated with gender were identified and, on the one hand, mitigation measures were
formulated so that CSICAP does not widen the gender gaps, and, on the other hand, measures to promote gender
equality in order for the project to contribute to reducing these gaps.
157. Summary of Gender Analysis. The Gender Analysis identified that the gender division of work persists mainly
in rural contexts; Consequently, housework and unpaid care work are activities that fall on rural women, which
considerably limits their labor participation and permanence in the paid labor market and decision-making in relation
to agricultural production units (UPA)34. Additionally, women farmers and ranchers have less access to productive
factors, such as land, credit and technology, which reduces their production potential in crop chains, and limits local
economic development.
158. In response, the Gender Action Plan of the CSICAP Project seeks to reduce the barriers faced by women
producers who participate in the Project and will take advantage of it to identify opportunities, in an articulated
manner between different actors, to favor a greater participation of rural women in the local productive development.
In relation to the care economy35 and women's rights, actions will be developed based on the 3R concept: i)
Recognition through the sensitization of the different actors involved in CSICAP (farmer associations officials,
extension workers) , ii) Reduction of the time that women dedicate to these activities, facilitating access to care
services (promotion of pilot of nurseries, community washing machines, efficient stoves, among others) and iii)
Redistribution of loads in the home (training to producers and agency promotion, participation and empowerment
of women). In a complementary way, and to improve access to technology, technical assistance alternatives that
favor women will be promoted (flexible hours, comprehensive assistance, "producer to producer" methodology,
access to technologies that reduce their workload, but increase productivity, among others).
159. Likewise, a greater participation of women in the Project will be fostered, by taking advantage of economic
opportunities along the links of the productive chains (for example, through the economic exploitation, by women,
of species for the models). silvopastoral and agroforestry, which in turn can improve household food security).
Similarly, the institutional capacities of the farmer associations will be strengthened to promote gender equality from
their mission, so that in this way they can have the necessary tools to implement the action plan.
160. Consultations with interested parties. 52 interviews and group sessions were carried out, in which 205
people participated: 131 men and 74 women, who were asked for recommendations to ensure success in including
the gender approach in the project, among other aspects. The actors recommended characterizing the women
beneficiaries to develop actions relevant to their needs, include affirmative measures, sensitize all actors on gender
issues, promote activities exclusively for women and / or that are led by women, promote associativity and
participation of women. These suggestions were incorporated into the actions proposed in the GAP, several of
which include participatory formulation processes (in field workshops) with women, in order for the project to have
a “bottom-up” approach. Additionally, several of the actions will be implemented not only with the direct beneficiaries
(women producers), but also with indirect ones (for example, from the households of the producers) in order to
promote a greater participation of rural women in the project.
161. The Project Management Unit will have a Gender Team, made up of a senior and a junior professional, who
will be in charge of the design of guidelines, plans and strategies of the GAP, provide support and technical advice
during implementation, monitor the progress and compliance as stipulated in the GAP, and support the review and
update of the plan.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
34 In CSICAP municipalities, on average, men make production decisions in 58.4% of UPAs, compared to 20.0% of UPAs where women make decisions, and
15.3% where decisions are made in a shared way.
35 Article 2 of Law 1413 of 2010, defines the care economy as “unpaid work carried out in the home, related to the maintenance of the home, the care of other
people in the home or the community and the maintenance of strength of paid work. " In the case of rural women, the effects of climate change are exacerbated
by gender norms and relations in the home and on the farm. The overload of unpaid domestic and care work, as well as low participation in production decision-
making, low access and control over land and financial and technological resources, and low income and high levels of poverty (especially in female heads of
household), among other factors, limit the ability of women to develop adaptation strategies to climate variability. In addition, the effects on household food security
can be deepened, because, on the one hand, the responsibility for the supply of food falls on them, and, on the other hand, climate change can reduce the
availability of water, food and resources for self-consumption.

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
155. Development of the Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan. The Gender Analysis carried out a
comprehensive diagnosis with a gender perspective of the territories, the population and the agricultural value
chains that are the focus of the CSICAP project, as well as the institutional, normative and policy framework
associated with gender equality. The Gender Analysis was obtained from mixed research methods and the
triangulation of secondary and statistical information (population census, agricultural census, and quality of life,
labor market and time use surveys), with primary information. The latter included the completion by the farmer
associations of an institutional capacity analysis form, as well as the development of interviews and group sessions
with farmer associations officials, extension workers, producers and affiliated producers (including people belonging
to ethnic groups) and actors. institutional institutions of the national and local order.
156. For the formulation of the Gender Action Plan, the gender approach was analyzed and mainstreamed in each
of the components, axes and activities that comprise the CSICAP project. Based on the results of the Gender
Analysis, the risks associated with gender were identified and, on the one hand, mitigation measures were
formulated so that CSICAP does not widen the gender gaps, and, on the other hand, measures to promote gender
equality in order for the project to contribute to reducing these gaps.
157. Summary of Gender Analysis. The Gender Analysis identified that the gender division of work persists mainly
in rural contexts; Consequently, housework and unpaid care work are activities that fall on rural women, which
considerably limits their labor participation and permanence in the paid labor market and decision-making in relation
to agricultural production units (UPA)34. Additionally, women farmers and ranchers have less access to productive
factors, such as land, credit and technology, which reduces their production potential in crop chains, and limits local
economic development.
158. In response, the Gender Action Plan of the CSICAP Project seeks to reduce the barriers faced by women
producers who participate in the Project and will take advantage of it to identify opportunities, in an articulated
manner between different actors, to favor a greater participation of rural women in the local productive development.
In relation to the care economy35 and women's rights, actions will be developed based on the 3R concept: i)
Recognition through the sensitization of the different actors involved in CSICAP (farmer associations officials,
extension workers) , ii) Reduction of the time that women dedicate to these activities, facilitating access to care
services (promotion of pilot of nurseries, community washing machines, efficient stoves, among others) and iii)
Redistribution of loads in the home (training to producers and agency promotion, participation and empowerment
of women). In a complementary way, and to improve access to technology, technical assistance alternatives that
favor women will be promoted (flexible hours, comprehensive assistance, "producer to producer" methodology,
access to technologies that reduce their workload, but increase productivity, among others).
159. Likewise, a greater participation of women in the Project will be fostered, by taking advantage of economic
opportunities along the links of the productive chains (for example, through the economic exploitation, by women,
of species for the models). silvopastoral and agroforestry, which in turn can improve household food security).
Similarly, the institutional capacities of the farmer associations will be strengthened to promote gender equality from
their mission, so that in this way they can have the necessary tools to implement the action plan.
160. Consultations with interested parties. 52 interviews and group sessions were carried out, in which 205
people participated: 131 men and 74 women, who were asked for recommendations to ensure success in including
the gender approach in the project, among other aspects. The actors recommended characterizing the women
beneficiaries to develop actions relevant to their needs, include affirmative measures, sensitize all actors on gender
issues, promote activities exclusively for women and / or that are led by women, promote associativity and
participation of women. These suggestions were incorporated into the actions proposed in the GAP, several of
which include participatory formulation processes (in field workshops) with women, in order for the project to have
a “bottom-up” approach. Additionally, several of the actions will be implemented not only with the direct beneficiaries
(women producers), but also with indirect ones (for example, from the households of the producers) in order to
promote a greater participation of rural women in the project.
161. The Project Management Unit will have a Gender Team, made up of a senior and a junior professional, who
will be in charge of the design of guidelines, plans and strategies of the GAP, provide support and technical advice
during implementation, monitor the progress and compliance as stipulated in the GAP, and support the review and
update of the plan. |  | 
 | G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 73 OF 75
GG
162. Financial Management and Control. The MADR, as Executing Entity, will be responsible for supervising the
implementation and supervision of the project, in accordance with its own internal rules, policies and procedures,
including the administration and management of the use of GCF resources, as well as the follow-up, evaluation and
reporting responsibilities. The loan resources will be administered according to the CAF Credit Process Manual
(MN / DCRR -017) that has been reviewed by the GCF during the CAF accreditation process. The Manual guides
the process for all phases of credit, including: (i) Origination; (ii) Evaluation; (iii) Approval; (iv) Formalization; and
(v) Administration. The non-reimbursable resources of the GCF will be executed by the Government of Colombia,
through MADR as the Executing Agency, and CIAT, as the procured party. The Figure in this section shows the
execution scheme of the GCF funds and how these would be handled by CAF as an accredited agency.
Figure G.3.1. Flow chart, management and financial control of the Project
163. The financial control and procurement processes will be implemented in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the CAF, which were certified in the accreditation process before the GCF. On the other hand, CIAT
has an ERP UBW (Unit4 Business World) that allows it to separate projects through specific codes per signed
agreement and monitor budget execution online, it also has logistics and travel modules that allow requests to be
made to assistants and project leaders directly giving transparency to the execution of expenses through their
approval workflows. CIAT handles the accrual accounting established in the procedures documented in Directive
D 2.15. The Alliance has an annual financial institutional review and audit process, through the External Auditors,
the CGIAR internal audit and, on occasions, if the donor requires it, the audit of specific projects that is carried out.
by external auditors and negotiated as part of the audit plan in accordance with the requirements established in the
signed agreements and with the budget availability within the agreement.
164. During project execution, CAF will supervise and guarantee quality in accordance with its policies and
procedures. This may include follow-up missions, spot checks, and participation in Steering Committee meetings.
The project will be subject to the CAF audit regime, including external and internal audit functions. CIAT is
responsible for financial monitoring and has the support of a financial management team, which will interact with
and support the work of the Executing Unit.
165. Procurement. The Procurement Plan is aligned with that of CAF's Goods and Services Procurement Manual,
following what is stipulated in CAF's Master Accreditation Agreement (AMA) with the GCF. Similarly, the financial
management policies of CIAT (the procured party) are aligned with those of CAF to guarantee sound internal
control. Procurement processes will follow CIAT's Procurement Manual for Goods, Consulting Services and Works,
with the thresholds for procurement. CIAT guidelines will be used for the acquisition and contracting of goods.
These guidelines have been included in Annex 10.

--- Table 1 on Page 75 ---
 | 162. Financial Management and Control. The MADR, as Executing Entity, will be responsible for supervising the | 
 | implementation and supervision of the project, in accordance with its own internal rules, policies and procedures, | 
 | including the administration and management of the use of GCF resources, as well as the follow-up, evaluation and | 
 | reporting responsibilities. The loan resources will be administered according to the CAF Credit Process Manual | 
 | (MN / DCRR -017) that has been reviewed by the GCF during the CAF accreditation process. The Manual guides | 
 | the process for all phases of credit, including: (i) Origination; (ii) Evaluation; (iii) Approval; (iv) Formalization; and | 
 | (v) Administration. The non-reimbursable resources of the GCF will be executed by the Government of Colombia, | 
 | through MADR as the Executing Agency, and CIAT, as the procured party. The Figure in this section shows the | 
 | execution scheme of the GCF funds and how these would be handled by CAF as an accredited agency. | 
 |  | 
 |  | 
 |  | 
 | Figure G.3.1. Flow chart, management and financial control of the Project | 
 |  | 
 | 163. The financial control and procurement processes will be implemented in accordance with the rules and | 
 | regulations of the CAF, which were certified in the accreditation process before the GCF. On the other hand, CIAT | 
 | has an ERP UBW (Unit4 Business World) that allows it to separate projects through specific codes per signed | 
 | agreement and monitor budget execution online, it also has logistics and travel modules that allow requests to be | 
 | made to assistants and project leaders directly giving transparency to the execution of expenses through their | 
 | approval workflows. CIAT handles the accrual accounting established in the procedures documented in Directive | 
 | D 2.15. The Alliance has an annual financial institutional review and audit process, through the External Auditors, | 
 | the CGIAR internal audit and, on occasions, if the donor requires it, the audit of specific projects that is carried out. | 
 | by external auditors and negotiated as part of the audit plan in accordance with the requirements established in the | 
 | signed agreements and with the budget availability within the agreement. | 
 | 164. During project execution, CAF will supervise and guarantee quality in accordance with its policies and | 
 | procedures. This may include follow-up missions, spot checks, and participation in Steering Committee meetings. | 
 | The project will be subject to the CAF audit regime, including external and internal audit functions. CIAT is | 
 | responsible for financial monitoring and has the support of a financial management team, which will interact with | 
 | and support the work of the Executing Unit. | 
 | 165. Procurement. The Procurement Plan is aligned with that of CAF's Goods and Services Procurement Manual, | 
 | following what is stipulated in CAF's Master Accreditation Agreement (AMA) with the GCF. Similarly, the financial | 
 | management policies of CIAT (the procured party) are aligned with those of CAF to guarantee sound internal | 
 | control. Procurement processes will follow CIAT's Procurement Manual for Goods, Consulting Services and Works, | 
 | with the thresholds for procurement. CIAT guidelines will be used for the acquisition and contracting of goods. | 
 | These guidelines have been included in Annex 10. | 

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 74 OF 75
GG
166. The Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT has implemented an ERP (Agresso Unit4 Business World),
which manages the procurement of goods and services. Its use improves the flow of information, supports the
traceability of processes, facilitates reporting, increases transparency and strengthens internal control. Acquisitions
comply with the Logistics Policy, which is based on principles of fairness and competitiveness, transparency,
quality, service, objective selection and reduction of legal risk. In addition, the guidelines set forth in the CGIAR
Financial Guidelines Series (FG6) IFRS have been adapted to the procedures of the Alliance.
167. Due to the civil nature of the relationship with suppliers, they are required to assume all material, human and
financial risks involved in acquisitions, thus avoiding risks to the Alliance. Therefore, in accordance with the nature,
scope and purpose of the contracted good or service, contracts are signed in which providers are suggested to
acquire the policies with the insurance broker of the Large Beneficiaries Program. Finally, in the contracts there are
compromissory clauses are considered for the solution of differences, controversies or discrepancies that arise
between the parties.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential
information.

--- Table 1 on Page 76 ---
 | 166. The Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT has implemented an ERP (Agresso Unit4 Business World), | 
 | which manages the procurement of goods and services. Its use improves the flow of information, supports the | 
 | traceability of processes, facilitates reporting, increases transparency and strengthens internal control. Acquisitions | 
 | comply with the Logistics Policy, which is based on principles of fairness and competitiveness, transparency, | 
 | quality, service, objective selection and reduction of legal risk. In addition, the guidelines set forth in the CGIAR | 
 | Financial Guidelines Series (FG6) IFRS have been adapted to the procedures of the Alliance. | 
 | 167. Due to the civil nature of the relationship with suppliers, they are required to assume all material, human and | 
 | financial risks involved in acquisitions, thus avoiding risks to the Alliance. Therefore, in accordance with the nature, | 
 | scope and purpose of the contracted good or service, contracts are signed in which providers are suggested to | 
 | acquire the policies with the insurance broker of the Large Beneficiaries Program. Finally, in the contracts there are | 
 | compromissory clauses are considered for the solution of differences, controversies or discrepancies that arise | 
 | between the parties. | 
 |  | 
 | G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal | 
 |  | 
 | ☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be | 
 | disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | ☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited | 
 | entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 |   full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with | 
 | an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the | 
 | accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and | 
 |   redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential | 
 | information. | 

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 75 OF 75
HH
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☒ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
☐
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☒ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
☒ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☒ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☒ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☐ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project
☒ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)
☒ Annex 22 GHG Emissions Reduction Estimates
☒ Annex 23 Other relevant reference: impact assessment baseline initiatives (evaluation ex-post)
☒ Annex 24 Other relevant reference: estimation of direct and indirect beneficiaries
☒ Annex 25 Operations and maintenance (O&M) plan
☒ Annex 26 Annexes requested by iTAP
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.

--- Table 1 on Page 77 ---
 | ANNEXES |  |  | 
H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☒ |  | Annex 3 | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 6 | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
☐
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) | 
☒ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☒ |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☐ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project | 
☒ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity | 
☒ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment | 
☐ |  | Annex 21 | Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 22 | GHG Emissions Reduction Estimates | 
☒ |  | Annex 23 | Other relevant reference: impact assessment baseline initiatives (evaluation ex-post) | 
☒ |  | Annex 24 | Other relevant reference: estimation of direct and indirect beneficiaries | 
☒
☒ |  | Annex 25
Annex 26 | Operations and maintenance (O&M) plan
Annexes requested by iTAP | 

=== PAGE 78 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 80 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Project or programme title
Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and
Existence of subproject(s) sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in
to be identified after GCF Colombia (CSICAP)
Board approval
Sector (public or private) No
Accredited entity
Environmental and social Public
safeguards (ESS) category Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)
Location – specific
Category B
location(s) of project or
target country or
location(s) of programme
Colombia
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on
Friday, January 7, 2022
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English and Spanish
Spanish is the official language of Colombia and the language
Explanation on language
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.
English:
https://www.caf.com/media/3382061/en-2021-04-29-
annex-6-esmf-rev011221-clean.pdf
Link to disclosure
Spanish:
https://www.caf.com/media/3382057/2021-03-31-anexo-6-
esia-y-mgas-corto-26042021-rev1-12-2021-clean.pdf
https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente-y-cambio-
Other link(s)
climatico/proyectos/
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B
Remarks project is contained in the “Environmental and Social
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
Management Framework (ESMF)”.
Date of disclosure on
Friday, January 7, 2022
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English and Spanish
Spanish is the official language of Colombia and the language
Explanation on language
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.
English:
https://www.caf.com/media/3382061/en-2021-04-29-
annex-6-esmf-rev011221-clean.pdf
Link to disclosure
Spanish:
https://www.caf.com/media/3382057/2021-03-31-anexo-6-
e sia-y-mgas-corto-26042021-rev1-12-2021-clean.pdf
https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente-y-cambio-
Other link(s)
climatico/proyectos/
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B
Remarks
project is contained in the ESMF.

--- Table 1 on Page 80 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  | 
Project or programme title |  |  | Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and | 
 | Existence of subproject(s) |  | sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in
Colombia (CSICAP) | 
 | to be identified after GCF |  |  | 
 | Board approval |  |  | 
 | Sector (public or private) |  | No | 
 | Accredited entity |  |  | 
 | Environmental and social |  | Public
Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF) | 
 | safeguards (ESS) category |  |  | 
 | Location – specific |  | Category B
Colombia | 
 | location(s) of project or |  |  | 
 | target country or |  |  | 
 | location(s) of programme |  |  | 
 | Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | Friday, January 7, 2022 | 
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English and Spanish | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | Spanish is the official language of Colombia and the language
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.
English:
https://www.caf.com/media/3382061/en-2021-04-29-
annex-6-esmf-rev011221-clean.pdf
Spanish: | 
 |  |  | https://www.caf.com/media/3382057/2021-03-31-anexo-6-
esia-y-mgas-corto-26042021-rev1-12-2021-clean.pdf | 
Other link(s) |  |  | https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente-y-cambio-
climatico/proyectos/
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B | 
 | Remarks project is contained in the “Environmental and Social
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Management Framework (ESMF)”. | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | Friday, January 7, 2022 | 
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English and Spanish | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | Spanish is the official language of Colombia and the language
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.
English:
https://www.caf.com/media/3382061/en-2021-04-29-
annex-6-esmf-rev011221-clean.pdf
Spanish: | 
 |  |  | https://www.caf.com/media/3382057/2021-03-31-anexo-6-
e sia-y-mgas-corto-26042021-rev1-12-2021-clean.pdf | 
Other link(s) |  |  | https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente-y-cambio-
climatico/proyectos/ | 

=== PAGE 81 ===
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on
N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
OAtnhye or tlihnekr( sr)e levant ESS reportNs,/ eA. g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement
RPeomlicayr kFsr amework (RPF), IndiNge/nAo us Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)
Environmental and Social Risk Assessment of the project is
Description of contained in the Environmental and Social Management
report/disclosure on Framework (ESMF), Gender Assessment (GA) and Gender
accredited entity’s website Action Plan (GAP)/
Friday, January 7, 2022
Language(s) of disclosure English and Spanish
Spanish is the official language of Colombia and the language
Explanation on language
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.
English:
- ESMF https://www.caf.com/media/3382061/en-2021-04-
29-annex-6-esmf-rev011221-clean.pdf
- GA https://www.caf.com/media/3382062/en-2021-03-31-
annex-8-gender-assessment-rev-19-11-21-clean.pdf
-GAP https://www.caf.com/media/3382060/en-2021-03-31-
annex-8-gap-rev-19-11-2021-clean.pdf
Link to disclosure
Spanish:
- ESMF https://www.caf.com/media/3382057/2021-03-31-
anexo-6-esia-y-mgas-corto-26042021-rev1-12-2021-
clean.pdf
- GA https://www.caf.com/media/3382058/2021-03-31-
anexo-8-analisis-de-genero-rev-19-11-2021-clean.pdf
-E nGgAliPsh h htttptps:s/:///wwwwww..ccaaff..ccoomm//emne/dtoiap/ic3s3/e8/2e0n5v9ir/o2n0m2e1n-t0-a3n-3d1--
anexo-8-pag-rev19-11-2021-clean.pdf
climate-change/projects/
Spanish
Other link(s)
https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente-y-
cambio-climatico/proyectos/
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
Remarks N/A
Date Friday, January 7, 2022
Hard copies were made available in CAF´s office in Colombia
Place located in Carrera 9 #76-49, Bogota D.C.
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
CP 110221
Date of accredited entity’s
Monday, June 6, 2022
Board meeting
NDoatete: Tofh GisC fFo’sr mBo warads mpreeeptianrge d bMyo tnhdea ay,c Fcreebdruitaerdy e7n, 2ti0t2y2 s tated above.

--- Table 1 on Page 81 ---
 | Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | OAtnhye or tlihnekr( sr)e levant ESS reportNs,/ eA. g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement |  |  | 
 | RPeomlicayr kFsr amework (RPF), IndiNge/nAo us Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) |  |  | 
Description of
report/disclosure on |  |  | Environmental and Social Risk Assessment of the project is
contained in the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), Gender Assessment (GA) and Gender | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  | Action Plan (GAP)/ | 
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | Friday, January 7, 2022
English and Spanish | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | Spanish is the official language of Colombia and the language
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.
English:
- ESMF https://www.caf.com/media/3382061/en-2021-04-
29-annex-6-esmf-rev011221-clean.pdf
- GA https://www.caf.com/media/3382062/en-2021-03-31-
annex-8-gender-assessment-rev-19-11-21-clean.pdf
-GAP https://www.caf.com/media/3382060/en-2021-03-31-
annex-8-gap-rev-19-11-2021-clean.pdf
Spanish:
- ESMF https://www.caf.com/media/3382057/2021-03-31-
anexo-6-esia-y-mgas-corto-26042021-rev1-12-2021-
clean.pdf
- GA https://www.caf.com/media/3382058/2021-03-31-
anexo-8-analisis-de-genero-rev-19-11-2021-clean.pdf | 
Other link(s) |  |  | -E nGgAliPsh h htttptps:s/:///wwwwww..ccaaff..ccoomm//emne/dtoiap/ic3s3/e8/2e0n5v9ir/o2n0m2e1n-t0-a3n-3d1--
anexo-8-pag-rev19-11-2021-clean.pdf
climate-change/projects/
Spanish | 
 |  |  | https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente-y- | 
 | cambio-climatico/proyectos/
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
Date |  |  | Friday, January 7, 2022
Hard copies were made available in CAF´s office in Colombia | 
 | Place located in Carrera 9 #76-49, Bogota D.C.
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered |  |  | 
 |  |  | CP 110221 | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of accredited entity’s |  | Monday, June 6, 2022 | 

--- Table 2 on Page 81 ---


Description of

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 82
Secretariat’s assessment of FP182
Proposal name: Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and
sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems
in Colombia (CSICAP)
Accredited entity: Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)
Country/(ies): Colombia
Programme/programme size: Medium
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths Points of caution
Modernization of agricultural extension services Relatively high staff costs for scientists and
and adaptation decision-making at the producer technicians and a need to ensure that funding is
level with cutting-edge technologies, including used to build the capacity of local actors.
artificial intelligence and big data.
Great potential to attract the private sector in the
targeted agricultural value chains (eight crops
and livestock) with active financial actors already
in place with high demands from local, national
and international markets.
High potential for further scaling up and
replication to other gremios (farmer producer
groups) once the innovative business models have
been developed and proven to be successful
through output 3.1.
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum V, titled “List of proposed
conditions and recommendations.”
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 Project background
3. The agricultural sector in Colombia has been negatively affected by climate change. Its
production, yields, land suitability and harvest seasons have all been impacted by higher
temperatures, rainfall variability, droughts and a higher frequency of extreme weather events.
Projections show that 26 out of 32 Colombian departments are likely to see large yield losses for
basic crops associated with food security. Farmers in the regions are not adequately adapting to
these climate impacts, owing to costly adaptation technologies, limited knowledge and lack of
timely agroclimatic information to help them cope with changing weather patterns and extreme
weather events.

--- Table 1 on Page 82 ---
Strengths | Points of caution
Modernization of agricultural extension services
and adaptation decision-making at the producer
level with cutting-edge technologies, including
artificial intelligence and big data. | Relatively high staff costs for scientists and
technicians and a need to ensure that funding is
used to build the capacity of local actors.
Great potential to attract the private sector in the
targeted agricultural value chains (eight crops
and livestock) with active financial actors already
in place with high demands from local, national
and international markets. | 
High potential for further scaling up and
replication to other gremios (farmer producer
groups) once the innovative business models have
been developed and proven to be successful
through output 3.1. | 

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 83
4. The objectives of the project are to change the current paradigm of agricultural
production of intensive use of conventional agricultural inputs with little adaptation techniques,
and to reduce the vulnerability of crops to droughts, floods and other climatic stressors through
adopting digital agriculture and adaptation technologies. The project will generate adequate
and stable availability of good-quality food by strengthening climate risk management, while
reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from agricultural production. In addition, the project
will strengthen the capacities of producers, technicians and institutions so that they can adopt
and implement technologies. The project is national in scope, and it considers livestock and
eight crops – rice, corn, potatoes, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, coffee, bananas and plantains.
5. The project will contribute to directly benefitting 619,691 rural producers and their
families (7 per cent of total agricultural producers in Colombia), and an additional 347,996
people indirectly through the provision of climate information services. It is also expected to
increase the climate resilience of the agricultural system across a total of 967,997 hectares,
distributed in 22 departments (69 per cent of the country’s departments) and 219
municipalities (20 per cent of all municipalities). The project is projected to reduce GHG
emissions by 9,152,034 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO eq) throughout its 25-year
2
lifespan.
6. The total project financing is USD 99,910,201, with a request for GCF financing of USD
73,283,080 (grant USD 48,283,080 and loan USD 25,000,000). Corporación Andina de Fomento
(CAF) contributes to the project with a senior loan of USD 10,300,000, and co-financing of USD
16,300,000 will be provided by the institutions and entities involved in the project, such as the
alliance between Biodiversity International and the International Center for Tropical
Agriculture (CIAT) and the farmer groups (guilds or “gremios”). The project is submitted under
environmental and social safeguards category B.
2.2 Component-by-component analysis
Component 1: Digital agriculture and climate services for rural modernization with an emphasis
on adaptation and mitigation (total cost: USD 39.615 million; GCF cost: USD 26.045 million, or 66
per cent)
7. Component 1 aims to improve decision-making at the producer level and avoid crop
losses through the adoption of digital agriculture, including the use of big data and artificial
intelligence. It includes the design, assembly, implementation and operation of climate
information services for technicians and producers. In addition, this component includes early
warning systems on climate hazards, as well as other sophisticated warning systems on pests,
diseases and other abiotic factors that can occur due to climatic phenomena.
8. Under this component, GCF grants and loans will be used to strengthen and modernize
the agricultural extension system, and to provide information services to reduce agroclimatic
risk. The component seeks to modernize and expand the coverage of agricultural extension in
Colombia. More than 2,200 technicians will be trained in using this type of tool, and the
component will ensure there is technical support covering the implementation and adaptation
and mitigation measures delivered to about 49,200 producers, who are considered direct
project beneficiaries.
9. This component shows the key paradigm-shift potential in the proposed project, by
bringing in cutting-edge technologies to extension services and farming activities. Adopting
artificial intelligence with big data platforms will make it possible to automate crop cycle
monitoring and data management, and to produce automatic responses in extension services.
The feasibility study assesses the advantages of several proposed technologies compared with
conventional statistical methods, and provides sound justification for discarding the
conventional methods and opting for the proposed solutions. The target production sites are

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 84
well equipped to implement the proposed solutions because such systems are not entirely new
for some of the crops (e.g. rice and cotton). The proposal also shows that sufficient technical
capacity is in place from both CIAT and Agricultural Research Corporation of Colombia
(Agrosavia) to carry out the project activities.
10. The project is structured so that minimum concessionality is sought to make the
investments viable with the participation of both the private and public sector. As demonstrated
in the financial model, reducing the concessionality would make the project unviable. When
reducing the grant amount by a third, for instance, it would make the project unviable for
certain gremios (i.e. livestock and sugar cane). At reduced levels of grants, the model shows that
the project is not viable for most of the gremios. This demonstrates that the concessionality in
this project, including components 2 and 3, mainly benefits the producer associations, which in
turn have committed to provide co-financing so that the project’s objectives are met.
Component 2: Genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options
and their scaling up to increase climate resilience and promote low-carbon agricultural
development (total cost: USD 48.025 million; GCF cost: USD 37.362 million, or 78 per cent)
11. Component 2 will improve the resilience of productive systems and promote low-carbon
agricultural development, and considers alternatives for genetic improvement by developing
new varieties and hybrids that are more resilient to climate impacts, efficient use of water
resources and soil, and other adaptation and mitigation options. This component comprises two
thematic outputs with their corresponding activities: (i) strengthening the germplasm bank,
developing new varieties, and supporting the massive multiplication of seeds for adaptation and
mitigation; and (ii) crop management techniques and other technological options and their
scaling up to increase resilience and mitigation.
12. Under this component, GCF grants and loans will be used to develop a state-of-the-art
phenotyping platform designed to identify climate-resistant genetic resources aimed at
developing heat- and drought-resistant, nitrogen-use efficient and low-GHG emission varieties
for rice, maize, bananas, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, coffee, potatoes and livestock. Also, GCF
funding will be used for implementing a range of crop management techniques on 9,230
hectares of land to increase the efficient use of water resources, restore soil properties, reduce
GHG emissions or increase carbon capture, while enabling productivity increases.
13. The proposal provides sound justification for the need of a germplasm bank and
development of new varieties that are resilient to climate change, with several alternative
options assessed in the feasibility study. There are limited options available in the market in
terms of genetic materials, and other solutions such as whole breeding cycle would take a
longer time than the project period. A phenotyping platform would thus be the most cost-
effective and feasible solution to develop climate-resistant genetic resources.
14. The proposed crop management techniques and technologies are well known and
recognized agricultural practices that will produce no-regret results. These techniques will be
tailored to the needs of the various crops. The feasibility study presents the detailed steps
needed for implementing these agronomic measures, including methods to monitor the GHG
emission reductions achieved through implementing such techniques. The proposed
interventions, their rationale and the steps for implementation are assessed to be adequate and
reasonable to achieve the project objectives.
Component 3: Innovative and inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems
and a more engaged financial sector (total cost: USD 8.571 million; GCF cost: USD 7.169 million, or
84 per cent)
15. Component 3 aims to develop science-based business models that will enable prioritized
value chains to open new commercial opportunities. The component will also transfer
modernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services to 2,200 trainees under

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 85
component 1. The component is expected to generate eight business models (one per gremio)
and involve at least four financial institutions (banks, microfinance institutions, insurance
companies and so on), incentivizing them to design tailored financial products for the target
agricultural value chains.
16. The business model development under this component has been strengthened after
extensive reviews conducted during the second-level due diligence. The outputs of this
component will include detailed value chain analyses for the target crops, strengthening the
gremios’ capacities to use adopted digital tools, and developing low-carbon and climate-resilient
business models for the key value chains. As presented in the feasibility study, there are already
well-functioning domestic and international markets with active public and private sectors,
including various lending opportunities with financial actors. This output should therefore focus
on developing differentiated business models that integrate the technological solutions in
agricultural planning and production, providing new commercial opportunities for the private
sector in the target value chains.
Project management (total cost: USD 3.692 million; GCF cost: USD 2.704 million, or 73 per cent)
17. The GCF portion of the project management cost is about 3.7 per cent of the total
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GCF policy on fees.
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria
3.1 Impact potential Scale: Medium to high
18. The project is cross-cutting, aiming to generate both adaptation and mitigation results.
The project has substantial mitigation potential, with 9.1 MtCO eq in emission reductions and
2
carbon sequestration over the 25-year project lifetime (0.37 MtCO eq per year). The emission
2
reductions and carbon sequestration will be achieved through rice cultivation (reduction of
methane emissions); efficient use of fertilizers; implementing efficient stoves; and applying bio-
inputs as well as other adaptation techniques. The baseline emission values for each crop, as
well as calculation of emission reductions, are in accordance with the guidelines for emissions
inventories in agricultural systems published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change.
19. Adaptation impact is deemed to be significant: the number of direct beneficiaries is 7.2
per cent of the total producer population in Colombia, and the scope of the project is national ,
with the project’s target departments accounting for close to 70 per cent of the country
departments. The project areas have been targeted on the basis of their climate risks and
mitigation potential, and agreed among project stakeholders including gremios. Rigorous
eligibility criteria for selecting project sites, activities and beneficiaries have been submitted as
part of the funding proposal package and they are included in the term sheet.
20. As the project scope is at the national level, the climate rationale for the adaptation
interventions has been demonstrated in rather a generic manner. Colombia has been
experiencing an average temperature increase of 0.13°C per decade between 1971 and 2000,
and will continue to be affected by higher temperature, intense rain and drought, and a higher
frequency of extreme weather events. The proposal lacks observed historical trends for each
identified climate parameter from location-specific representative meteorological stations.
While efforts have been made to identify a link between El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
and agricultural productivity in Colombia, the proposal needs to strengthen its information on
the observable long-term trend between identified parameters and agricultural productivity.
3.2 Paradigm shift potential Scale: Medium

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 86
21. The key paradigm shifting potential in this project is from technological innovation and
transfer, whereby digital agriculture (including big data and a bot-based system) will be used
for agroclimatic forecasting and for selecting the most suitable adaptation measures for
producers. The proposal demonstrates high potential for scaling up and replication for the
proposed digital agriculture system. As the project itself is a scaling up of the pilot project
implemented by CIAT and the Colombian Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
(MADR), substantial groundwork has already been done (e.g. the big data platform is already set
up for rice, maize and sugarcane), and the project will scale up the system for other crops
(potatoes, sugarcane, bananas, and livestock).
22. The proposal presents a detailed market analysis for each target crop and each gremio,
in both domestic and international markets. It shows how the proposed project will remove
existing financial and socioeconomic barriers to access to markets and amplify income
opportunities for the guilds. The project proposal shows there is a high degree of potential to
change incentives for market participants by reducing costs and risks, and by eliminating
barriers to the deployment of adaptation technologies.
23. The proposal presents a solid financial exit strategy with an operations and
maintenance plan as part of the annexes. The various assets to be created (e.g. big data
platforms) will be operated and maintained by the gremios, while the public goods will be
incorporated into Agrosavia’s extension systems. Co-financing of USD 16 million from all the
participating gremios demonstrates their willingness and ownership of the proposed project.
The financial analysis of the proposal also shows profitability of the investment for farmers,
with concessional financing from GCF and CAF, ensuring the sustainability of the farming
activities with adaptation technologies after project completion.
3.3 Sustainable development potential Scale: Medium
24. The proposal provides sound justification for its potential to generate positive
environmental externalities. The project will contribute to soil conservation, improved
sustainability of land management, improved tree coverage, and carbon sequestration through
various soil and water conservation techniques. The project will not introduce any genetically
modified organisms and invasive species, and will abide to strict regulations regarding the use
of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, as provided in the environmental and social management
framework (annex 6 to the proposal).
25. The project is expected to produce positive economic and social benefits. It will increase
household income from agricultural production by 14.6 per cent, as captured in the logical
framework, and increased food security will deliver health and nutritional improvements for
the target farmer families. The proposal also provides other economic and social co-benefits
that have not been quantified.
26. Gender considerations have been included in the project design with an emphasis on
reducing barriers for women producers to participate in local development. A detailed gender
assessment and action plan has been developed and was submitted as annex 8 to the proposal.
3.4 Needs of the recipient Scale: Medium
27. The vulnerability of the country and the target beneficiaries and their adaptation needs
are generally explained throughout the proposal, but without detailed descriptions of the scale
and intensity of the country’s exposure to climate risks. The impacts of climate change,
including incidents resulting in droughts and flooding, on agricultural production and
livelihoods are presented. The vulnerability of farmer groups, including women, is

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 87
acknowledged, especially with regard to their food insecurity as presented in the funding
proposal.
28. Colombia is classified as an upper middle-income country. However, the proposal makes
a case that the proposed interventions and the initial cost of technology adoption, require
concessional financing to make the project viable. As the gremios do not have financial capacity
to adopt the required technologies, the Government of Colombia is taking low concessional
sovereign loans to support the adoption of low-carbon and climate-resilient agricultural
technologies.
29. The proposal explains the needs of the recipient based on the absence of alternative
financing. Although such justification is acknowledged, the justification could have been
strengthened by providing a wider investment strategy, including a financial estimation of the
cost of implementing climate change adaptation measures in agriculture at the national level,
and the associated shortfalls in the national budget. Such an exercise would have provided a
clear road map or pathway for climate resilience-building in the sector from a financial
perspective and would clarify the level of contribution from GCF.
3.5 Country ownership Scale: High
30. The proposal demonstrates that the project is aligned with policies and strategies at
both the national and the sectoral level, including with the country’s nationally determined
contribution. The proposal makes it clear which objective the proposed project will contribute
to in its national and sectoral strategies.
31. The project will be implemented by two executing entities (EEs): the Ministry of Finance
and Public Credit (MHCP) which will be in charge of channelling GCF grants and loans, and
MADR which will be responsible for technical implementation of the project, supported by CIAT.
CAF, as the accredited entity (AE), submitted a financial management capacity assessment of the
EEs and CIAT. MADR and CIAT have track records of implementing similar projects in other
regions of the country, with comparable sizes of investments.
32. The project was designed on the basis of rigorous consultations with relevant
stakeholders, including the GCF national designated authority, civil society organizations,
indigenous peoples, women and other vulnerable groups, and all the stakeholders involved in
this project. A stakeholder consultation report was submitted as part of the funding proposal
(annex 7).
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness Scale: High
33. The project is highly efficient with a GCF cost of USD 1.45 per tCO 2 eq, which is assessed
to be efficient compared with benchmarks of similar investments in similar regional contexts.
The project will leverage USD 26.6 million from the co-financiers, with a co-financing ratio of
1:0.36.
34. The proposed structure, with a mix of GCF grants and loans, is assessed to be adequate
and reasonable. The AE developed nine financing mix scenarios resulting in various outcomes
for the profitability of the activities considered for each producer organization. The scenarios
consider different combinations of loans from GCF, CAF and commercial sources, and assess
reductions in grant amount of 35 and 75 per cent. The GCF and CAF loan mixture scenario
shows that a reduction of 35 per cent of grant component leads to only one out of eight value
chains not profitable, while when the grant element is reduced by 75 per cent, four out of eight
value chains are not profitable. The model demonstrates that the grant component is more
important for the concessionality of the instruments than the loan component in the
profitability of the interventions for each producer association.

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 88
35. The proposal demonstrates its cost-effectiveness using a well-established financial
modelling methodology. Project internal rate of return (IRR) is estimated at 24 per cent overall
or twice the 12 per cent social discount rate used by the AE. The model also estimates IRRs for
each value chain or each gremio with economic IRRs ranging from 17 to 29 per cent. The net
present value for the eight crop models stands at USD 3.3 billion with technology adoption. The
model overall shows that the project is financially viable with GCF concessional financing.
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards
36. Project background. The project aims to develop, validate, and implement new low-
emission and resilient technologies and to scale up existing technologies such as genetic
improvements, crop management techniques and other technological options. These actions are
to be supported by the implementation and operation of climate information services that will
be available to various stakeholders and decision-makers. Among the environmental and social
co-benefits are improved tree cover and soil conservation, sustainable land management, and
carbon sequestration through implementation of various soil and water conservation strategies.
Among the social benefits are improved health and nutrition as a result of resilient food supply,
particularly during climate-induced natural events.
37. Environmental and social risk category and safeguard instruments. The project is
classified as Category B because the project will potentially have limited adverse environmental
and social risks and/or impacts which are site-specific, largely reversible and can be mitigated
with appropriate environmental and social management measures. An environmental and social
assessment is included in the ESMF that has been prepared for the project. The Secretariat
confirms that the risk category is aligned with GCF environmental and social risk categorization
and is within the risk accreditation level of the AE.
38. Compliance with the GCF environmental and social safeguards standards. The
paragraphs below summarize the project’s compliance with GCF ESS standards and
requirements.
39. ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts. The
project has submitted an ESMF, which included an environmental and social risk assessment
and management measures as provided in the included environmental and social management
plan (ESMP). The risk assessment was undertaken considering the nature, magnitude,
extent/location, permanence, duration, reversibility and significance of the risks/impacts and
assessed as either low, moderate or high. The results of the environmental and social risk
assessment are presented and an ESMP is proposed that identifies potential impact areas,
required mitigation measures, and responsibilities of stakeholders, among other things. The
ESMP is built on the assumptions that the project will comply with applicable national laws,
regulations and standards for the protection of the environment and communities as well as
that of the AE’s and GCF ESS. Regarding the potential for conflicts – such as territorial conflicts,
armed conflict as well as between beneficiary and non-beneficiary conflicts that may be
generated between selected producers and those who may not be selected as beneficiaries of
the project – these will be mitigated as part of the site selection where the security and conflict
situation will be thoroughly assessed, and low-risk areas will be prioritized and selected for
project implementation.
40. ESS 2: Labour and working conditions. Potential workers that may be hired by the
project (including day labourers, jornaleros) will be engaged under the terms and conditions of
the current labour law in the country. Although farmers will be mostly beneficiaries, should
farmers also be hired, the same terms and conditions will be applied. The project will also

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 89
ensure that there is appropriate occupational health and safety management for the workers –
following good international industry practices – to consider issues such as labourers’ working
conditions, terms of employment, workers organization, non-discrimination, equal opportunity,
child labour, and forced labour of direct and indirect employees, including contracted and third-
party workers.
41. ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention. The project generally seeks to
reduce and make more efficient use of resources including agrochemicals and pesticides,
although health risks associated with the use of pesticides and chemical inputs in the
production process may still continue to occur. The activities of the project aim to reduce the
use of these inputs, especially pesticides, in the value chains and to employ more sustainable
agriculture practices. Each of the implementing partners will also be assessed and required to
have a comprehensive solid waste management plan to manage project-associated waste
streams. The project will also promote the implementation of low water consumption
technologies and develop guidelines for the efficient use of water resources on farms.
42. ESS 4: Community health, safety and security. As indicated above, areas with security
and conflict situations will be assessed and avoided as necessary. Regarding community health
and safety, each of the implementing partners will be required to have an occupational health
and safety plan to manage the risks to people and the environment. Additionally, farmers will
received training on the proper use of pesticides and chemical inputs, as part of the training and
capacity-building on good agricultural practices.
43. ESS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. The AE stipulated that the project
will have no interventions that will require the displacement of people, either physically or
economically, including potential involuntary restrictions on land use and access to natural
resources that may result in the communities losing access to these resources for their
livelihoods and other economic activities. This is also highlighted in the project’s ESMF. Formal
agreements between project beneficiaries and implementing partners will also be acquired.
44. ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural
resources. The project’s activities under component 2 will promote management practices and
other technical options that will increase resilience through agroforestry arrangements, rational
use of fertilizers and bioproducts, optimization of irrigation systems, implementing
conservation agriculture using harvest residues, and implementing landscape-level
conservation and restoration strategies. This includes adopting restoration guidelines published
by the Ministry of Environment which prioritizes use of native species. Regarding the potential
for introducing genetically modified organisms (GMOs), the AE stipulated that the project will
not introduce any GMOs and invasive species, and that the project will comply with existing
national regulations regarding restrictions and the permit system. The AE also stated that
attention will be paid to interventions (e.g. in potato and livestock value chains) that will be
carried out in surrounding areas of moorland ecosystems, such as prohibiting the use of heavy
machinery in agricultural activities; the final disposal, management and burning of solid and/or
hazardous waste; the introduction and management of GMOs and invasive species; and burning,
logging and fumigation and spraying of chemicals. The project will also explore relationships
with various conservation-focused institutions to establish partnerships on knowledge and
information relating to ecosystem services, biodiversity and sustainable practices that are
beneficial to the stakeholders of the project, particularly on managing potential negative
impacts of agricultural and livestock activities in the delimited moorland areas (“paramos”),
among others.
45. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous peoples. The AE confirmed that
the project will not have a direct impact on indigenous peoples and their territories. To
encourage the participation of producers from ethnic groups in the project, the ethnic
differential approach is included in the baseline, the risk assessment, and the mitigation
measures, and as well as in the disclosure and engagement processes to be implemented by the

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 90
project. Specific measures to achieve this ethnic differential approach are: including people
from ethnic communities in the project’s intervention areas and in the project’s technical team,
especially in the group of extension workers, to build trust and facilitate work with the
communities while building local capacity; identifying producers from ethnic communities in
the information-gathering forms and the databases of the producer associations; and preparing
a guideline to advance the incorporation of the ethnic differential approach in the internal
policies of the producer associations participating in the project. If in the future the project
directly affects indigenous peoples the project will only proceed in accordance with the GCF
Indigenous Peoples Policy and domestic law.
46. ESS 8: Cultural heritage. The ESMF indicates that the project could have adverse impacts
on cultural heritage in the project sites, specifically regarding the potential for “loss of cultural
diversity due to limited recognition of local knowledge and traditional productive practices,
such as community seed storage/banks, among others, related to the project´s value chains”.
The project plans to mitigate this through “social appropriation of knowledge” that will
recognize and document “existing traditional practices, especially in the potato, corn, sugar cane
value chains”. The project’s physical interventions will, however, be implemented in farm areas
that have already been cultivated with conventional agriculture; thus the project’s activities are
not expected to have adverse impacts, particularly on physical cultural resources. In the very
remote possibility that these occur, the project will follow the guidelines on cultural heritage of
the current laws of Colombia.
47. Implementation arrangements. The project will have a project management unit that
will be responsible for implementing the project’s ESMF. This will be coordinated with various
stakeholders such as through CIAT, the producer associations, Agrosavia, and other
implementing partners. The project management unit will also have an environmental, social
and gender team that will oversee the technical requirements of the project, such as designing
guidelines, plans and strategies for the ESMF; providing support during implementation,
monitoring progress and compliance; and supporting the review and updating of the ESMF. The
ESMF will also be made part of the documents of the call for proposals throughout the life cycle
of the project to ensure that effective implementation of the ESMF and adequately management
of the adverse impacts of the project’s activities at each stage of the project implementation.
48. Stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism (GRM). The project has
conducted interviews and group sessions with stakeholders in the formulation process of the
ESMF. A stakeholders’ participation plan has also been developed that provides details about
the kick-off workshop, participation strategies, and complementary measures and mechanisms
to disseminate the plan. The plan likewise proposes mechanisms to maximize beneficiary
participation in decision-making bodies such as the technical committees. The project will
further design and implement a communications plan to ensure that workshops and other
information dissemination and socialization strategies are further defined, prepared, convened
and organized. The project will also establish a GRM that will address issues and complaints that
may arise in the implementation of the project. It includes step-by-step procedures, responsible
parties and timelines that are aimed at addressing grievances to be resolved promptly and
effectively.
4.2 Gender policy
49. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan, and therefore
complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.
50. The gender assessment provided illustrates the existence of an enabling environment
that is conducive to the pursuit of gender equality and women’s empowerment. Colombia has
ratified important international instruments and its Constitution guarantees equal rights and
opportunities to women and men. The laws enacted dictate equal opportunities for women as

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 91
well as guarantees that women live free of violence, while the country includes the care
economy in its national accounts system. Colombia also has a national public policy on gender
equity with the view to guarantee rights to women as well as the mainstreaming of gender
issues in all sectors of the economy.
51. The gender assessment provided by the AE was compiled on the basis of desk reviews
and stakeholder consultations with female producers and associations. The assessment
included an institutional capacity analysis, as well as discussions with association officials,
extensionists, affiliated female and male producers, and institutional actors. The assessment
indicates that rural women are disproportionately affected by climate change and their
situation is exacerbated by the gender norms and relations in the household and on the farm.
Compared with men, women have lower engagement in production-related decision-making,
have low access to and control over land and financial and technological resources, and
therefore have lower incomes and face higher levels of poverty, particularly female-headed
households. Women more than men are responsible and burdened with domestic and unpaid
care work, with women spending approximately 8 hours a day on such tasks, compared with 3
hours by men. These realities limit women’s ability to develop adaptation strategies to manage
and cope with climate-induced vulnerabilities, and contribute to the deepening of food
insecurity as well as water and resource constraints.
52. Further, in the agriculture sector, women producers face challenges in getting access to
productive assets such as land, technical assistance and credit. These challenges are seen in the
value chains of the eight crops that are the focus of this project as well. The banana, corn, rice,
livestock, and potato chains have the lowest proportion of production units headed by women
(less than 20 per cent and, in the case of bananas, the figure does not exceed 10 per cent). The
issue is not only that women lack access to land but it is also the size of land they own or
manage, which is on average 72.9 per cent of the size of the land owned by men (the greatest
differences are found mainly in the cattle chain, where it is only 41 per cent). Access to credit is
an issue for women and men alike, with under 20 per cent of people – regardless of the crop –
able to receive some method of financing for production. Most of the producer associations also
reflect the existing disparities in the participation and benefit of women. The associations lack
capacity, awareness, institutional mechanisms and instruments to identify and address the
challenges faced by women in the sector.
53. The AE has provided a gender action plan and therefore complies with the requirement
of the GCF Gender Policy. The gender action plan contains activities, targets, indicators, budget,
timelines (by way of schedule and annual budget) and gender experts to support with the
implementation of the gender action plan and to mainstream gender across the project. The
implementation of the gender action plan will also involve the Ministry of Agriculture’s Rural
Women’s Directorate. The activities included in the gender action plan will address the issues
raised in the assessment, thereby promoting gender equality in systems and institutions. It will
ensure men and women producers have equal access to information on seasonal climate
forecasts in agriculture and that access to women producers for agricultural extension services
is made possible. It will work towards ensuring changes and improvements in the number of
women with decision-making roles, thereby making women beneficiaries leaders in the process
of implementing CSICAP’s plans and activities for the conservation, preservation and
restoration of strategic areas and ecosystems (e.g. fertilizers and bioproducts for the
management of pests and diseases, led by women farmers’ groups and/or organizations). To
address capacity and training opportunity gaps, the project will target training for women and
will disseminate modules for young rural women on primary processing, management and
marketing, among other topics. It will reduce structural barriers to women by making access to
credit easier, ensuring women participate in farmers’ groups or organizations and ensuring
women’s engagement in the boards of directors of the producer associations. Acknowledging
the importance and burden of care work on women, the project will work on ensuring the
availability of local care services while at the same time raising awareness of gender issues and

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 92
gender-based violence among both women and men. The latter could also be reported using the
project-level grievance redress mechanism, which will focus on complaints from women and
ethnic groups.
54. The activities included in the gender action plan are intended to empower women and
the community at large by providing women with training, access to information on agricultural
value chains, agroclimatic information, information and communication techniques, and
mechanisms for the prevention of violence against women, while also creating an enabling
environment for women to participate more in decision-making and sustainable practices on
agricultural value chain issues. These activities are also expected to support women to improve
their productivity, sphere of influence and capacity in the agricultural sector, as well as to
increase their incomes.
4.3 Risks
4.3.1. Overall programme assessment (medium risk)
55. The objective of the project is to reduce the vulnerability of agricultural production to
climatic threats, to minimize the impacts of those threats on the competitiveness of the
agricultural sector, and to have an adequate and stable availability of quality food by
strengthening climate risk management, while reducing GHG emissions from agricultural
production. CAF is the AE of the project and the Government of Columbia will be the EE. The
GCF financing consists of (i) a sovereign loan to the Government of Columbia of up to USD
25million and up to USD 48.3 million in grants. The AE will co-finance a loan of USD 10 million
and grants will be provided by local producer associations totalling USD 16.3 million. Both the
reimbursable and non-reimbursable funds provided by the GCF and the AE will be used by the
EE to provide grants to the beneficiaries.
56. The project comprises three components: (i) digital agriculture and climate services for
rural modernization with an emphasis on adaptation and mitigation; (ii) Genetic improvement,
crop management techniques and other technological options and their scaling up to increase
climate resilience and promote low-carbon agricultural development; and (iii) innovative and
inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems and a more engaged
financial sector.
4.3.2. Accredited entity/executing entity’s capability to execute the current programme
(medium risk)
57. The CAF is the AE for the project. CAF is rated A+ by Standard & Poor’s and Fitch. CAF
has a local presence in Columbia and nearly 11 per cent of CAFs portfolio (at year end 2019) is
located in Columbia. CAF has two approved GCF projects totalling over USD 230 million in
project value. The Government of Columbia is a shareholder of the AE.
58. The Government of Colombia will be the EE and will be the entity responsible for the
project resources through MHCP, both credit and grant resources from the GCF and resources
provided by the AE. MADR will be responsible for executing the project resources and technical
implementation.
4.3.3. Project-specific execution risks (medium risk)
59. Demand risk: the success of the project depends on the demand of local farmers for the
new technologies. Low uptake could result in project delays or lower-than-expected impacts.
This risk is partially mitigated by (i) involving farmer organizations; and (ii) the relatively high
expected IRRs providing financial incentives for uptake by farmers.

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 93
60. Credit risk: The GCF and AE will be exposed to repayment risk for the sovereign loan to
Columbia. Columbia is rated BB+ by Standard & Poor’s and Fitch. The AE will be the lender of
record and enjoys de facto preferred creditor status. Historically, none of the AE’s sovereign
loans have ever been placed in non-accrual status or been written off.
61. Operations and maintenance (O&M) risk: after the implementation period of the project
the O&M costs and insurance will not by covered by the project but by the producer
associations. Project success will therefore depend on the continued capability of the producer
associations to support these costs. Creation of O&M plans and technical support to the
producer associations is part of the project.
62. Delay and cost escalation: as result of lack of supply or increased price of inputs, human
resources and tools, delays and costs escalation might occur, reducing the impact of the project.
Currency fluctuations can also result in changes in costs. Comfort can be derived from
contingencies in the budget and envisioned in the project planning.
4.3.4. Project viability and concessionality
63. GCF will provide both grants and low concessional loans. The EE will use both
reimbursable and non-reimbursable funds to provide grants to beneficiaries. The economic and
financial analysis shows a high average IRR of 201 per cent for the beneficiaries, suggesting that
there is potential for reflows and therefore reduced amounts of grants from GCF. The AE
considers that reimbursable instruments are not viable because investments are mostly public
goods and not owned by the farmers.
4.3.5. GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)
64. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.
4.3.6. Compliance risk (medium risk)
65. The recipient country, Colombia, is not subject to United Nations Security Council
restrictive measures. The AE has performed due diligence on the two EEs –MHCP and MADR –
and has determined a medium risk when it comes to their ability to mitigate money laundering,
terrorist financing and prohibited practices risks. In addition, the AE has undertaken due
diligence on CIAT and did not identify any red flags that would prevent CIAT from fulfilling its
responsibilities in the funded activity. The AE has also performed a project-level risk
assessment for money laundering, terrorist financing and prohibited practices and has
determined a low probability and high impact. In addition to its standard set of internal
controls, the AE will ensure that beneficiaries receiving equipment are subject to adequate
training as well as an agreement that prohibits them from engaging in selling the equipment to
third parties.
Summary risk assessment and recommendation
Summary risk assessment Risk assessment
Medium
Overall project/programme Medium risk classification as a result of the
experience of the accredited entity in the country,
Accredited entity/ executing the operations and maintenance risk, impact of
entity capability to implement Medium cost increases and demand risk of the project
the project/programme

--- Table 1 on Page 93 ---
 | Summary risk assessment |  |  | Risk assessment
Overall project/programme |  | Medium |  | Medium risk classification as a result of the
experience of the accredited entity in the country,
the operations and maintenance risk, impact of
cost increases and demand risk of the project
Accredited entity/ executing
entity capability to implement
the project/programme |  | Medium |  | 

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 94
Medium
Project-specific execution
Low
GCF portfolio concentration
Medium
Compliance
4.4 Fiduciary
66. CAF is the AE for the project and the EEs of the programme are the Government of
Colombia (through MHCP and MADR) and CIAT.
67. MHCP will be the entity responsible for the project resources, both credit and grant
resources from the GCF as well as CAF financing resources. The Government of Colombia will
take loans from both GCF and CAF, and will provide grants to the beneficiaries (gremios).
68. MADR is the main EE along with CIAT. MADR will be responsible for supervising the
technical implementation of the project, in accordance with its own internal rules, policies and
procedures, including the administration and management of the use of GCF resources, as well
as the follow-up, evaluation and reporting responsibilities. It will be responsible for executing
the resources and technical implementation of the project through the Directorate of
Innovation, Technological Development and Sanitary Protection. Also, MADR will be responsible
for supervising CIAT to ensure that all activities are executed on time and with the required
quality, to ensure that the project aims are achieved. MADR will receive technical support from
the alliance between Biodiversity International, CIAT and other partner organizations.
69. The loan resources will be administered according to the CAF Credit Process Manual
which guides the process for all phases of credit, including (i) origination; (ii) evaluation; (iii)
approval; (iv) formalization; and (v) administration. The non-reimbursable resources of the
GCF, on the other hand, will be executed by the Government of Colombia, through MADR and
CIAT.
70. MADR will be responsible for the project financial execution and implementation before
MHCP and CAF. CAF and the Government of Colombia, through MHCP and MADR, will enter a
subsidiary agreement for the use of GCF funds. MADR will carry out direct contracting with
CIAT under the Colombian legal framework called the Technical and Scientific Cooperation
Agreement. The Government of Colombia, acting through MADR, will retain the final approval
authority over any matter/decision adopted by the project cooperation team/any other
governance bodies or units. MADR will have support in the operation of the project from the
Alliance of Biodiversity International and CIAT, and the producer associations, following the
regulations and frameworks defined and allowed by Colombian legislation. These arrangements
will be reflected in the agreement signed between MADR and CIAT.
71. CIAT will form a project coordination team (PCT) that will be directly responsible for
interacting with the project executing unit within MADR and responding to its technical and
administrative requirements. The PCT will be responsible for implementing the project and will
guide the six theme leaders and eight crop coordinators. The team will work with the relevant
areas of MADR, CIAT, the strategic partners, and any other institution, firm, or person
contracted to provide a service or supply a good. The PCT will be responsible for the project’s
institutional relationships, led by the project leader, and therefore must respond to MADR,
which will ensure the proper execution of the project and the adequate use of resources. The
team will be responsible for preparing the technical reports and submitting them to MADR and
preparing the financial report. The interaction between MADR and CIAT will be carried out
through the project executing unit (MADR) and the PCT (CIAT).

--- Table 1 on Page 94 ---
Project-specific execution | Medium | 
GCF portfolio concentration | Low | 
Compliance | Medium | 

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 95
72. The financial control and procurement processes will be implemented in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the CAF, which were certified in the accreditation process
before the GCF. During project execution, CAF will supervise and guarantee quality in
accordance with its policies and procedures. This will include follow-up missions, spot checks,
and participation in steering committee meetings. The project will be subject to the CAF audit
regime, which includes external and internal auditing.
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting
73. As a cross-cutting initiative, the programme aims at generating both mitigation and
adaptation benefits. On the mitigation side, the intervention is expected to result in overall GHG
emission reductions of 9,152,034 tCO eq over the project lifespan of 25 years, as per the metrics
2
of the GCF core indicator for mitigation (based on the GHG accounting methodology detailed
under annex 22 of the funding proposal). On the adaptation side, 619,691 direct beneficiaries
and 347,9996 indirect beneficiaries are expected as adaptation impact. The AE provided a
robust methodology and rationale for defining both direct and indirect beneficiaries in annex 24
of the funding proposal.
74. The theory of change diagram adequately captures different levels of expected changes
as well as logical linkages between them from the goal statement to the proposed activities. The
barriers and risks that may hinder the achievement of these changes are identified and linked to
pertinent activities which will tackle them.
75. The logical framework has been designed in accordance with relevant GCF-level impacts
and outcomes as well as with project-specific outputs. In most cases baselines and targets of
each indicator are provided on the basis of data available from credible sources, such as
national surveys.
76. It is welcome to have a baseline study in the first year of project implementation as
indicated in annex 5 (Implementation timeline) of the funding proposal, through which the AE
will establish concrete definitions and methodologies for its performance indicators. The
timeline also indicates the submission timings of annual performance reviews and deliverables
of each subactivity.
77. Annex 11 (Monitoring and evaluation plan) of the funding proposal clearly describes the
key concepts and elements of the monitoring and evaluation system and how it will be reported
back to the GCF.
4.6 Legal assessment
78. The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 15
November 2016 (the “AMA”), and it became effective on 19 March 2018.
79. The Accredited Entity has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. It
is recommended that, prior to submission of the Funding Proposal to the Board (a) the
Accredited Entity has obtained all its internal approvals and (b) the Fund has received a
certificate or legal opinion from the Accredited Entity in form and substance satisfactory to the
Fund confirming that all final internal approvals by the Accredited Entity have been obtained
and that it has the authority and capacity to implement the project.
80. The proposed project will be implemented in Colombia, a country in which GCF is not
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF is not
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 96
assessed. The GCF provided an updated draft agreement on privileges and immunities, along
with a background note, to the host country on 8 April 2019.
81. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and
expropriation in the country(ies), or has been provided with appropriate privileges and
immunities.
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal)
82. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is
made subject to the following conditions:
(a) Submission by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval,
confirming that the Accredited Entity has obtained all final internal approvals needed by
it and has the capacity and authority to implement the proposed project;
(b) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the
Accredited Entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has
obtained all final internal approvals, whichever is later; and
(c) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 97
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP182
Proposal name: Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and
sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems
in Colombia (CSICAP)
Accredited entity: Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)
Country/(ies): Colombia
Programme/programme size: Medium
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
Scale: Medium to high
1 .1 ICmonpcaepctt potential
1.
. Th
1
is is a semi-experimental funding proposal for upscaling and upgrading the
‘digital agricu)lture’ pilot initiative of the Government of Colombia. The proposal targets nine
agricultur ea nvda lue chains(rice, maize, potato, sugarca
2
ne, panela cane, coffee, bananas, plantains
and livestock in six agroclimatic zones of Colombia. The CSICAP initiative has a nation-wide
approach will be implemented in 22 departments and 219 municipalities of Colombia,
directly benefiting 619,691people, of whom more than 194,871 are farmers from different
producers’ associations and about 424,820 people their family members. The funding proposal
2
is expected to reduce or avoid 9.15 million tCO eq during the 25-year lifespan of the project
(3 66,081 tCO
2
eq annually).
2.
The pilot phase of the digital agriculture initiative was initiated in 2012 by the Alliance
of Biodiversity International (the Alliance) and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture
3
(CIAT) in cooperation with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development/Ministerio de
Agricultura y Desarrollo Rural (MADR) of Colombia and was implemented in 2013–2015. It
covered mainly two value chains (rice and maize) in eight departments of Colombia. The
4
capacities of two crop producer associations, known as gremios, Fedearroz (rice) and Fenalce
(maize), were strengthened during the pilot. The results of the pilot phase were assessed on
su ccess, barriers and gaps and supported development of this funding proposal.
3.
The pilot phase had four basic activities to mitigate climate change effects on Colombian
far mers
A
a
g
n
r
d
o c
t
l
h
im
es
a
e
t
r
ic
e m
ris
a
k
i n
m
a
a
s
n
k
a
e
g
y
e m
ac
e
t
n
iv
t
ities in the funding proposal:
(a)
focuses on development and validation of climate
variability and long-term predictions for agricultural sectors in different Colombian
1
Digital agriculture refers to agricultural practices that digitally collect, store, analyze, and share electronic data and
information along the agricultural value chain.
2
Considering the most general classifications, the project covers 6 of the 7 agroclimatic zones of the country and 22
(40 per cent) of the 54 subregions considering more detailed agroclimatic classification.
3
See overview: https://www.cgiar.org/?s=International+Center+for+Tropical+Agriculture
4
A ‘gremio’ refers to a crop-specific private sector organization consisting of small, medium and large-scale farmers,
which aims to support the category to improve competitiveness and income profitability. These organizations are
nation-wide in Colombia and have branches in all relevant areas for each specific agricultural system. Usually, the
gremios provide a variety of services including, but not limited to, research and innovation, technical and
commercial assistance and input provision. Most gremios wer e established decades ago. They also represent
farmers before governmental institutions so that their needs are addressed. Some of those organizations have
separate research and innovation entities to support farmers.

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 98
region s to improve crop management. During the pilot phase progress was made in the
development of climate forecast models and their validation for some of the prioritized
zonesand the first site-specific agriculture analyses were also carried out on the
b
Si
e
t
h
e-
a
s
v
p
i
e
o
c
u
i
r
fi c
o f
a
s
g
e
r
l
i
e
c
c
u
t
l
e
tu
d
r
c
e
r
m
op
a
s
n
u
ag
n
e
d
m
er
e n
cl
t
imate variability;
(b)
includes identification problems that limit
agricultural sector growth, collect information at the farm level, and propose
technological solutions adapted to the producer's needs under climate variability.
Genetically improved species with tolerance to drought and waterlogging were
evaluated and the water footprint was measured for different production systems,
i
T
n
e
c
s
l
t
u
in
d
g
in
n
g
e
r
w
ic
a
e
g
, d
ri
u
c
r
u
i
l
n
tu
g
r
t
a
h
l
e
t e
p
c
i
h
lo
n
t
o
;
l ogies for adaptation to climate change hazards and
mitigation of greenhouse gases GHGs)
(c)
( aiming to define agricultural innovations and best
agricultural management practices that contribute to reducing GHGs emissions and offer
alternatives for adapting to climate change. During the pilot stage the carbon footprint
of palm trees, intensive silvopastoral systems and fruit trees was measured. Soil loss and
the water footprint of potatoes were also measured, and cassava materials were
ev
v
a
a
l
l
u
u
a
a
t
t
e
in
d
g
.
sustainable production systems
(d)
E targeting the identification of sustainable
production systems adapted to the national context and training interested partners in
using new tools and technologies to mitigate climate change effects. In the pilot phase
capacity-building was provided for the technical staff of gremios, and in some specific
areas information was delivered directly to producers. Targeted Gremios, Fedearroz
and Fenalce, respectively for rice and maize, have found great potential in the
information and tools generated during the two years of work.
4.
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) considers that the main result of this
pilot is the joint work carried out between the national Government, academia, research
ce ntres, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), producer associations and farmers.
5.
The funding proposal consists of three interconnected components each with two result
are as al
C
so
o m
co
p
v
o
er
n
i
e
n
n
g
t
t h
1
e territories targeted during the pilot phase:
(a)
covers deployment of digital agriculture and climate services for rural
modernization with an emphasis on adaptation and mitigation. Component 1 activities
will be carried out in 179 municipalities in 6 agricultural subregions (Dry Caribbean,
Humid Caribbean, Inter-Andean Valleys, Foothills/Mid-mountain, High Mountain,
Result 1.1
Eastern Plains).
is sdtreesinggnt,h aesnseemd abnlyd, immopdleemrneinzteadt idoing iatnadl a ogpreicruatltiounral an
5
d extension systems
with an emphasis on adaptation and mitigation. Seven ‘Big Data’ platforms will be
established ( ) to supply analyzed and
processed information that considers user’s social, ethnic and gender differences;
producer associations are empowered to deliver recommendations on adaptation and
mitigation measures to producers; management of agroclimatic risks allows provision of
timely and reliable information to more than one million users (considered indirect
beneficiaries) on the main climatic threats and crop management recommendations to
Result 1.2
avoid losses.
is established and/or strengthened agroclimatic services to provide
recommendations on adaptation and mitigation measures. Direct technical support is
provided to approximately 123,389 producers and indirect support to 104,000 users
5
Big Data Technologies can be defined as software tools for analyzing, processing, and extracting data from an
extremely complex and large data set with which traditional management tools can never deal.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 99
and 15 Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups which will receive recommendations
t
C
h
o
r
m
ou
p
g
o
h
n
t
e
h
n
e
t
c
2
limatic services platforms on how to reduce crop losses.
(b)
considers improvement of genetic resources (tolerance to climate
variability), crop management techniques and other technological options and their
scaling-up to increase climate resilience and promote low-carbon agricultural
development. Activities of component 2 will take place at CIAT's campus in Cali,
Colombia, and at experimental stations located in the same six agricultural subregions
Result 2.1
as component 1.
is a strengthened germplasm bank, new climate resilient varieties developed,
and their seeds massively distributed. A key deliverable is design and development of a
state-of-the-art Phenotyping Platform to identify low-carbon production and climate-
Result 2.2
resistant genetic resources (heat, drought and excess water-tolerant varieties).
is improved knowledge on the water and carbon footprints of selected value
chains. In this regard development of new crop management techniques and
technologies and scaling up existing technologies to increase climate variability
resilience and GHG mitigation will be supported in the targeted value chains for
different types of farmers. As a result of this activity at least 30 new low-emission and
resilient technologies should be developed, validated and implemented and 70 existing
technologies (genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other
6
technological options) should be scaled up. In 131,710 hectares resilience to climate
variability is increased and in 8,750 hectares low-carbon agricultural practices are
2
promoted, reducing 432,297 tonnes of CO e. These activities will mainly take place at
CIAT's campus in Cali, Colombia, and at experimental stations located in the six
agricultural subregions (Dry Caribbean, Humid Caribbean, Inter-Andean Valleys,
Foothills/Mid-mountain, High Mountain, Eastern Plains) since they must be performed
C
un
o
d
m
e
p
r
o
c
n
on
e
t
n
r
t
o
3
lled conditions.
(c)
should ensure identification and implementation of innovative and
inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems and a more engaged
financial sector. As this component will be supporting the implementation of the first
two components, component 3 will be implemented in all the previously prioritized
Result 3.1
locations.
of this component is improved business models that provide farmers with
reasonable profits and improved GHG mitigation practices. In particular, improved
business models on climate resilience and low-carbon technologies will be operational
and effective for at least 60 entities of the agricultural sector (including Departmental
Result 3.2
and Municipal Agriculture Secretariats) covering 4,400 technicians.
should be modernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services
with multi-tool strategies, adapted to specific environmental, social, gender and
productive contexts at the national level. Reinforced training will be provided to 54,000
agricultural producers for low-carbon and resilient agriculture considering
environmental, social and gender aspects.
6
In the case of rice and maize, the aim is to scale up technologies that were previously evaluated in the pilot and were
found to perform well. For example, the MIRI (multiple-inlet rice irrigation system) for low water consumption in
rice; Cenicaña (private, non-profit corporation, founded in 1977 at the initiative of the Association of Sugar Cane
Growers of Colombia) developments in the efficient use of water, Augura developments in bio-pesticides and
efficient use of fertilizers; Fedepanela with more efficient burner systems and fertilizer use; Fedegan, CIPAV,
Agrosavia and the CIAT Biodiversity Alliance with sustainable livestock systems model; Cenicafé with systems for
the efficient use of fertilizers and harvesting, treatment and use of water in agroforestry models; in potatoes with
minimum tillage and conservation agriculture developed by the CIAT Biodiversity Alliance.

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 100
6.
An important step that is expected to be taken with this project is to improve the
information available at site-specific level, and to accompany that information with
recommendations that are supported by predictions with high performance that make it
possible to generate a good degree of confidence in producers. The proper selection of a variety
in relation to the local environmental resources can make a difference of up to 40 per cent in
yield. However, this must be complemented with the development and implementation of
technologies to face different circumstances that may arise due to the predicted climatic
conditions. In this sense, it is necessary to develop technological options to maintain high yields
under different types of stress factors, for example, abiotic factors, such as low solar radiation,
2
high nighttime temperatures, high CO concentrations and reduced rainfall (drought), as well as
biotic factors that can be exacerbated when certain climatic circumstances occur, as is the case
w ith phytosanitary problems
7.
In the opinion of the independent TAP, the funding proposal is quite innovative and has
potential to achieve high impact in agriculture and food security. However, there are still
barriers which should be taken into consideration, such as vertical dissemination of scientific
results achieved and shared with gremios. As was identified within the pilot phase, while
interaction between the Alliance and the associations was good, the producers' vertical
dissemination was not always satisfactory. It is key to incorporate spaces and strategies that
allow farmers to be massively involved and to ensure an equal level of access to the digital
communications for all farmers. As these gaps could significantly affect the final impact of the
initiative, the independent TAP scored this criteria medium to high.
Scale: High
1 .2 Paradigm shift potential
8.
The independent TAP considers that the success of this approach, as described in the
funding proposal, could significantly contribute to the future of sustainable and safe food
7
security. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), to
produce a “sustainable food future”, the world must increase food production while cutting GHG
emissions and maintaining (or reducing) the land used in agriculture and ‘digital agriculture’
could address these challenges by making the agricultural value chain more efficient, equitable
and environmentally sustainable. To achieve this agricultural research, extension and advisory
8
services are essential. FAO describes the digitalization process of agriculture as a revolution,
na mely, a digital agricultural revolution.
9.
As introduced in the impact assessment section, this proposal offers upscaling and
upgrading of the “digital agriculture programme” pilot phase initiated in Colombia in 2012. The
funding proposal plans to scale up (for new crops and agroclimatic regions) successful findings
(for rice and maize) and upgrade activities for assessment of risks not considered or not fully
successful during the pilot stage with strengthening the understanding of how climate affects
the various farming systems and value chains through crop-climate modelling and empirical
da ta analysis.
10.
As was reported in the accredited entity’s (AE) responses on the independent TAP
questions, one of the key successes of the pilot phase was establishing digital and participatory
climate services platforms led by the Local Technical Agroclimatic Committees. These
Committees have transformed Colombian agriculture in five ways: (1) increasing confidence in
the quality of climate and agroclimatic information; (2) enhancing the level of understanding of
agroclimatic information; (3) spreading climate knowledge across the territory; (4)
transforming the way crops are produced in certain regions; and (5) leading to institutional and
policy changes. A Pledge by the MADR to create 15 Local Technical Agroclimatic Committees by
7
According to FAO and World Resource Institute (WRI) preliminary estimations, “The worl d will need to produce
50% more food (as compared to 2010, under ‘business as usual’ growth) to feed over 9 billion in 2050.”
8
Research and Extension | FAO | Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 101
2030 has already been met with the support of FAO and Consortium of International
Ag ricultural Research Centers (CGIAR).
11.
The independent TAP considers that such joint activities from government and scientific
institutions for gathering locally tested scientific and experimental information for further
identification of gaps and planning improvements in consultations with farmers and farmers’
associations should have real transformational impact in the agriculture sector. The
independent TAP agrees with the project proponents that “as long as adaptation continues to be
considered as a problem of generalizing around some intuitive measures, we will be far from
rea l, competitive and site-specific solutions.”
12.
The Approach offered in the funding proposal is progressive and covers most of the gaps
existing in the agriculture sector on how to reduce the sector vulnerability including climate
change vulnerability and produce low-emission safe food products in a sustainable way. The
proposal has to ensure maximum digitalization of entire value chains for nine agricultural
activities; monitor the vulnerability of crops to climate variability and to climate hazard; model
future climate change at local level; manage information with Big Data Systems and
Phenotyping Platforms; improve resilience of crops to climate change through modification of
germplasm; ensure horizontal and vertical dissemination of information (early warning process,
innovative technics, technologies and tools); ensure security of biodiversity, food and health
related to the genetic modification of crops; develop and implement novel and inclusive
business models; ensure financial institutions access to information to develop tailored financial
products that support scaling of climate-smart technologies; and gremios to have close to 100
pe r cent capacity in each of the technologies proposed in the framework of the project.
13.
The independent TAP recognizes the complexity of the activities planned but at the
same time understands that only a combination of all the activities listed above could bring real
impact and seeffcetcotr, real transformational change. The independent TAP confirms that the role of
this funding proposal is crucial to accelerate a paradigm shift process in the country’s
agriculture initiated by the pilot phase. In case of success, the approach could also be a
model for other agricultural countries.
Scale: Medium to high
1. 3 Sustainable development potential
14.
A comprehensive Environmental Safeguards Monitoring Framework (ESMF) is provided
for this funding proposal where all potential risk areas and mitigation measures for each
component are detailed. During the review Component 2 was particularly targeted for
assessment of risks and mitigation measures. The incorporation and enforcement of the risk
mitigation measures will minimize potential adverse impacts of the project on the environment,
communities and project beneficiaries. The project’s information disclosure strategy and
grievance redress mechanism seek to promote transparency and accountability among
sta keholders.
15.
Component 2 of the funding proposal consists of activities related to the increase of crop
resilience to climate variability and long-term changes in agroclimatic zones. Among such
activities are genetic modification for development of improved seeds, hybrids and clones
resistant to effects associated with climate variability and pest resistance, and the dissemination
of these modified seeds in regions with similar conditions. Such activities could have some risks
for biodiversity and health, as well as for sustainable development processes in general, and
require relevant control by the Government and through international treaties. Within this
context special attention was given by the independent TAP to the project’s ESMF, which is
an nex 6 of the funding proposal package.
16.
The ESMF document demonstrates that where research on genetic improvements of
crops and the introduction of genetically improved organisms are carried out, there will be

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 102
compliance with the provisions and restrictions established by the country in current
reg ulations.
)
17.
The ESMF considers all relevant regulations in force in this area including chapter 2
(Basic Genetic Materials of Improved Seeds) and chapter 3 (Living Modified Organisms of the
Sole Regulatory Decree of the Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development
Ad ministrative Sector, Decree 1071 of 2015, in particular:
(a)
Article 2.13.7.2.2.1 which determines that the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development, through the Colombian Agricultural Institute (ICA), has the function of
supervising the registration, certification, multiplication and distribution of all improved
material intended for food or industrial crops;
(b)
Article 2.13.7.2.2.3. defines that basic genetic materials produced by private industry
that are to be delivered for multiplication and distribution to the public, in the form of
improved materials, must be registered with the ICA;
(c)
Article 2.13.7.2.2.4 determines that the ICA must certify seeds derived from improved
materials to be made available to the public; and
(d)
The regulatory framework for Living Modified Organisms (LMOs) following the
provisions of Law 740 of 2002, which approves the "Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to
the Convention on Biological Diversity", which applies to the transboundary movement,
transit, handling, and use of LMOs that may have adverse effects on the environment
and biological diversity, taking into account the risks to human health, productivity and
agricultural production.
18.
The ESMF considers risk mitigation measures for Activity 2.1, “Strengthening the
germplasm bank, development of new varieties and massive multiplication of seeds for
adaptation and mitigation. Seed multiplication techniques will be applied to outstanding
varieties, facilitating a large-scale adoption of the varieties developed by the project”. In the
ESMF the AE identified that the impact of activity 2.1 could be introduction of genetically
modified organisms which might have negative impacts on ecosystems and biodiversity (for
example: crossing and/or genetic contamination of native species, competition with native
species, loss of native species, development of more resistant pests, among others) and
estimated this as high risk with a probability of 4 (within a score system of 5) and impact rate of
4. Three activities are planned for mitigation of this risk:
(a)
Regarding the introduction and management of genetically modified organisms, the
project will comply with the corresponding regulations in relation to authorizations and
permits, among others. In addition, great attention will be paid to interventions carried
out in surrounding areas of moorland ecosystems, taking into account the guidelines of
Law 1930 of 2018. This issue is of special attention for the potato value chain;
(b)
Carry out research and experimentation in controlled environments, in such a way as to
avoid a possible negative impact on the species and ecosystems of the intervention
areas; and
(c)
Carry out impact evaluations associated with the biosafety aspects of genetically
modified organisms that are developed in the project in compliance with current
regulations, and that involve the analysis of potential impacts on ecosystems.
As a result of these risk mitigation measures the risk downscaled to medium and the probability
an d impact are downrated to 2 and 3 respectively.
19.
For activities 2.1 and 2.2 risk is assessed as high (5 score) for cases when genetically
modified organisms could be used or high impact production practices developed in areas with
moorland ecosystems. This risk should be given special attention in the potato and livestock
value chains, among others. Mitigation measures have been planned and as a result the risk is

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 103
downscaled to moderate, and the probability and impact are downrated to 2 and 3 respectively.
Mi tigation measures planned are:
(a)
The project will comply with restrictions stated in the regulations, specifically in Law
1930 of 2018 article 5, which establishes prohibitions of some productive practices in
moorlands such as: the use of heavy machinery in the development of agricultural
activities; the final disposal, management and burning of solid and/or hazardous waste;
the introduction and management of genetically modified organisms and invasive
species; burning; logging; fumigation and spraying of chemicals should be gradually
eliminated in activities of conversion of agricultural land into sustainable activities; and
the degradation of native vegetation cover, among other practices, is prohibited;
(b)
The project will not carry out activities within delimited moorland areas (there are 37
moorland complexes in Colombia). However, in case it is necessary within the scope of
the project to provide assistance to producers located in those areas, the
aforementioned prohibitions will be respected, and the project will promote the
participation of those producers in training spaces that will inform about and promote
the development of sustainable practices, which in turn will allow reduction of pressure
on these ecosystems. As mentioned above, these measures need special attention in the
potato and livestock value chains; and
(c)
The Project Management Unit (environmental team), with support from the producer
associations, will identify the male and female producers who carry out their productive
activities in areas close/adjacent to delimited moorland ecosystems and will monitor
the implementation of project activities developing sustainable agriculture practices.
They will provide guidance and technical assistance for producers in these areas to
participate in the activities proposed by the environmental authorities within the scope
of Law 1930 of 2018.
20.
The producer associations, CIAT, Agrosavia and MADR are responsible for monitoring
activity 2.1 compliance with ESMF. Key groups for monitoring are: producers who have their
crops in areas close to delimited moors; cattle breeders who have their livestock production
activities in areas close to delimited moors; producers in areas near delimited moors that
implement sustainable production practices; producers in areas near delimited moors that
im plement solid waste management practices.
21.
In general, the monitoring schemes for all components are similar; the producer
associations are the responsible entities for initial monthly and annual monitoring reports on
risks and non-compliance with ESMF, and for providing details of corrective actions taken to
reduce the impact of any difficulties, situations and/or problems encountered. Producer
associations report to the Project Management Unit, which will report to the National Project
Manager, CAF, and the MADR. Detailed performance criteria for monitoring are provided in the
ESMF for all components. ICA is an entity within MADR and has the responsibility to legislate on
san itary, phytosanitary, production and inputs control issues.
22.
The ESMF confirms that regarding the sustainable use of biodiversity and the
management of genetically improved organisms, within the framework of the Convention on
9
Biological Diversity, Colombia participated in the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety of in 2000,
and approved through Law 740 of 2002. In 2010, the country participated in the Nagoya
9
The “Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity” is an international treaty governing
the movements of living modified organisms (LMOs) resulting from modern biotechnology from one country to
another. It was adopted on 29 January 2000 as a supplementary agreement to the Convention on Biological
Diversity and entered into force on 11 September 2003.

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 104
Protocol on access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising
10
fro m their use, which was approved through Law 1926 of 2018.
23.
The funding proposal contributes mainly to Sustainable Development Goal 2, “End
hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture” and
in particular to target 2.a, which aims to “increase investment, including through enhanced
international cooperation, in rural infrastructure, agricultural research and extension services,
technology development and plant and livestock gene banks in order to enhance agricultural
pr oductive capacity in developing countries, in particular least developed countries.”
24.
The funding proposal could significantly contribute to the sustainable food security
process though there are some risks which should be very closely monitored against any
potential negative leakage. During an interview, the AE confirmed that the funding proposal
mainly considers “conventional genetic improvements” and that “non- conventional genetically
modified organisms” are not the part of the funding proposal. The independent TAP’s
understanding is that there is no clear delineation between these two from the scientific point of
vie w and as a result the ESMF attached to the project is quite detailed.
25.
The independent TAP takes into consideration that GCF does not have a policy on
genetically modified bioproducts and that Colombia is a member of Cartagena Dialog and has all
necessary regulations and responsible bodies for monitoring and certification of genetic
modification/improvement prosses at national level and the criteria scored as medium to high.
In addition, the independent TAP suggests a specific recommendation to the Board in case of
approval of this funding proposal (see para 49).
Scale: High
1. 4 Needs of the recipient
26.
The feasibility study describes everyday challenges faced by Colombia’s agriculture
sector, by producers and gremios such as price issues and competitiveness, some with
international market problems and others with respect to national markets. These challenges
are exacerbated by climate change and weather-related losses. Columbia’s intended nationally
determined contribution, among the priority activities to be implemented by 2030, considers
ten agricultural subsectors such as rice, coffee, livestock and silvopastoral systems, with
im proved capabilities to adapt appropriately to climate change and climate variability.
27.
There is a clear commitment in the agricultural sector to aim at the objectives proposed
in the nationally determined contributions (NDC) for adaptation and mitigation of climate
change in the sector, and at the same time a high degree of awareness of the importance of
joining efforts between the different institutions of the private sector (gremios), public sector
(MADR), research centres (Alliance of Biodiversity International and CIAT, Agrosavia, and crop
research centres) to design a strategy that allows prioritizing and coordinating efficient actions
aimed at concrete results in the coming years. A major barrier in Colombia has always been to
br ing all these institutions together towards a common goal.
28.
The digitalization of agriculture should be considered as the future of this sector
worldwide, including Colombia. The Colombian agricultural sector has seen a drastic drop in its
share of the national economy in recent decades, from 22 per cent of GDP in the late 1970s to
6.0 per cent in 2015. In recent years, the sector has shown a slight recovery, with growth of 2.4
per cent and 2.3 per cent for 2018 and 2019 respectively. Areas identified as inhibiting faster
development of the sector are:
10
The Nagoya Protocol is significant in terms of conservation of biodiversity, and for having an equitable sharing of
benefits of the genetic resources. This is also intended to help indigenous peoples everywhere to avoid being
exploited for their traditional knowledge and expertise.

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 105
(a)
Limited capacities of agricultural extension services and local farmers to collect, manage
and systematize data to generate site- and time-specific advice for good management
practices under climatic conditions induced by climate variability and change;
(b)
Limited access to and knowledge of genetic resources and their tolerance to climate
variability and change by local farmers and producers;
(c)
Limited knowledge of water footprint and efficient water use technologies to promote
behavioural changes that contribute to a better use of water resources, particularly
under stress conditions;
(d)
Limited knowledge of carbon footprint at crop and technology level to promote large-
scale adoption of low-emission practices;
(e)
Weak/vulnerable business models and lack of tailored financial instruments;
(f)
Weak extension services based on a linear model that provides blanket
recommendations rather than site- and time-specific guidelines;
(g)
Limited knowledge of contributing factors to climate-smart agricultural technology uses
and adoption by farmers in the targeted value chains;
(h)
Limited access to productive factors and participation in labour and decision-making
processes by women and young farmers; and
(i)
Limited adoption of good practices to reduce environmental risks in at-risk areas (e.g.
use of fertilizers.
29.
Well-developed digital infrastructure for communication is a key element of the system
promoted by the proposal. USAID’s digital ecosystem assessment for Colombia highlights the
need for investment and the potential for innovation in the country’s rural areas. The funding
proposal is in fact tapping into this potential for innovation and democratizing digitally enabled
services for climate adaptation through leveraging private sector investment (from the gremios
an d the Government).
30.
The independent TAP considers that needs of the recipient country are high and the GCF
programme could be a significant contribution to narrowing most of the identified gaps through
the activities, such as the establishment of tools for assessment of value chains of bio-businesses
on sustainability including climate change resilience and low emissions, and strengthening crop
resilience to climate change, to support start-up cases.
Scale: High
1. 5 Country ownership
31.
As was already highlighted above, this funding proposal is upscaling the national
programme initiated by the Government of Colombia represented by the MADR in cooperation
with the Alliance of Biodiversity International and CIAT via an agreement for technical and
scientific cooperation. The four basic topics of agreement for mitigating climate change effects
on Colombian farmers are detailed under the investment criteria “impact assessment”.
32.
The funding proposal has two executing entities: MADR and the International Center for
Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), with MADR responsible for providing technical guidance for project
implementation and supervising CIAT to ensure that all activities are executed on time and with
the required quality to ensure the achievement of project results.
33.
The Government of Colombia through the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit will be
the entity responsible for project resources, both credit and grant resources from GCF, as well
as CAF financing resources. The MADR will be responsible for executing the project resources
and technical implementation through its Directorate of Innovation, Technological Development

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 106
11
and Health Protection. The Government of Colombia will take loans from both GCF and CAF
and will provide grants to the beneficiaries (gremios) given the public goods nature of the
interventions. The MADR will be supported in the operation of this project by the Alliance of
Biodiversity International and CIAT and the producer associations providing strong adherence
to the legislation and regulations of the Government of Colombia. In addition, CIAT will develop
a model agreement to be approved by the MADR that will be signed with each of the gremios,
including the details of the activities, the co-financing provided by each gremio, and at the end of
the project, commitments acquired for its contin
lo
u
c
i
a
t
l
y .
34.
The project will have thirteen strategic partners for project implementation, of
which there are ten gremios and three research institutions. For the execution of the CSICAP
project, CIAT will work in coordination with the following ten gremios: Fedearroz (rice),
Fenalce (maize), Fedegan (livestock), Fedepanela (panela cane), Fedepapa (potato), Federación
Nacional de Cafeteros - Cenicafe (coffee), Asocaña - Cenicaña (sugarcane), Augura, Asbama, and
Aohofrucol (musaceae). Additionally, there are three research institutions as part of the
strategic implementing partners: the Colombian Agricultural Research Corporation (Agrosavia),
the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) and the Center for Research
on Sustainable Agricultural Production Systems (CIPAV) of Colombia. These strategic partners
will have key roles in the implementation of project activities and therefore will be assigned a
budget that will be subject to outputs and deliverables. The importance of these partner
institutions lies in the fact that they will be responsible for the continuity and sustainability of
the project actions once the project is completed.
35.
The project has undergone a review by the Collegiate Body (made up of the Ministry of
Environment and Sustainable Development, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Presidential Agency for International Cooperation) which
12
supports Colombia’s national designated authority (NDA) in decision-making and the funding
proposal has incorporated the comments provided by the Collegiate Body. This process has
verified the alignment of the project to the goals of the National Development Plan 2018–2022,
the contribution to the strategies and goals of the National Climate Change Policy, the Green
Growth Policy, and the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), as well as coverage at the
mu nicipal level (project scale), and other criteria aligned with the investment criteria of GCF.
36.
According to the recently updated NDC, among Colombia's adaptation priorities for
agriculture is improvement of capacities and information access to prioritized agricultural
subsectors to adapt to climate variability and/or to climate change hazards. A priority for food
security and poverty eradication is to ensure that 50 per cent of programmed actions for risk
management, adaptation and climate change mitigation will be implemented by 2030. The
funding proposal directly contributes to the achievement of the goals of the NDC, which are to
strengthen ten producers’ associations (gremios) by 2030, and to establish Agroclimatic
Te chnical Work Groups in 27 departments, reaching one million users.
37.
The proposed project is fully aligned with the relevant country strategies and policies. It
is a part of Colombia’s GCF country programme.
38.
The exit strategy described in the funding proposal highlights country ownership
through demonstrating clear roles for different stakeholders. The funding proposal informs that
at the end of the project, the equipment and infrastructure developed by the it will continue to
be in the name of MADR, but once the project is completed, they will be delivered to the gremios
through a contract of bailment in which the gremios manage the assets and services (including
data platforms) but undertake to give it proper use and assume maintenance costs and
11
Representing the Ministry before national and international instances related to research, technological
development, innovation, agricultural technical assistance and health matters. Direction of Innovation,
Technological Development and Health Protection (minagricultura.gov.co)
12
In Colombia, the National Planning Department (DNP) is the national designated authority (NDA).

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 107
responsibility in compliance with national regulations. The funding proposal inform s that this
mechanism has been successfully used in several projects between MADR and the gremios,
including the pilot project. A large part of the success of the pilot project lies in the
strengthening of capacities and empowerment of the gremios (as in the case of Fedearroz and
Fe nalce in the pilot phase), which continued and expanded the work carried out with them.
39.
The independent TAP considers that country ownership of the funding proposal and
entire agriculture digitalization process is very high.
Scale: Medium to high
1. 6 Efficiency and effectiveness
40.
Total budget of the funding proposal is USD 99.91 million with USD 73.28 million (73.3
per cent) GCF share and the remaining 26.7 per cent is a country contribution. USD 25 million,
25 per cent of total and 34.1 per cent of the GCF share is grant. Of the total amount, 10.3 per cent
is loan from CAF and 16 per cent (USD 16.33 million) is the grant co-financing from AGROSAVIA,
CIAT and from nine producers’ association. The fund mobilization ratio is 2.75:1. The
independent TAP considers the ratio is efficient, considering that expected results are in the
‘pu blic goods’ category.
41.
Two key risk areas were identified by the independent TAP when reviewing the funding
proposal: appropriateness of digital communication facilities for successful implementation of
digital agriculture results; and monitoring of performance results through well-developed
performance criteria. Significance of the results monitoring process in achievement of success is
well recognized by the project proponents and the AE. One of the key findings when analysing
the pilot phase (annex 23) was that weak horizontal penetration of information, knowledge, etc.
was that monitoring of the ‘last mile’ was lacking, as was concluded by the funding proposal
developers. The AE response on the issue of monitoring and evaluation of the pilot project was
that it was not planned or considered at the time. Thus, timely information on the true impact of
the project was not available and consequently the Government of Colombia, the gremios and
the research centres were unable to react and adjust activities relevantly.
42.
According to the funding proposal, initial monitoring is the responsibility of gremios but
gremios should get information/data from producers and it should be very clear in the
agreement that this is not a voluntary activity but a responsibility for both producers and, at
later stage, for gremios. During the review, upon the request of the independent TAP, the AE
provided an English translation of the template agreement between the Alliance and the
gremios and a last-mile agreement between gremios and producers which were not in full
satisfaction of the independent TAP. Later the AE provided relevantly revised template
ag reements.
43.
Regarding the digital communication capacities in targeted regions, additional
information was provided during the review that as of 2020, in terms of digital infrastructure,
Colombia has 116 per cent mobile phone penetration and 77 per cent broadband penetration,
though adoption and use are skewed toward urban centres. Some 73 per cent of people (72 per
cent of females, 74 per cent of males) own a mobile phone, and 52 per cent of households have
internet access at home. The digital divide is that only 16 per cent of rural households have
int ernet at home compared to 63 per cent of urban households.
44.
About 80 per cent of the intervention municipalities have (or are in the process of
implementing) "Rural Digital Zones" implemented by the Ministry of Information, Technologies
and Communications, which, since 2018, offers internet access with free connectivity 24 hours a
day in areas with the highest concentration of the populated centres of municipalities.
According to a Digital Ecosystem Assessment conducted by USAID, people in rural areas access
internet outside their home, including at internet cafes, education centres, and public hotspots.
Furthermore, the proportion of the rural population with at least a feature phone is far larger

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 108
than the proportion with a smartphone. In addition, CSICAP will work with a multi-pronged
strategy using a variety of channels including voicemail (e.g. interactive voice response (IVR),
short messaging system (SMS)), audio books, video, photos, text messages, chatbots/Wireless
Ap plication Protocol (WAP), TV, radio, some of which does not require internet and/or literacy.
45.
Regarding the central system for improving the production of analytical information
there are several government initiatives and funds focused on guaranteeing and maximizing
access and service to information and communications technologies. At the same time CIAT
counts on a data centre with the capacity to attend to most of the project demands. In addition,
CIAT has access to BIOS (the highest performance computers in Colombia) through the RENATA
aca demic network.
46.
From the AE’s response during the review, the independent TAP understood that
implementation of offline systems and asynchronous communication tools are envisaged, as an
interim measure,. This will allow the project in the field to synchronise or upload the
information once there is network availability. The independent TAP considers that this kind of
off-line communication might not be effective, and additional measures should be considered
(e.g. individual meetings in villages, etc.) to effectively bring necessary information to the final
cu stomers/producers who could significantly increase the final efficiency of project.
47.
The strength of the funding proposal is partnership. The funding proposal and feasibility
study highlight that a major barrier in Colombia has always been bringing together all these
institutions working towards a common goal. The importance of these partners lies in the fact
that they are the institutions that will be responsible for the continuity and sustainability of the
project activities once the project is completed. This should guarantee the high efficiency and
eff ectiveness of this programme.
48.
The independent TAP recognises all the challenges of the project and scores the
effectiveness and efficiency potential of the funding proposal as medium to high.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
49.
The independent TAP recommends this funding proposal for approval by the GCF Board
and recommends that the Secretariat establish a special monitoring regime for the
implementation of ESMF commitments and establish periodic reporting to the Board on this
issue.

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 109
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical
Advisory Panel’s assessment (FP182)
Proposal name: Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and
sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in
Colombia (CSICAP)
Accredited entity: Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)
Country/(ies): Colombia
Programme/programme size: Medium
Impact potential
CSICAP considers f rom its formulation the direct work and massive involvement of producers as
a response to the lessons learned from the pilot. Components 1 and 2 of the CSICAP project
consider massive implementation of technologies on producers' farms. CSICAP is including a
whole component (component 3) aimed exclusively at strengthening the vertical dissemination
of technologies. The producers’ associations/ gremios and Agrosavia will allocate personnel and
resources to promote the vertical dissemination of the technologies promoted by CSICAP. The
CSICAP project is placing a strong emphasis on vertical dissemination for which a high potential
for impact is expected.
Paradigm shift potential
No comments
Sustainable development potential
CSICAP will not use genetically modified organisms. The Project (activities component 2) will
use only conventional genetic improvements. It is worth noting that the methods for plant
improvement are divided into “conventional” and “genetic modified (GM)”, both aim to produce
a crop with traits to improve the performance of the crop. However, GM achieves this through
adding new genes from other or the same species (transgenic, cisgenic), inducing recombination
with the agrobacterium mechanism. The conventional genetic improvement is the development
of cultivars based on the mode of reproduction of the species (cross pollination, self-pollination
or clonally propagation)1.
https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/projects/gm-plants/how-does-gm-differ-from-
1conventional-plant-breeding/; (ii) Acquaah, G. (2015). Conventional Plant Breeding Principles and Techniques. In J. M.
AAld-Kdhitaioynria, lS r. eMfe.r Jeanince, &ab Do.u Vt itJo: h(in) son (Eds.), (iii) Advances in Plant Breeding Strategies: Breeding, Biotechnology and
Molecular Tools (pp. 115–158). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22521-0_5

--- Table 1 on Page 109 ---
Impact potential
CSICAP considers f rom its formulation the direct work and massive involvement of producers as
a response to the lessons learned from the pilot. Components 1 and 2 of the CSICAP project
consider massive implementation of technologies on producers' farms. CSICAP is including a
whole component (component 3) aimed exclusively at strengthening the vertical dissemination
of technologies. The producers’ associations/ gremios and Agrosavia will allocate personnel and
resources to promote the vertical dissemination of the technologies promoted by CSICAP. The
CSICAP project is placing a strong emphasis on vertical dissemination for which a high potential
for impact is expected.
Paradigm shift potential
No comments
Sustainable development potential
CSICAP will not use genetically modified organisms. The Project (activities component 2) will
use only conventional genetic improvements. It is worth noting that the methods for plant
improvement are divided into “conventional” and “genetic modified (GM)”, both aim to produce
a crop with traits to improve the performance of the crop. However, GM achieves this through
adding new genes from other or the same species (transgenic, cisgenic), inducing recombination
with the agrobacterium mechanism. The conventional genetic improvement is the development
of cultivars based on the mode of reproduction of the species (cross pollination, self-pollination
or clonally propagation)1.

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01
Page 110
Needs of the recipient
No comments
Country ownership
No comments
Efficiency and effectiveness
CSICAP seeks to modernize, empower, and enhance the capacities of the existing extension
services, and in all cases (i.e. for all producers’ organizations) the offline systems and
asynchronous communication tools will be a complement to direct work with the farmers
through focus groups, farm visits, and in field individual meetings in local areas. The use of
online and offline systems and asynchronous communication tools is a strategy to scale up the
arrival to additional producers of information on adaptation and mitigation measures and
achieve greater efficiency in extension systems and achieve greater impact
.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
As mentioned before in the section of “Sustainable development potential”, the CSICAP project
(activities under component 2) will not work with genetically modified organisms and will only
use conventional methods of genetic improvement. In this sense, the ITAP recommendation
about “
is based on the premise of
the use tohf agte n tehteic aslelycr metoadriifaite de sotragbalnisihsm ssp, ewchiaicl hm iso nnoitto croinrgre rcet.g iWmee rfeosrp etchtefu ilmly psluegmgeenstt athtiaotn t hoef
EreScMomF mcoemndmaittimone nshtso ualndd b ee srteacbolnisshid epreerdio. dic reporting to the Board”

--- Table 1 on Page 110 ---
Needs of the recipient
No comments
Country ownership
No comments
Efficiency and effectiveness
CSICAP seeks to modernize, empower, and enhance the capacities of the existing extension
services, and in all cases (i.e. for all producers’ organizations) the offline systems and
asynchronous communication tools will be a complement to direct work with the farmers
through focus groups, farm visits, and in field individual meetings in local areas. The use of
online and offline systems and asynchronous communication tools is a strategy to scale up the
arrival to additional producers of information on adaptation and mitigation measures and
achieve greater efficiency in extension systems and achieve greater impact
.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
As mentioned before in the section of “Sustainable development potential”, the CSICAP project
(activities under component 2) will not work with genetically modified organisms and will only
use conventional methods of genetic improvement. In this sense, the ITAP recommendation
about “
is based on the premise of
the use tohf agte n tehteic aslelycr metoadriifaite de sotragbalnisihsm ssp, ewchiaicl hm iso nnoitto croinrgre rcet.g iWmee rfeosrp etchtefu ilmly psluegmgeenstt athtiaotn t hoef
EreScMomF mcoemndmaittimone nshtso ualndd b ee srteacbolnisshid epreerdio. dic reporting to the Board”

=== PAGE 111 ===
Gender documentation for FP182
Social, Gender and Environmental study of the Project CSICAP* in Colombia
Gender Assessment Date: 03/31/2021
presented to:
The Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT Deliverable No. 4
GENDER ASSESSMENT
CSICAP All the references in this document have been changed to CSICAP. If there
is any reference to CSICAP should be understand as CSICAP*
*The initial tittle of the project was changed from Low-Emission and Climate Resilient
Agriculture in Colombia (LECRA) to Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation
and sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in Colombia (CSICAP). All
the references in this document have been changed to CSICAP. If there is any reference to
CSICAP should be understand as CSICAP
Annex 8 – Part A
Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal
1

--- Table 1 on Page 111 ---
 | Social, Gender and Environmental study of the Project CSICAP* in Colombia | 
 | Gender Assessment
presented to:
The Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT | Date: 03/31/2021
 |  | Deliverable No. 4

=== PAGE 112 ===
Contents
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................... 3
1. POPULATION CHARACTERIZATION WITH A GENDER PERSPECTIVE ..................................... 5
2. CHARACTERIZATION OF PRODUCTION CHAINS FROM A GENDER PERSPECTIVE ................ 18
3. CAPACITIES OF THE PRODUCER ASSOCIATIONS TO MANAGE GENDER ISSUES .................. 20
4. REGULATORY AND GENDER POLICY FRAMEWORK OF CSICAP PROJECT ............................ 22
4.1 INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS ............................................................................................ 22
4.2 NATIONAL REGULATIONS AND PUBLIC POLICY .......................................................................... 23
4.3 LEGAL FRAMEWORK APPLICABLE TO THE CSICAP PROJECT .......................................................... 27
4.4 INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITIES AT THE NATIONAL AND LOCAL LEVELS.................................................. 29
5. BIBLIOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES ...................................................................................... 33
2

=== PAGE 113 ===
Introduction
The following gender assessment is an input for the formulation of the project “Low Emission
and Climate Resilient Agriculture” (CSICAP, for its acronym in English). This Project seeks to
improve the capacity of eight agricultural production chains (rice, corn, potato, cattle, banana,
panela and sugarcane, and coffee) to mitigate their respective greenhouse gas emissions and
adapt to climate change by increasing efficiency in the use of the natural resources and
production.
In recent years, the agricultural activities associated with these eight products have been
affected by variability in temperature and rainfall, with more frequent and intense floods,
droughts, and frosts, which have sometimes led to crop losses. Besides, some agricultural and
livestock practices have contributed to soil degradation. As a result, productive cycles have been
altered and land-use conflicts have increased, compromising the resilience and sustainability of
production. This in turn increases the economic vulnerability of male and female producers and
puts food availability at risk.
These events may have differential repercussions depending on the characteristics of the
territory and its communities (men and women, or ethnic groups), as well as the type of
producers (small, medium, or large), due to the unequal access to productive factors,
information technologies and the mechanisms for adapting to climate change. In the case of
rural women, the effects of climate change are exacerbated by the gender norms relations in
the household and on the farm. The low participation in production decision-making, low access
to and control over land and financial and technological resources, overburdened domestic and
unpaid care work, and low income and high levels of poverty (especially among female heads of
household), among other facts, limit the women’s capacity to develop adaptation strategies in
the face of climate variability. Besides, the effects on household food security may deepen
because, on the one hand, the responsibility for food supply falls on them, and, on the other
hand, climate change may decrease the availability of water, food, and resources for self-
consumption.
Specifically, in rural areas of the country, where 5,8 million men and 5,2 million women live,
there are differences in the socio-demographic conditions of the population. According to DANE
figures (2020), even though the number of people of working age is similar regardless of gender
(in the working ages, between 10 and 59 years, the percentage is similar, 67.9%, and in the older
ages slightly higher participation of men than women is identified: 13.1% and 12.7%
respectively), participation in the labor market evidence significant gender gaps: the 73.8% of
rural men are employed, compared to 36.8% of women. In addition, the rural female
unemployment rate is higher than that of men (9.6% and 3.0% respectively), which shows the
greater restrictions faced by women in developing activities included in the System of National
Accounts. This situation results in a lower capacity of rural women to generate income and,
therefore, in a higher percentage of monetary poverty (35,0% of rural female-headed
households are in this condition, compared to 27.9% of male-headed households).
These gender gaps evidence structural causes that limit the equitable development of rural
women and men and their communities. On the one hand, according to the National Time Use
3

=== PAGE 114 ===
Survey -ENUT (2016-2017), women perform most of the unpaid work in rural areas: they spend
approximately 8 hours a day on these tasks, compared to 3 hours spent by men. On the other
hand, according to the 2014 National Agricultural Census, only in 38.6% of the Agricultural
Production Units in the country, do women participate in decision-making on production.
Furthermore, as will be shown in the following chapters, women producers have less access to
productive assets such as land, technical assistance, and credit.
Within this framework, the main objective of the Gender Assessment is to provide a baseline for
recognizing the initial social, economic, and environmental conditions of the CSICAP Project,
with emphasis on identifying social and gender gaps in male and female producers in the
prioritized chains. The purpose of this is to generate inputs so that social inclusion and gender
approaches are considered in the formulation of the Project, so that CSICAP not only avoids
deepening of the gaps identified but also contributes to the transformation of the causes that
generate these inequities.
This Gender Assessment was obtained from mixed research methods and triangulation of
secondary information (on norms and policies) and statistical information,
mainly instruments (census and surveys) of the National Administrative Department of
Statistics, with primary information. The latter included the completion by the associations
of an institutional capacity analysis form, as well as the development of interviews and
group sessions with association officials, extensionists, affiliated female and male producers,
and institutional actors.
As a result, the Gender Assessment makes a comprehensive diagnosis with a gender perspective
of the territories, population, and productive chains targeted by the CSICAP Project, as well as
the institutional, regulatory, and policy framework. To this end, the document is organized into
four chapters.
The first chapter presents a general diagnosis of the social and gender conditions of the
territories prioritized by the CSICAP Project, which includes demographic, age, and household
headship characteristics and identifies gender gaps concerning to indicators of poverty,
education, labor market, income, and use of time in paid and domestic work and unpaid care
activities.
The second chapter characterizes the prioritized production chains, identifies gender gaps, and
comprehensively analyzes different aspects that determine the success of including a gender
approach in a climate-resilient agriculture program (Beuchelt & Badstue, 2013): the social
conditions of male and female producers, and their access to and control over productive assets.
Meanwhile, the third chapter analyzes the institutional capacities of the respective associations
to manage gender issues.
The fourth and last chapter defines the institutional and gender policy framework, which refers
to the main international norms adopted by Colombia, as well as those established at the
national level for the promotion of equity for women, especially those living in rural areas.
Similarly, it mentions the main policies and programs in force that have been formulated and
4

=== PAGE 115 ===
implemented by the national government to promote equity for rural women and analyzes the
institutional capacities of the entities involved in this process.
1. Population characterization with a gender perspective
According to DANE figures (2020a), the territories where the CSICAP1 Project will be
implemented have a rural population of 2,99 million people, of which 51.8% (1,55 million) are
men and 48.2% (1,44 million) are women. Regarding the distribution of this population by age
groups, Graph 0.1 shows a progressive behavior in the population pyramid of the rural
inhabitants of the Project municipalities, as well as that of the country2 country as a whole. This
is related to greater participation of children under 10 years of age and a relatively
homogeneous reduction for each of the age groups. Additionally, when comparing the
composition of the CSICAP municipalities regarding the national data, there is lower
participation of those under 20 years of age (34.4%, which is 2,7 percentage points lower than
the national situation) and higher participation those over 40 years of age. However, given that
the decrease is relatively homogeneous—among each of the groups— in these municipalities it
is not possible to identify a population loss, specifically, in initial working ages (between 20 and
29 years old) as it is presented in the national context, which goes from participation of 18.1%
to 15.5% (for the population between 10 and 19 years, and between 20 and 29 years old,
respectively)
Graph 0.1. Population pyramid. Rural area. CSICAP municipalities and rural national. 2020
80 o más años
Entre 70 y 79 años
Entre 60 y 69 años
Entre 50 y 59 años
Entre 40 y 49 años
Entre 30 y 39 años
Entre 20 y 29 años
Entre 10 y 19 años
Entre 0 y 9 años
25% 20% 15% 10% 5% 0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25%
Nacional Mujer LECRA Mujer Nacional Hombre LECRA Hombre
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2020a)
Regarding the participation of men and women in decision-making within households, of the
941,5 thousand households in the CSICAP municipalities, 7 out of 10 are headed by men, which
is higher than the situation in rural areas of the country (68.9%) (graph 0.2). Further, only 26.0%
1 The departments selected for the implementation of the chains are as follows:
Rice: Antioquia, Casanare, Cesar, Córdoba, Huila, La Guajira, Magdalena, Meta, Norte de Santander, Sucre Tolima, Valle del Cauca.
Risaralda, Santander, Tolima y Valle del Cauca.
Banana: Antioquia, Cesar, La Guajira y Magdalena.
Sugarcane: Antioquia, Boyacá, Caldas, Caquetá, Cauca, Cundinamarca, Huila, Nariño, Norte de Santander y Quindío,
Corn: Antioquia, Cesar, Córdoba, Huila, La Guajira, Meta, Quindío, Risaralda, Santander y Tolima.
Potato: Antioquia, Bogotá, Boyacá, Caldas, Cauca, Cundinamarca, Nariño, Norte de Santander, Santander, Tolima y Valle del Cauca.
Cattle: Antioquia, Arauca, Caquetá, Cauca, La Guajira, Meta, Nariño, Santander y Sucre.
2 The population of the municipalities of the CSICAP project are represented in the graph with filled bars; while the national rural
information is shown in the bars without filling and with dark outline.
5

--- Table 1 on Page 115 ---
 | 

--- Table 2 on Page 115 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 116 ===
of female-headed households live with a spouse, while 33.9% of female-heads of household are
single, 24.9% are widowed, and 24.1% are separated (common-law or married). This reflects
that in most of these households, women are the head of household, which increases the
household’s risk of falling into poverty since women earn less income than men to support their
dependents. In contrast, 72.0% of male-headed households live with their spouse, 40.4% of male
heads of household are in a union, and 30.6% are married.
Graph 0.2. Sex of the head of household. Rural area. CSICAP municipalities and rural national. 2018
Municipios LECRA 69,8% 30,2%
Nacional 68,9% 31,1%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2020b)
Now, from Social Conpes 150 of 2012, the Multidimensional Poverty Index was defined to
establish the absence of desired social conditions of households and individuals, by identifying
simultaneous deficiencies in the dimensions of educational conditions of the household3,
conditions of children and youth4, work5, health6 and household services and housing7
conditions.
In view of the above, and based on DANE (2020c), it is identified that, of the 10,38 million rural
people in the CSICAP8 departments, 3,47 million are in a condition of multidimensional poverty,
corresponding to 33.5%, a figure lower than the national situation (34.5%). To capture territorial
differences, Map 1 presents the adjusted MPI calculated by DANE from the 2018 National
Population and Housing Census. It shows that 47.3% of the municipalities prioritized by the
CSICAP project have multidimensional poverty incidence rates between 40% and 60% and the
overall average is 43.4%. Most of the country’s municipalities with the highest levels of rural
poverty (above 60%) are not part of the project, and the average adjusted rural MPI for the rest
of the municipalities Is estimated at 54.0%. Therefore, in terms of poverty conditions, the
prioritized municipalities are in a better situation compared with the rest of the country’s rural
territory.
3 The educational conditions of the household are analyzed in terms of low educational achievement and illiteracy.
4 The conditions of children and youth are analyzed based on school absenteeism, school lag, barriers to access to early childhood
care services, and child labor.
5 Labor conditions are analyzed based on long-term unemployment and informal employment.
6 Health conditions are analyzed through health insurance and barriers to access to health services.
7 Public services and housing conditions are analyzed bases on access to an improved water source, inadequate excreta disposal,
inadequate floors, inadequate exterior walls, and critical overcrowding.
8 A CSICAP department is one that has at least one municipality to intervene in the project.
6

--- Table 1 on Page 116 ---
 |  |  | 69,8% |  |  |  |  | 30,2% | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 68,9% |  |  |  |  | 31,1% | 

=== PAGE 117 ===
Map 1. Adjusted Rural Multidimensional Poverty Index. 2018
Panel A. National Panel B. CSICAP Municipalities
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2020)
Regarding poverty status according to the gender of the head of household, graph 0.3 shows
that 34.6% of the rural female-headed households are considered multidimensional poor,
compared to 27.7% of male-headed households. The main deprivations affecting female-headed
households correspond to informal work (91.9%), low educational attainment (75.5%), limited
access to an improved water source (38.5%), and school lag (32.9%). However, when compared
to male-headed households, there is a large difference in long-lasting unemployment (6.6% for
male-headed households and 21.8% for female-headed households), which reflects the
restrictions on women’s entry into the labor market.
7

=== PAGE 118 ===
Graph 0.3. Percentage of households living in multidimensional poverty according to the sex of the head of
household. Rural area. CSICAP department and rural national. 2019
40% 34,6% 35,4%
s e s e ln 3 3 0 5 % % 27,7% 28,9%
rb
o p
a
o is 25%
s e ra
g
n e m
id
1 2 5 0 % %
o
H
itlu 10%
m 5%
0%
Hombre Mujer Hombre Mujer
Departamentos LECRA Nacional
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2020c)
Similarly, when analyzing the condition of monetary poverty, which represents the percentage
of people who do not have enough per capita income to cover the basic basket of goods and
services, it is identified that in the CSICAP departments, 34.6% of the rural population faces this
situation, which is lower than the national rural poverty rate(36.1%). Additionally, based on
DANE (2019) it is estimated that of the 2,1 million rural households headed by men, 26.8% are
income poor, which is below the 33.8% of poor households headed by women (673,8 thousand
households). This situation is explained by the lower income-generating capacity of female-
headed households (with an income of 959,8 thousand, in contrast to 1,1 million male-headed
households).
Graph 1.4. Percentage of households in monetary poverty according to the sex of the head of household. Rural
área. CSICAP department and rural national. 2018
40% 33,8% 35,0%
ro 35%
p
s
30% 26,8% 27,9%
e rb
o p
s e ra
o
s e rg
n i
1
1
2
2
0
0
5
5
%
%
%
%
g
o
H 5%
0%
Hombre Mujer Hombre Mujer
Departamentos LECRA Nacional
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2019)
Therefore, the gender gaps, both in the quality of life (represented by multidimensional poverty)
and in the capacity to generate income (monetary poverty), are evidence of the feminization of
poverty in rural areas of the country and the CSICAP departments. Regarding the educational
conditions of the rural population, DANE (2020B) identifies that of the 2,0 million people over
15 years of age living in the CSICAP municipalities, 12.1% do not know how to read or write. This
rate is lower than the national rural rate (11.9%), and it is similar between men and women
(12.2% and 12.0% respectively). When analyzing educational levels by gender, women have
8

--- Table 1 on Page 118 ---
 |  |  | 28,9% |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 118 ---
 |  |  | 27,9% |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 119 ===
higher levels of education than men: 22.8% have high school education and 10.6% have higher
education; while 19.8% of men have vocational secondary education and 8.1% have higher
education. However, more than 50% of the population does not have basic secondary education,
showing strong restrictions for the accumulation of human capital in rural areas of the country.
Graph 1.5. The educational level attained by sex. Rural area. Over 15 years of age. CSICAP municipalities and rural
national. 2018
o ip
ic
in
u M
A
R
C
E L
Ho
M
m
u
b
je
re
r 8
1
,
0
3
,
%
2%
6
5
,3
,1
%
%
35,
4
8
0
%
,3%
16,2%
16,5%
22,8
1
%
9,8%
10
8
,
,
6
1
%
%
la Hombre 11,6% 5,1% 39,0% 16,6% 19,5% 8,1%
n
o
ic
a N Mujer 8,9% 7,3% 34,4% 16,6% 22,4% 10,4%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Ninguno Preescolar Básica primaria Básica secundaria Media Superior
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2020b)
In terms of the labor market, the population that is part of the labor force totals 7,7 million for
the CSICAP departments, of which 57.1% are employed and 18.6% are employed in household
occupations. When analyzing activity according to sex (graph 0.4), there are large differences
between men and women: while 74.2% of men are considered employed, for women this figure
does not exceed 37.5%. In addition, 38.0% of the female population is employed in household
occupations, while the participation of men is barely 1.5%.
These figures reflect that, even though rural women have on average a higher level of education
than men, care services in rural areas fall on women and limit their labor participation, which
has an impact on their limited capacity to generate income, affecting their economic
empowerment.
Graph 0.4. Labor force activity by sex. Rural area. CSICAP departments and rural national. 2018
o
tn
Hombre 74,2% 15,4% 1,5%
eA
mR
aC
tra
p
E
L Mujer 37,5% 15,7% 38,0%
e
D
la Hombre 73,8% 16,1% 1,7%
n
o
ic
a
N Mujer 36,8% 16,2% 38,8%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Ocupado Aspirante Cesante Estudiante Oficios del hogar Incapacitado Otra
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2019)
Also, in the CSICAP departments, 69.3% of those employed are men and 30.7% are women (
9

--- Table 1 on Page 119 ---
10,2% |  | 5,1% |  |  |  | 40,3% |  |  |  | 16,5% |  |  | 1 | 9,8% |  | 8,1%
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
8,3% | 6 | ,3% |  |  | 3 | 5,8% |  | 16,2 |  | % |  | 22,8 |  | % | 10,6% | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
11,6% |  |  | 5,1 | % |  | 39,0% |  |  |  | 16,6% |  |  | 1 | 9,5% |  | 8,1%
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
8,9% |  | 7,3% |  |  |  | 34,4% |  | 16,6 |  | % |  | 22,4 |  | % | 10,4% | 

--- Table 2 on Page 119 ---
 |  |  | 74,2% |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 15,4% | 1, | 5 | % | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 37,5 | % |  |  |  | 15,7 | % |  |  | 38,0% |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 73,8% |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 16,1% | 1 | ,7 | % | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 36,8 | % |  |  | 16,2 |  | % |  |  | 38,8% |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 120 ===
graph 0.5). This shows the preponderance of men in the development of productive activities in
rural areas, both in these departments and at the national level. Additionally, there are large
differences between the incomes earned by men and women in the agricultural sector.
Specifically, in the agriculture, livestock, and hunting subsector, men’s average income
corresponds to 74.5% of the current legal monthly minimum wage (smmlv9 for its acronym in
Spanish), while women’s average income is 33.5% of 1 smmlv. When analyzing these data
according to the occupational position, it is identified that employees earn the highest labor
income (131% of 1 smmlv for men and 106% for women), followed by the employer (129% for
men and 98,2% for women), day laborers (99% for men and 64% for women), and, finally, self-
employed workers, who earn the lowest income in the sector (57% of 1 smmlv for men and 34%
for women)
Graph 0.5. Percentage of employed by sex. Rural area. CSICAP departments and rural national. 2018
Departamento LECRA 69,3% 30,7%
Nacional 69,6% 30,4%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2019)
However, identifying the unemployment rate shows that while men have an unemployment rate
of 3.2% in the CSICAP departments, the rate for women is 9.9% (similar to the national rate).
Therefore, the labor market in rural areas does not manage to absorb the supply of women’s
jobs. This situation is related to the structure of the rural economy, where agricultural and
livestock activities predominate, in which male paid labor prevails. Nevertheless, rural women
participate in these tasks as unpaid family workers and care economy activities closely related
to agricultural production, such as the production, transformation, and supply of food for self-
consumption and day laborers, and animal care.
9 This is the minimum legally established payment that a person receives per month for their work, it is currently 908.526 COP in
Colombia.
10

--- Table 1 on Page 120 ---
 |  |  | 69,3% |  |  |  |  | 30,7% | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 69,6% |  |  |  |  | 30,4% | 

=== PAGE 121 ===
Graph 0.6. Unemployment rate by sex. Rural are. CSICAP departments and rural national. 2018
12%
9,9% 9,6%
o10%
e
lp
m 8%
e
s
e 6%
d
e d 4% 3,2% 3,0%
a
s
a 2%
T
0%
Hombre Mujer Hombre Mujer
Departamento LECRA Nacional
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2019)
In this sense, and thanks to Law 1413 of 2013, the importance of unpaid work performed at
home that is not usually accounted for (housing maintenance, care of household or community
members, and maintenance of the paid labor force) is recognized, and the role of rural women
in the economic and social development of their communities is beginning to become evident.
In this regard, 37.1% of rural women carry out activities included in the System of National
Accounts (SNA) with a daily destination of 4:50 hours, and 92.5% carry out activities not included
in the SNA for 07:52 hours. On the other hand, 65.5% of men perform SNA activities (8:25 hours)
and 60.5% perform non-SNA activities (3:06 hours). In other words, women work more hours
per day than men (12:42 hours vs 11:31 hours, respectively), but approximately two-thirds of
them are spent on domestic and unpaid care activities, while men spend less than one-third of
their working time on these activities.
Among the work activities not included in the System of National Accounts are: i) providing food
to household members; ii) maintaining clothing for household members; iii) cleaning,
maintenance, and repairs for the household; iv) household purchases and administration; v) care
activities with children under 5 years of age belonging to the household; vi) support for
household members; and vii) passive care (being on standby). The gender gaps in each of these
areas are presented below.
First, concerning to providing food to members of the household10 (preparing and serving food;
lifting and washing dishes at home; preparing canned food, cheese or sausages; or taking food
to people at their place of work or study), in rural areas of the country, 22.9% of men perform
these activities compared to 81.3% of women (graph 0.7). The regions with the greatest
differences are the Atlantic region (17.4% of men and 82.5% of women) and the Central region
(19.2% of men and 80.9% of women). On the other hand, the Eastern and Pacific regions show
higher participation of men (29.1% and 27.1% respectively).
10 Since the CSICAP Project will be implemented in all regions, a disaggregated description is provided for each region.
11

--- Table 1 on Page 121 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 3,0% |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 122 ===
Graph 0.7. Participation in activities of supplies to household members by sex and region. 2016-2017
100%
82,5% 80,9% 81,9% 79,9% 81,3%
80%
60%
40% 29,1% 27,1%
22,9%
17,4% 19,2%
20%
0%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
graph 0.8 also shows the time rural men and women spend on these activities: men spend 67
minutes on these activities, while women more than double this figure with 147 minutes. The
region with the lowest time spent in the Pacific region (52 minutes for men and 125 minutes for
women), while in the Central region men spend 74 minutes and women 160 minutes.
Graph 0.8. Time spent in activities of supplies to household members by sex and region. 2016-2017
200
160 157
144 147
150 125
s
o
tu n 100 79 74 69 67
iM 52
50
0
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
Second, concerning the participation in clothing maintenance (washing, ironing, or putting away
the clothes from household members; repairing clothes, tablecloths, blankets, footwear,
suitcases; making clothes; and taking or picking up clothes from the laundry), only 9.6% of rural
men perform these activities, compared to 49.2% of women (graph 0.9). Similarly, food supply
shows that the Atlantic region is the one where men perform these activities the least, with
4.3%; women’s participation is 42.6%. On the other hand, the Pacific region is the one where
the maintenance of clothing presents the highest participation of men with 16.3% and 51.9% of
women.
12

--- Table 1 on Page 122 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 19,2% |  |  | 29,1% |  |  | 27,1% |  |  | 22,9% |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 122 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 125 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 74 |  |  | 69 |  |  | 52 |  |  | 67 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 123 ===
Graph 0.9. Participation in wardrobe maintenance activities of household members by sex and region. 2016-2017
60% 54,9% 51,9%
49,2%
46,4%
50% 42,6%
40%
30%
16,3%
20%
7,7% 10,7% 9,6%
10% 4,3%
0%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
Regarding the time allocated to these activities, on average, rural men spend 44 minutes and
women spend twice as much, 87 minutes (graph 0.10). Although the participation of men in the
Atlantic región is low, the time allocated is the highest with 63 minutes, and women spend 120
minutes. On the other hand, the Pacific región shows lower periods with 37 minutes for men
and 70 minutes for women.
Graph 0.10. Time spent on wardrobe maintenance activities of household members by sex and region. 2016-2017
140
120
120
100 83 78 87
s o 80 63 70
tu
n iM 60 46 44 37 44
40
20
0
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
Thirdly, regarding the participation in household cleaning and maintenance (corresponding to
cleaning the house, caring for pets and the garden, cleaning vehicles, fetching water or fuel for
cooking at home), 33.6% of men living in rural areas carry out these activities compared to 76.6%
of rural women (graph 0.11). The greatest difference according to the sex of the person is in the
Central zone where 25.6% of men and 77.8% of women perform some of the actions for
household cleaning and maintenance. In the Atlantic, Eastern, and Pacific regions, the behavior
is similar. The smallest difference is in the Eastern region with 37.5% of men and 76.0% of
women.
13

--- Table 1 on Page 123 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 16,3% |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 7,7% |  |  | 10,7% |  |  |  |  |  | 9,6% |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 123 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 46 |  |  | 44 |  |  | 37 |  |  | 44 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 124 ===
Graph 0.11. Participation in household cleaning and maintenance activities by sex and region. 2016-2017
100%
76,2% 77,8% 76,0% 76,0% 76,6%
80%
60%
36,0% 37,5% 36,8% 33,6%
40%
25,6%
20%
0%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
Similarly, graph 0.12 shows how people spend their time on these activities. On average, men
spend 59 minutes and women 85 minutes. The Pacific region is the one where both men and
women spend the least amount of time, with 47 minutes for men and 71 minutes for women.
The Central region shows the greatest difference in participation and in time as well, with men
spending 66 minutes and women 102 minutes.
Graph 0.12. Time spent on household cleaning and maintenance activities by sex and region. 2016-2017
120
102
100 85 85
78
s o tu 6 8 0 0 70 66 54 47 71 59
n
iM
40
20
0
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
Fourth, concerning the participation in household purchasing and administration activities
(purchasing personal items, buying or claiming medicines, directing or supervising household
activities, paying bills, looking for housing to rent or buy, collecting subsidies for someone, or
moving to carry out one of the activities), the percentage of men and women who carry out
these activities is similar (17.0% and 17.3% respectively) (graph 0.13). The region with the
greatest difference is the Atlantic region, where 17.1% of men and 19.9% of women engage in
purchasing and management activities. It is worth mentioning the Pacific region, since 20.7% of
men report carrying out these activities, while the participation of women is 19.0%.
14

--- Table 1 on Page 124 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 37,5% |  |  | 36,8% |  |  | 33,6% |  | 
 |  | 25,6% |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 124 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 66 |  |  | 54 |  |  | 59 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 47 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 125 ===
Graph 0.13. Participation in shopping and household management activities by sex and region. 2016-2017
25%
19,9% 20,7%
19,0%
20% 17,1% 16,3% 17,2% 17,0% 17,3%
14,3% 13,8%
15%
10%
5%
0%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
Likewise, the time spent by the population is similar, as shown in graph 0.14, with men spending
85 minutes and women 78 minutes. By region, the Central region has the longest time spent,
with 125 minutes for men and 117 minutes for women. On the other hand, the Pacific region-
despite not being the region that spends the least time- is the one with the greatest similarity
between the two sexes (77 minutes for men and 78 minutes for women).
Graph 0.14. Time spent on shopping household and management activities by sex and region. 2016-20172016-
2017
140,0 125
117
120,0
100,0 85
s o 80,0 79 70 77 78 78
tu
n 60,0
58
51
iM
40,0
20,0
-
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
In fifth place, graph 0.15 shows participation in activities with children under 5 years of age in
the household (such as playing, telling, or reading stories, or taking them to the park), according
to which 11.4% of men and 19.0% of women carry out caregiving activities. The highest
participation is found in the Pacific region, with 13.7% of men and 23.3% of women. The Atlantic
region has the lowest percentage (10.2% of men and 16.5% of women).
15

--- Table 1 on Page 125 ---
 |  | 16,3% 17,2%
14,3% 13,8% |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 125 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 126 ===
Graph 0.15. Participation in activities with children under 5 years of age in the household by sex and region.
2016-2017
25% 23,3%
20% 18,0% 18,5% 19,0%
16,5%
13,7%
15% 11,6% 11,4%
10,2% 10,2%
10%
5%
0%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
In terms of time spent on this activity, women spend an average of 82 minutes and men 78
minutes. Nevertheless, regional differences are evident: in the Atlantic region, the time spent
by men is 91 minutes, while for women it is 75 minutes. In the Central and Eastern regions, the
additional time spent by women is around 15 minutes. In the Pacific region, the time spent by
both sexes is homogeneous.
Graph 0.16. Time spent in activities with children under 5 years of age in the household by sex and region. 2016-
2017
100 91 93 89
75 79 74 78 82
80 69 70
s o 60
tu
n
iM 40
20
0
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
Sixth, 8.2% of women and 5.0% of men perform support activities for household members
(taking or bringing minor and those over 12 years of age to their place of study or work, or taking
people from the household to social, cultural, or recreational events) (graph 0.17). In the case
of the Central region, the number of people who perform these activities is low (2.3% of men
and 5.0% of women), while in the Pacific region it is more common (13.5% of women and 8.1%
of men).
16

--- Table 1 on Page 126 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 11,6% |  |  | 10,2% |  |  |  |  |  | 11,4% |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 126 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 127 ===
Graph 0.17. Participation in activities supporting household members by sex and region. 2016-2017
16%
13,5%
14%
12% 10,0%
10% 8,1% 8,5%
8% 6,3%
6% 4,8% 5,0% 5,4% 5,0%
4% 2,3%
2%
0%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
In terms of time spent, rural men spend about 38 minutes and women 35 minutes (graph 0.18).
Likewise, in the case of the Atlantic, Eastern and Pacific regions, there is homogeneity in the
time spent by individuals. In the Central region, however, there is a significant difference
between the sexes, with men spending 51 minutes and women 32 minutes.
Graph 0.18. Participation in activities supporting household members by sex and region. 2016-2017
60
51
50 42
40 37 40 35 34 38 35
s 32 31
o
tu30
n
iM20
10
0
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
Finally, taking care of other members of the household is an activity carried out mainly by
women (37.4%) (graph 0.19). The gender gap is similar for the Atlantic and Central regions,
where women’s participation is close to 33% and men’s is 10%. The Pacific region is the one with
the highest participation rates (19.4% of men and 44.2% of women).
Graph 0.19. Participation in activities of taking care of household members by sex and region. 2016-2017
50% 44,2%
39,9%
37,4%
40% 32,5% 33,6%
30%
19,4%
20% 15,8% 13,5%
9,4% 10,4%
10%
0%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
17

--- Table 1 on Page 127 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 8,1% |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 5,0% |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 2,3% |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 127 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 31 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 127 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 15,8% |  |  | 19,4% |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 10,4% |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 13,5% |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 128 ===
It is worth noting that this activity is the one that shows the greatest dedication of time for both
men and women. As shown in Graph 1.22, women spend 387 minutes on passive caregiving and
men 288 minutes. In the Eastern region, women spend 520 minutes and men 441 minutes.
Meanwhile, the region that spends the least time is the Central region with 340 and 206 minutes
for women and men, respectively.
Graph 0.20. Time spent in activities of taking care of household members by sex and region 2016-2017
600 520
500 441
387
400 342 340 346
s
o 288
tu300 260 229
n 206
iM200
100
0
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2016-2017)
2. Characterization of production chains from a gender perspective
This chapter analyzes the production conditions, from a gender and ethnic perspective, in each
of the prioritized chains: rice, bananas, coffee, panela cane, sugarcane, cattle, corn, and
potatoes.
In general, issues and problems, both general and specific to each production chain, are
summarized in Table 2.1 and must be considered in the Gender Action Plan and the Project’s
Environmental and Social Management Framework, following the guidelines dictated by the
regulations and policies on equity for women described in the following chapter.
Table 0.1. Summary of production conditions by sex of the producer and production chain
Sex of the Panela
Component Rice Banana Coffee Sugarcane Potato Corn Cattle
producer Cane
Men 55,1% 71,8% 58,2% 54,4% 55,3% 53,5% 64,7% 63,8%
Decision-
Women 17,7% 8,8% 20,0% 24,8% 23,1% 18,6% 16,9% 18,3%
making
Mixed* 11,0% 13,7% 15,5% 18,4% 11,1% 16,0% 7,8% 22,4%
Average size of Men 40,6 ha 16,0 ha 15,0 ha 6,0 ha 7,2 ha 7,7 ha 30,6 ha 72,7 ha
the UPA Women 27,6 ha 29,9 ha 8,4 ha 3,2 ha 4,5 ha 4,3 ha 18,4 ha 29,5 ha
(estate.) Mixed 28,6 ha 10,5 ha 10,9 ha 5,2 ha 7,7 ha 7,2 ha 38,9 ha 22,0 ha
Access to Men 25,8% 61,5% 61,9% 59,3% 35,5% 15,3% 21,9% 16,7%
technical Women 20,4% 55,9% 56,1% 51,0% 27,5% 9,8% 16,1% 16,2%
assistance Mixed 33,9% 37,2% 62,0% 57,3% 43,6% 25,2% 23,7% 34,8%
Men 18,6% 6,6% 18,9% 14,5% 18,2% 24,1% 14,6% 16,9%
Access to
Women 11,9% 7,5% 16,3% 10,5% 15,1% 19,3% 13,6% 18,3%
credit
Mixed 27,9% 4,8% 24,2% 20,1% 19,7% 36,6% 14,4% 37,7%
Access to Men 72,4% 77,3% 60,2% 59,9% 60,9% 59,6% 76,7% 61,1%
information Women 81,9% 89,6% 65,9% 60,0% 66,9% 66,2% 84,4% 65,2%
and
communication Mixed 83,1% 97,3% 81,3% 81,2% 81,5% 81,2% 86,3% 80,6%
technologies
18

--- Table 1 on Page 128 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 288 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 206 |  |  |  |  |  | 229 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 128 ---
Component |  |  |  | Sex of the |  | Rice |  |  | Banana |  |  | Coffee |  |  | Sugarcane |  |  |  | Panela |  | Potato |  |  | Corn |  | Cattle |  | 
 |  |  |  | producer |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Cane |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Decision-
making |  |  |  | Men |  |  | 55,1% |  |  | 71,8% |  |  | 58,2% |  |  | 54,4% |  |  | 55,3% |  |  | 53,5% |  |  | 64,7% |  | 63,8% | 
 |  |  | Women |  |  | 17,7% |  |  | 8,8% |  |  | 20,0% |  |  | 24,8% |  |  | 23,1% |  |  | 18,6% |  |  | 16,9% |  | 18,3% |  | 
 |  |  |  | Mixed* |  |  | 11,0% |  |  | 13,7% |  |  | 15,5% |  |  | 18,4% |  |  | 11,1% |  |  | 16,0% |  |  | 7,8% |  | 22,4% | 
Average size of
the UPA
(estate.) |  |  | Men |  |  | 40,6 ha |  |  | 16,0 ha |  |  | 15,0 ha |  |  | 6,0 ha |  |  | 7,2 ha |  |  | 7,7 ha |  |  | 30,6 ha |  | 72,7 ha |  | 
 |  |  |  | Women |  |  | 27,6 ha |  |  | 29,9 ha |  |  | 8,4 ha |  |  | 3,2 ha |  |  | 4,5 ha |  |  | 4,3 ha |  |  | 18,4 ha |  | 29,5 ha | 
 |  |  | Mixed |  |  | 28,6 ha |  |  | 10,5 ha |  |  | 10,9 ha |  |  | 5,2 ha |  |  | 7,7 ha |  |  | 7,2 ha |  |  | 38,9 ha |  | 22,0 ha |  | 
 | Access to |  |  | Men |  |  | 25,8% |  |  | 61,5% |  |  | 61,9% |  |  | 59,3% |  |  | 35,5% |  |  | 15,3% |  |  | 21,9% |  | 16,7% | 
 | technical |  | Women |  |  | 20,4% |  |  | 55,9% |  |  | 56,1% |  |  | 51,0% |  |  | 27,5% |  |  | 9,8% |  |  | 16,1% |  | 16,2% |  | 
 | assistance |  |  | Mixed |  |  | 33,9% |  |  | 37,2% |  |  | 62,0% |  |  | 57,3% |  |  | 43,6% |  |  | 25,2% |  |  | 23,7% |  | 34,8% | 
Access to
credit |  |  | Men |  |  | 18,6% |  |  | 6,6% |  |  | 18,9% |  |  | 14,5% |  |  | 18,2% |  |  | 24,1% |  |  | 14,6% |  | 16,9% |  | 
 |  |  |  | Women |  |  | 11,9% |  |  | 7,5% |  |  | 16,3% |  |  | 10,5% |  |  | 15,1% |  |  | 19,3% |  |  | 13,6% |  | 18,3% | 
 |  |  | Mixed |  |  | 27,9% |  |  | 4,8% |  |  | 24,2% |  |  | 20,1% |  |  | 19,7% |  |  | 36,6% |  |  | 14,4% |  | 37,7% |  | 
 | Access to |  |  | Men |  |  | 72,4% |  |  | 77,3% |  |  | 60,2% |  |  | 59,9% |  |  | 60,9% |  |  | 59,6% |  |  | 76,7% |  | 61,1% | 
 | information |  | Women |  |  | 81,9% |  |  | 89,6% |  |  | 65,9% |  |  | 60,0% |  |  | 66,9% |  |  | 66,2% |  |  | 84,4% |  | 65,2% |  | 
 | and |  | Mixed |  |  | 83,1% |  |  | 97,3% |  |  | 81,3% |  |  | 81,2% |  |  | 81,5% |  |  | 81,2% |  |  | 86,3% |  | 80,6% |  | 
 | communication |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | technologies |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 128 ---
Decision-
making

=== PAGE 129 ===
Average income for the agriculture, livestock and hunting subsector: 74.5% of the current legal
monthly minimum wage.
Men
Average income of employee 131% of the smmlv, employer 129% of the smmlv, day laborer 99%
of the smmlv and self-employed 57% of the smmlv.
Earned income
Average income for the agriculture, livestock and hunting subsector: 33.5% of the current legal
monthly minimum wage.
Women
Average income of employee 106% of the smmlv, employer 98% of the smmlv, day laborer 64%
of the smmlv and self-employed 34% of the smmlv.
*Note: Mixed refers to agricultural production units (APU) in which men and women participate jointly in decision-making.
Source: Prepared by the authors.
Among the elements of the diagnosis, it should be noted that, in general, social norms, gender
stereotypes, and patriarchal relations, among others, have normalized the fact that domestic
work and unpaid care work are activities that fall on rural women, which considerably limits
their participation in labor and decision-making in agricultural production units. On average,
women participate considerably less in decision-making in production units, at 18.5% compared
to 59.6% for men. The banana, corn, rice, livestock, and potato chains have the lowest
proportion of production units headed by women (less than 20% and, in the case of bananas,
the figure does not exceed 10%)
Similarly, in terms of access to land, the size of production units in the municipalities prioritized
for the CSICAP project is higher than the national average. However, the analysis revealed
gender gaps not only about land ownership but also concerning size, where on average the size
of the land owned by women producers corresponds to 72.9% of the size of the land owned by
men (the greatest differences are found mainly in the cattle chain, where it is only 41%).
Production factors, such as access to technical assistance and credit, condition access to other
production factors, considerably limit the production possibilities of women farmers and
ranchers. This is the case, for example, of potato producers who receive technical assistance, of
whom only 9.8% are women. In the corn and livestock chains, women account for 16% of the
producers receiving assistance. In the rice and sugarcane chains, this percentage is between 20%
and 30%, while in the banana, coffee, and sugarcane chains, it is between 50% and 60%. In
addition, regarding the management of production systems and technical assistance, including
the topics taught through this service, there are some differences in behavior according to the
sex of the producers. This reflects the importance of working in a participatory way with the
different beneficiaries of the CSICAP project and, in this process, incorporating the gender
approach.
Regarding the access to credit, less than 20%-regardless of the crop- were able to receive some
method of financing for production. Besides, except for bananas and livestock, the gender gap
in access to credit persists among male and female producers in the other chains.
Therefore, the figures show that, in general, there is less access to productive factors by female
producers who make production decisions on their own. This situation has repercussions on
rural women’s ability to generate income. Indeed, not only is the income received by farmers
and ranchers in the country significantly low, but the gender gap is also quite wide: while men
earn, on average, 74.5% of the current legal monthly minimum wage (smmlv), the figure for
women is no more than 33.5%. Furthermore, the data show that the income gap is present in
all occupations (employee, employer, day laborer, and self-employed).
19

--- Table 1 on Page 129 ---
Earned income | Men | Average income for the agriculture, livestock and hunting subsector: 74.5% of the current legal
monthly minimum wage.
Average income of employee 131% of the smmlv, employer 129% of the smmlv, day laborer 99%
of the smmlv and self-employed 57% of the smmlv. |  | 
 | Women |  | Average income for the agriculture, livestock and hunting subsector: 33.5% of the current legal | 
 |  |  | monthly minimum wage. | 
 |  |  | Average income of employee 106% of the smmlv, employer 98% of the smmlv, day laborer 64% | 
 |  |  | of the smmlv and self-employed 34% of the smmlv. | 

=== PAGE 130 ===
This situation, added to the greater vulnerability and poverty levels of rural women who are
heads of household (35.0% of female-headed households are in monetary poverty and 35.4% in
multidimensional poverty, and 27.9% of male-headed households are in monetary poverty, and
28.9% in multidimensional poverty), makes this population group one that requires special
attention to help close gender gaps.
Concerning ethnic groups, most of the ones that have a presence in the prioritized municipalities
are indigenous. It was also identified that the participation of women and mixed producers tends
to be higher in ethnic groups, especially in indigenous groups. To access productive factors and
management practices of productive systems, wide gaps were identified according to ethnicity.
In addition, peasant producers and those belonging to ethnic groups currently implement
production and conservation practices that are culturally rooted, several of which should be
recognized and incorporated into the CSICAP project to generate trust and at the same time
promote appropriation and social construction of knowledge. To the above is added the low
digital connectivity of the territories participating in the Project and the fact that the changes
entail economic risks that may be difficult for small producers to manage. These and other
factors put at risk the adoption by the beneficiaries of the knowledge, technology, practices, and
models that are expected to be disseminated through CSICAP.
It is also important to note the demographic pressure on the Colombian countryside, which is
not foreign to the municipalities where the CSICAP project will be implemented. In all the chains
studied, the majority (over 64%) of producers are over 60 years of age (¡Error! No se encuentra
el origen de la referencia.). This imposes challenges, not only in terms of promoting change,
adopting knowledge and new technologies, and the communication and implementation
methods used with these users.
Table 2.2. Percentage of producers over 60 years of age in the prioritized municipalities by the production chain
% of producers over 60
Productive chain
years old
Rice 80,2%
Banana 68,2%
Sugarcane 64,4%
Panela cane 79,4%
Potato 79,7%
Corn 71,7%
Cattle 67,2%
Source: Prepared by the authors
3. Capacities of the Producer Associations to manage gender issues
About the capacities of the nine Producer Associations participating in the CSICAP Project to
manage gender issues, most of the entities do not have institutionalized channels, instruments,
and resources to promote gender equity; however, some practices and projects developed with
rural women demonstrate an interest in incorporating these issues. In general, it is essential to
strengthening the capacities of these entities to guarantee the implementation of the Gender
20

--- Table 1 on Page 130 ---
Productive chain |  |  |  | % of producers over 60 | 
 |  |  |  | years old | 
 | Rice |  |  | 80,2% | 

--- Table 2 on Page 130 ---
 | Sugarcane |  |  | 64,4% | 

--- Table 3 on Page 130 ---
 | Potato |  |  | 79,7% | 

--- Table 4 on Page 130 ---
 | Cattle |  |  | 67,2% | 

=== PAGE 131 ===
Action Plan of the CSICAP Project, as well as the sustainability of its results in the long term. The
following are the main conclusions regarding the institutional capacities of each guild.
Producer Associations such as Fenalce, Asocaña, Fedepapa, and Fedearroz have not
implemented policies and do not have a gender action plan. This has impacted the functioning
of the strategic plans and follow-up tools since no guideline allows observing the differentiated
needs of both women and producers belonging to ethnic communities. However, despite not
having a gender policy, it is important to highlight that Fedepapa has 68.2% of female workers
within the guild, and 40% of its extensionists are women. Concerning this, Fedepapa is the only
union with these figures. On the other hand, Fedearroz and Asozaña, despite having salary
equity policies, do not meet with affirmative measures to improve the access of female
producers to agricultural extension activities, and therefore the efforts made to establish inter-
institutional links to promote programs or projects that benefit female members are not
included in the institutional plan established by the unions, which may prove to impede the
recurrence of this type of projects. In other words, the lack of a general framework on equity
and gender does not guarantee the sustainability of these actions or their harmonization with
objectives to close gaps in the long term.
Regarding the inclusion of the differential approach, Producer Associations such as Fenalce and
Fedearroz have not established policies to promote projects, programs, or policies to encourage
the participation of ethnic communities belonging to their respective production chains. This is
shown in the percentages of people on the board of directors, the project formulation teams,
and the absence of areas whose function is to address issues related to the differential and
gender approach. It may be that many of these affirmative actions are seen as a form of
discrimination by the associations, as mentioned in some of the interviews. Therefore, the idea
is that "equity" means providing all members with the same opportunities, without recognizing
the different difficulties that vulnerable populations may have in accessing them.
On the other hand, Producer Associations with impact in regions with a high presence of ethnic
communities have consolidated efforts to integrate differential approaches into the internal
processes of the guild, such as Fedepapa, which has carried out activities or projects aimed at
improving the conditions of ethnic producers in the chain. This has been possible because they
have disaggregated information on their members since they have membership forms that
specify different aspects of the producers, which allows for a detailed record of the associated
population and their production conditions.
Equally, unions such as Fenalce, Asocaña, Fedepapa, and Fedearroz scored below 40% in the
financial capacity component with a gender perspective. This may be due mainly to the lack of
a gender equity policy or a differential approach to recognize the importance of having
budgetary markers associated with the affirmative actions that are carried out. The involvement
of women in production processes requires not only differentiated technical assistance but also
access to credit and an institutional budget for this purpose, as a way of establishing a
commitment from the guild to women and supporting their projects within the chain. In addition
to the monitoring, follow-up, and evaluation component, these associations do not have
information on the number of women extensionists, people from ethnic communities, or the
number of women members. The lack of disaggregated information on the people working in
21

=== PAGE 132 ===
the Producer Associations or associated producers is a flaw since it does not provide relevant
information for the design of projects, programs, and labor-union policies with a differential
approach.
On the other hand, Producer Associations such as Fedenapela, ASBAMA, and the National
Federation of Coffee Growers (FNC) were characterized for having high scores regarding the
components with a differential and gender approach. These Producer Associations have an
action plan or gender policies that are applied to strategic plans and follow-up tools, and
therefore have policies to promote equity and affirmative measures, and in the cases of
ASBAMA and the FNC, articulation, and financing processes have been carried out to benefit
women producers and ethnic communities that participate in the production chain. In the same
way, the last two mentioned Producer Associations have disaggregated information on aspects
such as the percentage of women members and the number of women working in the
institution, although they omit information on the ethnic component. However, and despite the
above, ASBAMA does not have regulations to promote participation regarding the inclusion of
women on boards of directors and decision-making bodies, and Fedepanela does not have a
budget designated for affirmative actions for female and male producers belonging to ethnic
communities.
Finally, the only guild that did not respond to the section referring to aspects related to the
differential approach was Fedegan; however, from the qualitative work, it was evident that the
importance of women within the production chain is recognized. To ensure this commitment to
sustainable actions, it is necessary to implement specific policies and guidelines to promote
equity and non-discrimination. About inter-institutional articulation processes, although no
response was obtained, the interviews referred to projects developed in alliance with
international actors, in which work was carried out with women ranchers, in some cases victims
of the armed conflict.
4. Regulatory and gender policy framework of CSICAP Project
4.1 International Instruments
Concerning gender equity and the guarantee of rights of women, Colombia has signed and
ratified important international instruments. First, it is worth mentioning the 1979 Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women - CEDAW (approved by
Colombia through Law 51 of 1981), which confirmed the country's commitment to the pursuit
of gender equality and the definition of relevant measures to achieve it.
Additionally, the country has participated in different international forums, such as the First
International Conference on Women (Mexico, 1975), where the Decade for Women plan was
signed; the Second World Conference on Women (Copenhagen, 1980), which emphasized the
elimination of violence against women; the Third World Conference on Women (Nairobi, 1985);
and the Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing, 1995), which established a platform of
action for the rights of women.
22

=== PAGE 133 ===
The above-mentioned conventions and conferences share the characteristic of recognizing the
link between gender inequalities and the disproportionate effects of climate change on women,
raising awareness of the need to adopt measures that are consistent with this situation and that
improve the quality of life of women, while at the same time adopting measures to protect and
restore ecosystems.
Likewise, there are regional platforms in which Colombia has participated, such as the
Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women
(Convention of Belém do Pará), which was ratified by Law 248 of 1995 and creates a regional
instrument for the recognition of the full and free exercise of civil, political, economic, social,
and cultural rights of women. Also, the Tenth Regional Conference on Women in Latin America
and the Caribbean, organized by ECLAC, appeals to States to guarantee the participation of rural,
indigenous, and Afro-descendant women in political life and paid work.
Moreover, the Colombian government has signed a series of United Nations resolutions that are
related to the quality of life of women, their role in the development, and their political
participation: Resolution 66/216 (2012) and Resolution 66/130 (2012). Particularly, Resolutions
62/136 (2008) and 64/140 (2009) are aimed at improving the situation of women in rural areas.
Recently, the country has aligned itself with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as a
reference point for the formulation of public policy in the country. In particular, SDG 5 refers to
gender equality, with a special emphasis on vulnerable women, such as rural women. Besides,
other goals such as climate action, underwater life, and terrestrial ecosystem life can be
addressed from a gender perspective.
4.2 National regulations and public policy
There are two main groups of gender equity regulations at the national level: one focused on
the protection of the rights of women and the other with special emphasis on rural women,
their productive inclusion, and, in general, on creating tools for gender equity in rural areas of
the country.
Among the main laws that protect women's rights are Article 43 of the 1991 Political
Constitution, which guarantees equal rights and opportunities between men and women; Law
823 of 2003, which dictates norms on equal opportunities for women; Law 1232 of 2008, which
defines female head of household; Law 1257 of 2008, which adopts norms to guarantee women
lives free of violence; and Law 1413 of 2010, or the Care Economy Law, which includes the care
economy in the National Accounts System.
Regarding the participation of women in decision-making spaces, Law 581 of 2000, or the Quota
Law, establishes minimum participation of 30% of women in public decision-making positions
and calls for the adoption of similar measures in the private sector and civil society. This law has
become a reference framework for the establishment of affirmative measures related to the
minimum participation of women in government programs, for example, those related to
productive projects.
23

=== PAGE 134 ===
In 2013, through document CONPES 161, the National Public Policy on Gender Equity was
adopted, to contribute to guarantee the full enjoyment of the rights of Colombian women. To
this end, it promotes the mainstreaming of the gender approach in all sectors of the economy,
giving special attention to rural women.
Law 731 of 2002, or the Rural Women's Law, aims to improve the quality of rural women and
prioritizes low-income rural women. This is based on the definition of affirmative and favourable
measures related to, among other aspects, i) access to financing (from which the Credit Line for
Low-Income Rural Women was created), ii) the titling of agrarian reform lands equitably for
women and their spouses, and iii) participation (of at least 30%) in reforestation and
environmental recovery projects. Thirteen years after the disclosure of this law, Decree 2369 of
2015 was signed, creating the Directorate of Rural Women in the Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development, responsible for ensuring the welfare of rural women.
On women's right to land ownership, there are several norms. Decree-Law 902 of 2017
establishes the joint titling of vacant and fiscal patrimonial lands for spouses or permanent
partners and recognizes care activities as activities for the use of rural lands for land
adjudication. In turn, Law 1900 establishes that the Family Agricultural Units on vacant land will
be awarded to spouses or permanent partners. Additionally, MADR Resolution 311 of 2019,
which regulates Law 1900 of 2018, establishes prioritization criteria for rural women for the
adjudication of vacant, based on their conditions of poverty and marginality. Besides, Resolution
12096 of 2019 and Agreement 0058 of 2018 of the National Land Agency, establish criteria
related to the care economy, the female head of household, and belonging to women's
organizations to prioritize women in the processes of access and formalization to land
ownership.
Similarly, Law 1448 of 2011 or Victims Law established that women have special protection from
the State in procedures associated with land restitution, such as preferential access to credit,
training, and social security programs.
It is also worth mentioning that, regarding productive activities, Article 8 of Law 1900 of 2018
establishes that the gender approach must be included and guarantee priority access to rural
women, especially those who are heads of household, to the different funds, plans, and
programs related to productive projects of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
and other entities that favor rural activity. Similarly, for productive projects, the aforementioned
article recognizes the activities of care and unpaid domestic work as rural activities. In the same
sense, the Regulations of the Comprehensive Agricultural and Rural Development Projects
(PIDAR for its acronym in Spanish) of the Rural Development Agency, adopted by Agreement
010 of 2019, amended by Agreement 004 of 2020, establishes that rural women are part of the
five population groups subject to differential attention.
In terms of agricultural extension, Law 1876 of 2017 created the National Agricultural Innovation
System (SNIA for its acronym in Spanish) and defines the public agricultural extension service as
a service with a differential approach that, among other aspects, will ensure comprehensive
assistance that includes the sustainable management of natural resources and the promotion of
practices for mitigating and adapting to climate change. In this context, the law establishes
24

=== PAGE 135 ===
affirmative and favorable measures for rural women, such as their prioritization as beneficiaries
of the subsidy for the public agricultural extension service fee, the promotion of the
development of organizations of female producers, and their participation in the SNIA's Superior
Council through a rural woman representative.
Another important norm regarding the welfare of rural women is Resolution 464 of 2017 on
public policy guidelines for Peasant, Family and Community Agriculture (ACFC for its acronym in
Spanish), which recognizes the fundamental role of rural women in the ACFC, which constitutes
75% of the country's Agricultural Units.
Moreover, the Bases of the National Development Plan (PND for its acronym in Spanish) 2018-
2022, throughout Chapter XIV presents the Pact for the Equity of Women, whose objective is
the creation of a National System of Women and the creation of the National Care System,
through the Intersectoral Commission of the Care System, recognizing the need for differential
policies for rural women. Furthermore, the PND 2018-2022 is a pioneer in the creation of a
budget tracer for the equity of women, which seeks that all public entities that receive resources
from the General Budget of the Nation have identified their investments and commitments to
close the gaps between men and women, both in investment and operation.
In line with the roadmap established in the PND 2018-2022, state strategies to address rural
women and their needs have been promoted and implemented by entities at the national public
level, such as the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, with the leadership of its
Directorate for Rural Women, as well as the National Land Agency (ANT for its acronym in
Spanish) and the Rural Development Agency (ADR for its acronym in Spanish), and, in some
cases, with the help of international cooperation and other civil society organizations. These
strategies have been developed under the 2013 National Public Policy on Gender Equity for
Women, whose six main axes are: 1) Peacebuilding and cultural transformation; 2) Economic
autonomy and access to assets; 3) Participation in power and decision-making scenarios; 4)
Sexual and reproductive health and rights; 5) Gender focus in education; and, finally, 6) A life
free of violence. Similarly, to close the socioeconomic gaps between the sexes, the Presidential
Advisory Office for Women's Equity also articulates with entities at the national and territorial
levels, promoting the creation of territorial links to promote gender-focused policy in the
territories. These institutional efforts have taken shape in the development of projects, the
signing of pacts, the expansion of coverage, and the injection of resources in the areas of
associativity, technology, access to land, technical assistance, among others.
Among the recently implemented programs, Colombia Siembra stands out, executed from 2015
to 2018, which proposed to increase the supply of agricultural products for the country and
promote agricultural exports. Although this policy was aimed at all actors in the production
chain, one of its objectives was to historically increase the support and participation of women
in the country's agricultural sector. Thus, Colombia Siembra favored nearly 506,264 women with
$60 billion invested in productive projects of restituted families, 35% of which are the
responsibility of women heads of household (Políticas Públicas Sector Agro Benefician a Más de
506 Mil Mujeres Rurales | Finagro, n.d.).
25

=== PAGE 136 ===
More recently, in October 2019, the Pact for the Equity of Rural Women was signed between
the Government, trade unions, and organizations of rural women, as well as unions and
companies in the agricultural production sector. This pact aims to shorten the poverty and social
exclusion gaps of women in the Colombian countryside, giving priority to low-income women,
and emphasizing the construction of specific measures aimed at accelerating equity between
men and women in the countryside. This pact proposed five commitments to be achieved in the
short and medium-term: 1. Economic empowerment for the elimination of gaps faced by
women in rural areas; 2. The participation of women in scenarios of power and decision-making,
3. Sexual and reproductive rights, 4. Rights of women to a life free of violence and, finally, 5. The
strengthening of gender institutions for rural women. Within the framework of this Pact, the
Rural Development Agency has financed projects for 7,299 rural women in 31 departments of
the country with the co-financing of Comprehensive Agricultural and Rural Development Plans,
in projects in the areas of cocoa, potatoes, milk, beans, bananas, machinery banks, and
agricultural inputs. At the same time, different organizations composed of rural women in
marketing and farmer’s market have been supported. Also, technical assistance interventions
reached 6,631 users; strategies for the promotion, participation, and strengthening of
associativity benefited 4,334 women in March 2020.
The generation of income to achieve economic independence has also been a relevant axis
within the implementation of strategies by the national government. The MADR and its affiliated
entities have offered programs that have established affirmative measures in the prioritization
of groups of women and associations as beneficiaries, to increase the participation of this
population group. Among the programs, it is worth mentioning "Construyendo Cpacidades
Empresariales Rurales (Building Rural Entrepreneurial Capacities) within the framework of El
Campo Emprende, which benefited 17,642 women during its three calls for applications,
representing 58.2% of the people served. Similarly, the "Generación de Ingresos y Desarrollo de
Capacidades Productivas” (Income Generation and Development of Productive Capacities)
project benefited 56,519 women (34.5% of the total) through strategies to ensure the
commercialization of agricultural products (Ministry of Agricultural and Rural Development,
2020). Likewise, the "Oportunidades Pacíficas Mujeres Rurales” (Peaceful Opportunities for
Rural Women) program was launched in 2020 to strengthen organizations of female producers
in the Colombian Pacific, strengthen their capacities, and provide opportunities to generate
empowerment in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic that affected the country. Aimed at
organizations made up of 50% or more rural women, it focuses on the production or marketing
of agricultural products for direct consumption in the departments of Cauca, Valle del Cauca,
Chocó, and Nariño. This program is supported by the Korea International Cooperation Agency
and the United Nations World Food Program to provide training, inputs, and technical assistance
to the women involved (Minagricultura Lanza Proyecto ‘Oportunidades Pacíficas Mujeres
Rurales’ Que Fortalecerá Organizaciones de Mujeres Productoras de La Región Del Pacífico
Colombiano, n.d.).
Among the financial instruments offered to improve the access of women to land and productive
inputs, Finagro offers, through financial intermediaries (such as Banco Agrario), agricultural
credit with special conditions, guarantees to back them, and coverage of up to 100% of the direct
costs of the project, to finance activities that are essential to the development of a productive
26

=== PAGE 137 ===
project, whether in the agricultural or fishing sector, as well as mining, rural tourism and
handicraft projects. Among other things, labor expenses, infrastructure construction, purchase
of machinery and equipment, inputs, and purchase of livestock may be financed. Among the
institution's financial instruments there are the Credit Line for Low-Income Rural Women and
the Special Credit Lines (LEC for its acronym in Spanish), which offer rate subsidies. Each year,
the National Agricultural Credit Commission defines the LECs for the respective year, among
which an additional interest rate subsidy of between 0.5% and 1.0% E.A. is usually granted to
rural women.
Concerning efforts to increase land tenure by rural women, the National Land Agency has
strategies for the adjudication of vacant land, formalization of rural land, formalization to
replace illicit crops, comprehensive land subsidies, among others. In 2019, ANT benefited more
than 5,600 women, 47% of the total beneficiaries of the programs. During this year, ANT
awarded 25,225 hectares to women, equivalent to 39% of the land formalized. Likewise, ANT
allocated 51% of the subsidies to rural women to gain access to land ownership and develop
productive projects (Agencia Nacional de Tierras Despliega Beneficios Para La Mujer Rural –
Agencia Nacional de Tierras, n.d.) .
Additionally, the Special Administrative Unit for the Management of Restitution of Land
Restitution (URT for its acronym in Spanish) is responsible for facilitating the restitution of land
to the owners or possessors of land or exploiters of vacant land who have been victims of
dispossession or forced abandonment of their land due to the armed conflict. The URT created
a program of special access to women to the restitution process, to guarantee women's right to
land during the restitution process. This intervention was implemented so that women could
"recognize themselves and be recognized by institutions and society as owners and workers of
the land". The results obtained so far show 52% of the women belonging to the process as
beneficiaries, with 35.5% of productive projects headed by women, and the training of 16,423
women victims, managing to reduce the gaps in access of women to land (La Restitución de
Tierras Empodera a Las Mujeres Victimas - Banco de Éxitos - Función Pública, n.d.).
4.3 Legal framework applicable to the CSICAP project
The following is a summary of the regulatory framework relevant to CSICAP project activities.
Table 0.1. Summary of the legal gender framework specific to the CSICAP project
Level Regulation Description
First World Conference Enacts the following principles of equality between men and women, in their
on Women (Mexico, significance and value as human beings, as well as equality in their rights,
1975). Decade Plan for opportunities, and responsibilities. Recognizes that the obstacles that stand in
the Equality of Women the way of equality of men and women must be removed.
la Recognizes the need to modernize the agricultural sector in a sustainable
n
o manner that generates opportunities for rural women.
a
it
Convention on the "To consecrate, if they have not already done so, in their national constitutions
n
r e Elimination of All and any other appropriate legislation the principle of the equality of men and
t
n Forms of women and to ensure by law or other appropriate means the practical
I
Discrimination against realization of that principle."
Women- CEDAW It also points out the importance of the role of rural women, so often
undervalued, encouraging the recognition that this is vital for the development
of the countryside.
27

--- Table 1 on Page 137 ---
 | Level |  |  |  | Regulation |  |  | Description | 
 | la
n
o
it
a
n
r
e
t
n
I |  |  | First World Conference
on Women (Mexico,
1975). Decade Plan for
the Equality of Women | First World Conference |  |  | Enacts the following principles of equality between men and women, in their | 
 |  |  |  |  | on Women (Mexico, |  |  | significance and value as human beings, as well as equality in their rights, | 
 |  |  |  |  | 1975). Decade Plan for |  |  | opportunities, and responsibilities. Recognizes that the obstacles that stand in | 
 |  |  |  |  | the Equality of Women |  |  | the way of equality of men and women must be removed. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Recognizes the need to modernize the agricultural sector in a sustainable | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | manner that generates opportunities for rural women. | 
 |  |  |  | Convention on the
Elimination of All
Forms of
Discrimination against
Women- CEDAW |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 138 ===
Towards the Year 2000 Reiterates the need for the unity, inseparability, and interdependence of the
Strategy for the objectives of the decade (equality and peace), about the advancement of
Advancement of women and their integration into economic, social, political, and cultural
Women – Nairobi 1985 development. It recognizes that the deprivation of traditional forms of
sustenance is one of the main consequences of environmental degradation and
particularly affects women.
1995 Beijing Platform "Combating constraints and obstacles to gender equity and advancing and
for Action empowering women worldwide".
Actions under the platform include analyzing the structural linkages between
gender, environment, and development in selected sectors such as agriculture,
industry, fisheries, forestry, environmental health, biodiversity, climate, water
resources, and sanitation;
1980 Copenhagen "To promote the maintenance of the three goals of equality, development, and
Conference: “Letter of peace, with special emphasis on the sub-theme - called employment, health,
the human rights of and education - as a significant component for development."
women”
Resolution 66/130 - Participation of rural women in public policy and participation of women in
Resolution 66/216 economic, political, and social development.
Resolution 64/140 y United Nations agreements for the improvement of the situation of women in
Resolution 62/136 rural areas.
Belem do Pará The full and free exercise of the civil, political, economic, social, and cultural
Convention rights of women and the protection of those rights consecrated in regional and
international human rights instruments are recognized. The States Parties
recognize that violence against women impedes and nullifies the exercise of
these rights. Ratified by Colombia through Law 248 of 1995.
The decade for women It is recognized that the social and economic value of unpaid domestic work of
CEPAL women, care as a public matter that is the responsibility of states, local
governments, organizations, businesses, and families, and the need to promote
the shared responsibility of women and men in the family sphere.
Sustainable Roadmap for sustainable progress that leaves no one behind, particularly
Development Goals through SDG 5. Gender equality and empowerment of girls and women.
Article 43 of the Whereby it is established that women and men have equal rights and
Political Constitution opportunities.
Law 51 of 1981 Whereby CEDAW is adopted and approved.
Law 823 of 2003 It establishes regulations on equal opportunities for women, guarantees their
rights, and incorporates gender equity actions at the national and territorial
levels.
Law 1232 of 2008 Amends Law 82 of 1993, defines and dictates other provisions related to female
(Amends Law 82 of head of household.
1993)
Law 1257 of 2008 Adoption of regulations that guarantee a life free of violence for all women,
both in the public and private spheres, and the exercise of the rights recognized
in the legal system.
Law 581 of 2000 "By which the adequate and effective participation of women in the decision-
making levels of the different branches and organs of public power is
la regulated".
o n Law 1413 of 2010 or Includes the care economy made up of unpaid household work in the National
c
it
Economy of Care Law Accounts System, to measure the contribution of women to the economic and
a
N social development of the country and as a fundamental tool for the definition
and implementation of public policies.
CONPES 161 of 2013 National Public Policy on Gender Equity, whose main objective is to contribute
to guarantee the full enjoyment of the rights of Colombian women by applying
the principles of equality and non-discrimination.
Law 1955 of 2019 Whereby the National Development Plan 2018-2022 is adopted. Which
includes the Pact for Women's Equity and the gender budget tracer.
Law 731 of 2002 or Its purpose is to improve the quality of life of rural women, giving priority to
Rural Women Law low-income women, and establish specific measures aimed at accelerating
equity between rural men and women.
Article 28 orders the participation of rural women in reforestation plans,
programs, and projects. At least 30% of the labor force must be rural women
living in the areas. They must be consulted together with the community to
which they belong.
28

--- Table 1 on Page 138 ---
 |  |  | Towards the Year 2000
Strategy for the
Advancement of
Women – Nairobi 1985 |  |  |  | Reiterates the need for the unity, inseparability, and interdependence of the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | objectives of the decade (equality and peace), about the advancement of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | women and their integration into economic, social, political, and cultural | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | development. It recognizes that the deprivation of traditional forms of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | sustenance is one of the main consequences of environmental degradation and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | particularly affects women. | 
 |  |  | 1995 Beijing Platform
for Action |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 1980 Copenhagen |  | "To promote the maintenance of the three goals of equality, development, and
peace, with special emphasis on the sub-theme - called employment, health,
and education - as a significant component for development." |  | 
 |  |  |  | Conference: “Letter of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | the human rights of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | women” |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Resolution 66/130 -
Resolution 66/216 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Resolution 64/140 y |  |  | United Nations agreements for the improvement of the situation of women in | 
 |  |  |  | Resolution 62/136 |  |  | rural areas. | 
 |  |  | Belem do Pará
Convention |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | The decade for women
CEPAL |  |  |  | It is recognized that the social and economic value of unpaid domestic work of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | women, care as a public matter that is the responsibility of states, local | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | governments, organizations, businesses, and families, and the need to promote | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | the shared responsibility of women and men in the family sphere. | 
 |  |  | Sustainable
Development Goals |  |  |  |  | 
 | la
n
o
it
c
a
N |  |  | Article 43 of the |  |  | Whereby it is established that women and men have equal rights and | 
 |  |  |  | Political Constitution |  |  | opportunities. | 
 |  |  | Law 51 of 1981 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Law 823 of 2003 |  |  |  | It establishes regulations on equal opportunities for women, guarantees their | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | rights, and incorporates gender equity actions at the national and territorial | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | levels. | 
 |  |  | Law 1232 of 2008
(Amends Law 82 of
1993) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Law 1257 of 2008 |  |  |  | Adoption of regulations that guarantee a life free of violence for all women, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | both in the public and private spheres, and the exercise of the rights recognized | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | in the legal system. | 
 |  |  | Law 581 of 2000 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Law 1413 of 2010 or
Economy of Care Law |  |  |  | Includes the care economy made up of unpaid household work in the National | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Accounts System, to measure the contribution of women to the economic and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | social development of the country and as a fundamental tool for the definition | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | and implementation of public policies. | 
 |  |  | CONPES 161 of 2013 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Law 1955 of 2019 |  |  |  | Whereby the National Development Plan 2018-2022 is adopted. Which | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | includes the Pact for Women's Equity and the gender budget tracer. | 
 |  |  | Law 731 of 2002 or
Rural Women Law |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 138 ---
Towards the Year 2000
Strategy for the
Advancement of
Women – Nairobi 1985

--- Table 3 on Page 138 ---
"To promote the maintenance of the three goals of equality, development, and
peace, with special emphasis on the sub-theme - called employment, health,
and education - as a significant component for development."

--- Table 4 on Page 138 ---
The decade for women
CEPAL

--- Table 5 on Page 138 ---
Law 1413 of 2010 or
Economy of Care Law

=== PAGE 139 ===
Decree 2365 of 2015 Creation of the Direction for Rural Women in the Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development.
Law 1900 of 2018 Whereby gender equity criteria are established in the awarding of vacant lands,
rural housing, productive projects, and other provisions (amending Law 160 of
1994).
Resolution 464 of 2017 Adopting the Strategic Public Policy Guidelines for Peasant, Family and
– Guidelines for Family, Community Agriculture. These recognize the fundamental role of rural women
Peasant and and the importance of the gender approach in the formulation of ACFC (for its
Community acronym in Spanish) policy.
Agriculture (Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural
Development)
Resolution 311 of 2019 Whereby the paragraph of Article 5 of Law 1900 of 2018 is regulated and
– marginality criteria for rural women are established.
(Ministry of Agriculture
and Rural
Development)
Agreement 058 of 2018 It regulates the administration and granting of rights of use to vacant land that
– National Land Agency can be awarded and grants additional points to vulnerable populations such as
rural women and mothers who carry out activities aimed at food production,
environmental protection, and the substitution of illicit crops.
Resolution 12096 of Modifies Article 45 of Resolution 740 of 2017 and creates a prioritization route
2019 – National Land for rural women through the recognition of the care economy as a productive
Agency activity of exploitation of the property, additional points for mothers who are
heads of household and those who are organized in women's associations.
Law 1876 of 2017 "Through which the National Agricultural Innovation System (SNIA for its
acronym in Spanish) is created and other provisions are issued...", through this
Law the SNIA is created, where it is urged to adopt alternatives that guarantee
the real participation of rural women and young people. The approaches of
Agricultural Extension in the provision of the service include the promotion of
the development of organizations of women. Also, a rural woman
representative is assigned a seat on the Superior Council of the SNIA.
Agreement 004 of 2020 It establishes that rural women, ethnic groups, young people, victims, and
– Rural Development people in the process of reincorporation are part of the five population groups
Agency subject to different attention of the Integral Rural Development Projects -
PIDAR. For this purpose, 50% of the organization must be made up of women.
4.4 Institutional capacities at the national and local levels
Compliance with the norms and implementation of the policies and programs indicated in the
previous sections is mainly the responsibility of the entities of the Agricultural, Fishing and Rural
Development Sector, which is made up of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
and its many affiliated and related entities, which participate in different stages of the
construction, implementation, and monitoring of public policy. The mainstreaming of the
gender perspective implies the constant articulation of different agencies in each of the entities.
Precisely, the responsibility for leading this articulation lies with the Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development through the Rural Women's Directorate – DMR (for its acronym in Spanish).
A technical directorate created in the Vice-Ministry of Rural Development in 2015 and its guiding
axis is the implementation of Law 731 of 2002 (Law of Rural Women) in the areas of competence
of the sector.
29

--- Table 1 on Page 139 ---
 | Decree 2365 of 2015 |  |  |  | Creation of the Direction for Rural Women in the Ministry of Agriculture and | 
 |  |  |  |  | Rural Development. | 
 | Law 1900 of 2018 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Resolution 464 of 2017 |  | Adopting the Strategic Public Policy Guidelines for Peasant, Family and
Community Agriculture. These recognize the fundamental role of rural women
and the importance of the gender approach in the formulation of ACFC (for its
acronym in Spanish) policy. |  | 
 |  | – Guidelines for Family, |  |  |  | 
 |  | Peasant and |  |  |  | 
 |  | Community |  |  |  | 
 |  | Agriculture (Ministry of |  |  |  | 
 |  | Agriculture and Rural |  |  |  | 
 |  | Development) |  |  |  | 
 | Resolution 311 of 2019
–
(Ministry of Agriculture
and Rural
Development) |  |  |  |  | 
 | Agreement 058 of 2018
– National Land Agency |  |  |  | It regulates the administration and granting of rights of use to vacant land that | 
 |  |  |  |  | can be awarded and grants additional points to vulnerable populations such as | 
 |  |  |  |  | rural women and mothers who carry out activities aimed at food production, | 
 |  |  |  |  | environmental protection, and the substitution of illicit crops. | 
 | Resolution 12096 of
2019 – National Land
Agency |  |  |  |  | 
 | Law 1876 of 2017 |  |  |  | "Through which the National Agricultural Innovation System (SNIA for its | 
 |  |  |  |  | acronym in Spanish) is created and other provisions are issued...", through this | 
 |  |  |  |  | Law the SNIA is created, where it is urged to adopt alternatives that guarantee | 
 |  |  |  |  | the real participation of rural women and young people. The approaches of | 
 |  |  |  |  | Agricultural Extension in the provision of the service include the promotion of | 
 |  |  |  |  | the development of organizations of women. Also, a rural woman | 
 |  |  |  |  | representative is assigned a seat on the Superior Council of the SNIA. | 
 | Agreement 004 of 2020
– Rural Development
Agency |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 139 ---
Adopting the Strategic Public Policy Guidelines for Peasant, Family and
Community Agriculture. These recognize the fundamental role of rural women
and the importance of the gender approach in the formulation of ACFC (for its
acronym in Spanish) policy.

--- Table 3 on Page 139 ---
Agreement 058 of 2018
– National Land Agency

=== PAGE 140 ===
The main function of the DMR is the coordination, design, and evaluation of policy plans and
projects aimed at influencing the social and economic well-being of rural women, as well as
promoting coordination with national and territorial entities for the implementation of such
plans and projects. At the national level, the main interlocutors of the DMR are the High
Counselor's Office for Gender Equity, the agencies of the National Planning Department related
to rural development and gender equity, and the entities attached to and linked to the Ministry.
At the territorial level, the main interlocutors are the territorial governments (departments and
municipalities) through the female secretaries of the women and rural development secretaries,
or whoever acts as the liaison for gender issues in the territory.
The articulated work between national entities allows, among other things, the follow-up of the
gender indicators of the sector in the National Development Plan and the Implementation
Framework Plan. The monitoring and follow-up of these indicators make it possible to provide
feedback within the sector on the actions taken in gender equity. Likewise, the articulation
between the entities allows the formulation of joint strategies for the productive inclusion of
rural women along the value chain of the agricultural and rural development sectors. This value
chain ranges from access, restitution, and formalization of land to marketing strategies and the
generation of added economic value.
In the area of access and formalization of land ownership, the National Land Agency (ANT for its
acronym in Spanish), through the gender team in the General Directorate, has managed to
incorporate affirmative measures in the access and formalization programs, in addition to
formulating a priority attention route for rural women. Although the gender group of the
General Directorate cannot be responsible for the implementation of the entire land policy for
rural women, it has ensured the mainstreaming of the gender approach within the agency
through guidelines and technical support to the different departments of the entity. For its part,
the Land Restitution Unit (URT for its acronym in Spanish) has a Social Directorate, which is
responsible for incorporating the gender approach into the land restitution policy. The Social
Directorate has a team of experts in gender and land restitution, who are under the
responsibility of formulating and designing methodologies that promote the participation of
rural women in the land restitution process.
The Rural Development Agency (ADR for its acronym in Spanish), responsible for implementing
agricultural policy and productive inclusion, has incorporated strategies for the participation of
rural women in the different services it offers. Within the ADR, the Participation and
Associativity Directorate of the Projects Vice Presidency is the unit that leads the gender issue;
however, there are gender liaisons in the national directorates and territorial offices under the
responsibility of the Productive Integration Vice Presidency, through which the agency
implements its services. All these liaisons coordinate internally and with the Directorate of Rural
Women, unions, territorial entities, and other entities to promote the participation of rural
women in agricultural production.
It should be recalled that the ANT and the ADR are the main executors of the Ministry of
Agriculture and agricultural policy of Rural Development, for which they have offices in the
territory. However, the ANT only has eight Territorial Management Units, and the ADR has
thirteen Territorial Technical Units, which reflects their weak territorial presence in the 32
30

=== PAGE 141 ===
departments of the country. In addition, the gender liaisons in these offices are usually in charge
of multiple issues and responsibilities, which limits the capacity of the agencies to address
gender issues in practice.
FINAGRO and the Agrario Bank do not have units exclusively dedicated to gender
mainstreaming, but multiple units are working to create affirmative measures to promote the
financial inclusion of rural women. In the case of FINAGRO, the presidential advisory team has
designated a person in charge of issues of rural women, who is responsible for coordinating
actions with the areas of FINAGRO and the different actors of the National Agricultural Credit
Commission. Agrario Bank also has people in charge of issues of rural women in the small
producer and microfinance areas. It is important to mention that Agrario Bank is the financial
institution with the largest territorial presence, covering 1,036 (94%) of the country's
municipalities through offices and banking correspondents.
Finally, the Rural Agricultural and Livestock Planning Unit – UPRA (for its acronym in Spanish),
the entity responsible for planning the agricultural and rural sector, is building the
Comprehensive Agricultural Risk Management System, an initiative to centralize information
that seeks to anticipate potential risks in the sector in different areas, one of which is the well-
being of producers. To this end, UPRA has a team of professionals with experience and expertise
in gender issues who are identifying gender risks in several prioritized production chains.
Finally, at the national level, the role of the Rural Development Directorate and the Gender Sub
directorate of the National Planning Department in providing technical support to the Ministry
and its affiliated and related entities is highlighted, especially for the development of plans and
policies that have an impact on the well-being of rural women and improve their productive
participation in the sector.
As mentioned above, the entities responsible for implementing the national policy in the
territory are the Secretariats of Women and the Secretariats of Agriculture, whose specific
functions rely on the institutional arrangement of each department and municipality. In the case
of the Secretariats of Women, their efforts are generally oriented towards the formulation and
direction of programs that have an impact on improving the welfare of women in different fields
of social, political, and economic life. In contrast, the Agricultural Secretariats are focused on
territorial productive development. There are some specific cases, such as that of the Secretariat
of Women of the Government of Cundinamarca, which has a unit specializing in issues of rural
women. In addition to Cundinamarca, the following departments where the CSICAP project will
be implemented also have Secretariats of Women: Antioquia, Arauca, Cauca, Córdoba, Huila,
Meta, Nariño, Norte de Santander, Sucre, Tolima and Valle del Cauca. In other words, 12 (55%)
of 22 departments could count on these secretariats as strategic allies for the implementation
of the CSICAP project.
It is important to point out the role of the Secretariats of Agriculture in the implementation of
income generation programs of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development such as
Support for Productive Alliances or El Campo Emprende, in which the Secretariats of Agriculture
are responsible for promoting the call for proposals at the territorial level and disseminating
affirmative measures in favor of rural women. In turn, it is the Secretariats of Agriculture that
31

=== PAGE 142 ===
coordinate with the regional offices of the National Land Agency and the Rural Development
Agency for the development of local activities such as business fairs, markets of farmers, and
business rounds.
32

=== PAGE 143 ===
5. Bibliographical References
Alliance Biodiversity CIAT. (27 of 01 of 2021). Biodiversityinternational.org Programa de
Investigación en Cambio Climático, Agricultura y Seguridad Alimentaria del CGIAR.
Obtained from Bananos y cambio climático: que va a pasar con una de las frutas
preferidas en el mundo?:
https://www.bioversityinternational.org/news/detail/bananos-y-cambio-climatico-
que-va-a-pasar-con-una-de-las-frutas-preferidas-en-el-mundo/
Barbosa, E. O. (2011). Tesis Evaluación del desarrollo del cultivo de papa bajo escenarios de
variabilidad climática interanual y cambio climático, en el sur oeste de la Sabana de
Bogotá. Bogotá: Universidad Nacional.
Beuchelt, T. D., & Badstue, L. (2013). Gender, Nutrition, and Climate-Smart Food Production:
Opportunities and Trade-offs. Food Security 5: , 709–21.
Bocanegra, H. (2019). Asobancaria Riesgos ambientales y sociales en la producción de panela.
Pilotos de innovación financiera del sector agropecuario. Bogotá.
Calderón, M. C. (2016). Tesis: Impactos de la variabilidad y el cambio climático sobre el cultivo
del banano (Musa spp) en tres países productores de América Latina. Cali: Univesidad
Autónoma de Occidente.
Cenicaña. (10 of 01 of 2021). Cenicana.org. Obtained from Clima ¿Que tanto afecta la
productividad?: https://www.cenicana.org/clima-que-tanto-afecta-la-productividad/
Cervantes, R. A., Angulo, G. V., Tavizón, E. F., & González, J. R. (2014). 61. Impactos potenciales
del cambio climático en la producción de maíz. Investigación y ciencia de la
Universidad Autónoma de Aguas Calientes, 48-53.
Conpes Social 150. (2012). Metodologías oficiales y arreglos institucionales para la medición de
la pobreza en Colombia. Bogotá D.C.: National Planning Department.
Cortéz, C. A. (2013). Uso del modelo aquacrop para estimar rendimientos para el cultivo de
papa en los departamentos de Cundinamarca y Boyacá. Colombia: FAO.
CTA; GSI-LAC; COSUDE; IDEAM. (2015). Evaluación multisectorial de la huella hídrica en
Colombia. Resultados por subzonas hidrográficas en el marco del Estudio Nacional del
Agua 2014. Medellín: Sello Editorial CTA.
CTA; GSI-LAC; COSUDE; IDEAM. (2015). Evaluación Multisectorial de la Huella Hídrica en
Colombia. Resultados por subzonas hidrográficas en el marco del Estudio Nacional del
Agua 2014. Medellín, Colombia: SELLO EDITORIAL CTA.
DANE. (2016). III Censo Nacional Agropecuario. Bogotá D.C.
DANE. (2019). Gran Encuesta Integrada de Hogares 2018. Bogotá D.C.
DANE. (2020a). Retroproyecciones y proyecciones de población a nivel nacional, departamental
y municipal. Bogotá D.C.
DANE. (2020b). Censo Nacional de Población y Vivienda 2018. Bogotá D.C.
33

=== PAGE 144 ===
DANE. (2020c). Encuesta Nacional de Calidad de Vida 2019. Bogotá D.C.
DANE. (2020d). Encuesta Nacional Agropecuaria 2019 - II Semestre. Bogotá D.C.
Elbehri, A. G. (2015). Cambio climático y sostenibilidad del banano en el Ecuador: Evaluación de
impacto y directrices de política. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
F. Castro-Llanos, G. H.-V. (2019). Climate change favors rice production at higher elevations in
Colombia. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change. 24, 1401–1430.
FAO. (27 de 01 de 2021). FAO. . Obtained from Diversidad del ganado y cambio climático:
http://www.fao.org/3/i0112s/i0112s16.pdf
FAO y PNUD. (2020). Análisis de vulnerabilidad y riesgo por cambio climático en el sector
agropecuario en Colombia. Bogotá: Programa de integración de la agricultura en los
Planes Nacionales de Adaptación PNA-Ag.
FONADE e IDEAM. (2013). Efectos del cambio climático en la producción y rendimiento de
cultivos por sectores. Evaluación del riesgo agroclimático por sectores. Bogotá.
Guerra, A., & Hernández, A. (27 de 01 de 2021). Centro Guatemalteco de Investigación y
Capacitación de la Caña. . Obtained from El cambio climático y el cultivo de la caña de
azúcar: https://icc.org.gt/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/cultivo-de-ca%C3%B1a-de-
azucar-en-guatemala-492-525.pdf
IAvHumboldt. (2012). Actualización del Atlas de Páramos de Colombia a escala 1:100.000.
Bogotá D.C.
IAvHumboldt. (2012). Geoservicios de la delimitación de páramos a escala y humedales, en
convenio realizado con el Fondo Adaptación (shapefile). Bogotá.
IAvHumboldt. (2014). Bosque Seco Tropical, escala 1:100.000 (shapefile). Bogotá.
IAvHumboldt. (2014). El bosque seco tropical en Colombia. Escala 1:100.000. Bogotá D.C.
IAvHumboldt. (2015). Criiterios para la delimitación de humedales en Colombia. Colombia
anfibia un país de humedales (Vol 1). Bogotá D.C.
IAvHumboldt. (2015). Mapa Identificación de humedales de Colombia, escala 1:100.000
(shapefile). Bogotá.
IDEAM. (2010). Mapa de flujos torrenciales a escala 1:500.000.
IDEAM. (2019). Colombia. Superficie deforestada (ha). Reporte por Municipio. Periodo 2014-
2018. Bogotá D.C.: Ecosystems and Environmental Information Subdirectorate. Forest
and Carbon Monitoring System.
IDEAM. (2019). Estudio Nacional del Agua 2018. Bogotá: IDEAM.
IDEAM. (2020). Resultados de monitoreo de deforestación 2019. Bogotá.
IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP & CANCILLERÍA. (2016). Inventario nacional y departamental de
Gases Efecto Invernadero - Colombia. Tercera Comunicación Nacional de Cambio
Climático. Bogotá D.C.: IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, FMAM.
34

=== PAGE 145 ===
IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA. (2015). Primer Informe Bienal de Actualización de
Colombia ante la CMNUCC. Bogotá D.C.
IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA. (2017). Análisis de vulnerabilidad y riesgo por
cambio climático en Colombia. Bofotá D.C.: Third National Communication on Climate
Change.
IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA. (2017). Análisis de vulnerabilidad y riesgo por
cambio climático en Colombia. Tercera Comunicación Nacional de Cambio Climático.
Bogotá.
IGAC. (2012). Estudio de los conflictos de uso del territorio colombiano. Escala 1.100.000.
Bogotá D.C.
IGAC. (2012). Estudio de los conflictos de uso del territorio colombiano. Escala 1:100.000.
Bogotá D.C.
IGAC-IDEAM. (2012; 2016). Mapa de inundaciones a escala 1:100.000.
Isaza, C., & Cornejo, J. (2014). Cambio climático y su impacto en el cultivo del café. Solidaridad
Norad.
MADS & IDEAM . (2019). Resultados de monitoreo de deforestación 2019. Bogotá D.C.
Meadu, V. (26 de 01 de 2021). Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food
Security. Obtained from ¿El maíz esta perdiendo la carrera contra el cambio climático?:
https://ccafs.cgiar.org/es/news/el-maiz-esta-perdiendo-la-carrera-contra-el-cambio-
climatico
MINAGRICULTURA. (1 de 11 de 2020). Clima y Sector Agropecuario Colombiano. Obtained from
http://www.aclimatecolombia.org/huella-hidrica/
Ministerio de Ambiente y Desarrollo Sostenible. (11 de 10 de 2020). Acuerdos Cero
Deforestación. Obtained from https://www.minambiente.gov.co/index.php/acuerdos-
cero-deforestacion
Ministerio de Ambiente y Desarrollo Sostenible. (28 de 01 de 2021). Ministerio de Ambiente y
Desarrollo Sostenible. Reservas forestales de Ley segunda. Obtained from
https://www.minambiente.gov.co/images/BosquesBiodiversidadyServiciosEcosistemic
os/pdf/reservas_forestales/reservas_forestales_ley_2da_1959.pdf
Parques Nacionales Naturales de Colombia. (2020). Registro Único de Áreas Protegidas. Bogotá
D.C.
Parques Nacionales Naturales de Colombia. (2020). Registro Único de Áreas Protegidas. Bogotá
D.C.
Parques Nacionales Naturales de Colombia. (31 de 01 de 2021). Parques Nacionales Naturales
de Colombia. Sistema Nacional de áreas protegidas SINAP. Obtained from
https://www.parquesnacionales.gov.co/portal/es/sistema-nacional-de-areas-
protegidas-sinap/
SGC. (2015). Mapa Nacional de susceptibilidad a movimientos en masa a escala 1:100.000
35

=== PAGE 146 ===
1.
2.
3.
36

=== PAGE 147 ===
Social, Gender and Environmental study of the Project CSICAP* in Colombia
Gender Action Plan Date: 03/31/2021
presented to: Rev. 19/11/2021
The Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT Deliverable No. 4
GENDER ACTION PLAN
CSICAP Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and
sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in Colombia
(CSICAP)*
Annex 8 – Part B
Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal
* The initial tittle of the project was changed from Low-Emission and Climate Resilient
Agriculture in Colombia (LECRA) to Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation
and sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in Colombia (CSICAP). All
the references in this document have been changed to CSICAP. If there is any reference to
LECRA should be understand as CSICAP

--- Table 1 on Page 147 ---
 | Social, Gender and Environmental study of the Project CSICAP* in Colombia | 
 | Gender Action Plan
presented to:
The Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT | Date: 03/31/2021
Rev. 19/11/2021
 |  | Deliverable No. 4

=== PAGE 148 ===
Overall Objective: Help to close the gender gap in prioritized agricultural value chains and promote equitable access to the strategies, plans, programs, services, goods, and activities of the Project
Budget
M&E Responsible
Activities Indicators Baseline Target estimates
Timing entities
(USD)
Specific Objective related to CSICAP´s first component: Reduce barriers to access to agroclimatic information faced by rural women
Gender outcomes related to CSICAP´s first component
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
70.5% 71.1%
decisions, with ICT connectivity and
access
Producer
Percentage of agricultural holdings
Men and women producers have equal access to information on During and Associations,
(farms) with female producers making
seasonal climate forecasts in agriculture, as well as recommendations 24.9% 28.0% after CIAT, Gender Team, $275,014
decisions, that utilize ICT to access
associated to the crops production cycle operation Ministry of
climate forecast information
Agriculture
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
1.4% 3.6%
decisions, that introduced changes
related to climate monitoring
Gender outputs related to CSICAP´s first component
Comprehensive information
dissemination strategy on agricultural
practices for agroclimatic risk
management, considering ethnic and 0 1
gender differences, using different
communication channels, designed and
implemented
Number of agricultural holdings (farms)
with female producers making
0 13,000
decisions, that received technical
1.1 Comprehensive information dissemination strategy designed and assistance on agroclimatic risks Producer
Pre and Associations,
implemented on agricultural practices for agroclimatic risk management, Percentage of agricultural holdings
during CIAT, Gender Team, $133,778
considering ethnic and gender differences, using different communication (farms) with female producers making
30.1% 38.9% operation Ministry of
channels decisions, that received technical
Agriculture
assistance on agroclimatic risks
Number of agricultural holdings (farms)
that implemented best agricultural 3,171 16,171
adaptation practices to climate change
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, that implemented best 0.52% 2.7%
agricultural adaptation practices to
climate change
1.2. Strategy designed and implemented on women producers and rural Strategy on women producers and rural Producer
Pre and
women´s empowerment and their participation in decision-making women´s empowerment and their Associations
0 1 during $141,236
positions. This strategy can be developed with the support of the Rural participation in decision-making CIAT, Gender Team,
operation
Women's Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and positions, designed and implemented Ministry of

--- Table 1 on Page 148 ---
Overall Objective: Help to close the gender gap in prioritized agricultural value chains and promote equitable access to the strategies, plans, programs, services, goods, and activities of the Project |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities | Indicators | Baseline | Target | M&E
Timing | Responsible
entities | Budget
estimates
(USD)
Specific Objective related to CSICAP´s first component: Reduce barriers to access to agroclimatic information faced by rural women |  |  |  |  |  | 
Gender outcomes related to CSICAP´s first component |  |  |  |  |  | 
Men and women producers have equal access to information on
seasonal climate forecasts in agriculture, as well as recommendations
associated to the crops production cycle | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, with ICT connectivity and
access | 70.5% | 71.1% | During and
after
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $275,014
 | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, that utilize ICT to access
climate forecast information | 24.9% | 28.0% |  |  | 
 | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, that introduced changes
related to climate monitoring | 1.4% | 3.6% |  |  | 
Gender outputs related to CSICAP´s first component |  |  |  |  |  | 
1.1 Comprehensive information dissemination strategy designed and
implemented on agricultural practices for agroclimatic risk management,
considering ethnic and gender differences, using different communication
channels | Comprehensive information
dissemination strategy on agricultural
practices for agroclimatic risk
management, considering ethnic and
gender differences, using different
communication channels, designed and
implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $133,778
 | Number of agricultural holdings (farms)
with female producers making
decisions, that received technical
assistance on agroclimatic risks | 0 | 13,000 |  |  | 
 | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, that received technical
assistance on agroclimatic risks | 30.1% | 38.9% |  |  | 
 | Number of agricultural holdings (farms)
that implemented best agricultural
adaptation practices to climate change | 3,171 | 16,171 |  |  | 
 | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, that implemented best
agricultural adaptation practices to
climate change | 0.52% | 2.7% |  |  | 
1.2. Strategy designed and implemented on women producers and rural
women´s empowerment and their participation in decision-making
positions. This strategy can be developed with the support of the Rural
Women's Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and | Strategy on women producers and rural
women´s empowerment and their
participation in decision-making
positions, designed and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of | $141,236

--- Table 2 on Page 148 ---
Budget
estimates
(USD)

--- Table 3 on Page 148 ---
M&E
Timing

--- Table 4 on Page 148 ---
Responsible
entities

=== PAGE 149 ===
the Presidential Council for Women's Equity, which already have training Number of women trained in women Agriculture (Rural
programs. producers and rural women Women
0 12,750
empowerment and their participation Directorate)
in decision-making positions
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making 33.3% 36.2%
decisions
Gender activities related to CSICAP´s first component
Producer
1.1.1 Design and implement plan for disseminating information on Plan for disseminating information on
Associations
agroclimatic risk management that includes a language analysis agroclimatic risk management that
CIAT, Gender Team,
differentiated by region, considering ethnic elements -if necessary-, includes a language analysis
Ministry of
transmission schedules (taking into account variables of the care economy differentiated by region, considering Pre and
Agriculture (Rural
and sexual division of labor). The analysis shall present the scope of the ethnic elements -if necessary-, 0 1 during $0
Women
plan in terms of number of people disaggregated by gender, age, ethnicity. transmission schedules (taking into operation
Directorate,
These plans will be supported by consultations with women and women's account variables of the care economy
Agricultural
organizations contacted with the support of the Ministry of Agriculture and sexual division of labor, since the
Innovation
and Rural Development. call), designed and implemented
Directorate)
1.1.2 Within the plan for disseminating information on agroclimatic risk
management, define and implement actions through different
Dissemination actions on agroclimatic Pre and CIAT, Gender Team,
communication channels, with the support of the local platforms of Vive
risk management defined and 0 1 during Producer $0
Digital (National Plan to develop a digital ecosystem in the country) and
implemented operation Associations
other platforms of information dissemination (community radio stations,
booklets with audio instructions).
1.1.3. Elaborate in a participatory way a document that articulates into
Document that articulates into project Producer
project activities the local knowledge and practices of men and women
activities the local knowledge and Associations
related to the management of agroclimatic risk, both in the crop and in During
practices of men and women related to 0 9 CIAT, Gender Team, $36,000
other aspects, such as the home, the agroecological calendar, irrigation operation
the management of agroclimatic risk Ministry of
strategies and practices and tools to manage drought. This information will
elaborated Agriculture
also be disseminated within action 1.1.1 of component 1.
Actions to train men and women
Pre and Producer
1.1.4. Design and implement actions to train men and women producers in producers in Information Literacy with
0 1 during Associations $35,903
Information Literacy with an ethnic, age and gender focus an ethnic, age and gender focus
operation CIAT, Gender Team
designed and implemented
1.1.5 Design and implement a plan to cofinance electronic communication
devices (smartphones) for (direct and indirect) women beneficiaries of the Plan to cofinance electronic
program. communication devices (smartphones) Pre and Producer
Women have lower levels of access to ICT, not only due to knowledge for (direct and indirect) women 0 1 during Associations, $61,875
gaps, but also to access to resources. The co-financing plan includes an beneficiaries of the program, designed operation CIAT, Gender Team
electronic device financing strategy for women to ensure access to and implemented
program information.
3

--- Table 1 on Page 149 ---
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions | 33.3% | 36.2%

--- Table 2 on Page 149 ---
Gender activities related to CSICAP´s first component |  |  |  |  |  | 
1.1.1 Design and implement plan for disseminating information on
agroclimatic risk management that includes a language analysis
differentiated by region, considering ethnic elements -if necessary-,
transmission schedules (taking into account variables of the care economy
and sexual division of labor). The analysis shall present the scope of the
plan in terms of number of people disaggregated by gender, age, ethnicity.
These plans will be supported by consultations with women and women's
organizations contacted with the support of the Ministry of Agriculture
and Rural Development. | Plan for disseminating information on
agroclimatic risk management that
includes a language analysis
differentiated by region, considering
ethnic elements -if necessary-,
transmission schedules (taking into
account variables of the care economy
and sexual division of labor, since the
call), designed and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture (Rural
Women
Directorate,
Agricultural
Innovation
Directorate) | $0
1.1.2 Within the plan for disseminating information on agroclimatic risk
management, define and implement actions through different
communication channels, with the support of the local platforms of Vive
Digital (National Plan to develop a digital ecosystem in the country) and
other platforms of information dissemination (community radio stations,
booklets with audio instructions). | Dissemination actions on agroclimatic
risk management defined and
implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | CIAT, Gender Team,
Producer
Associations | $0
1.1.3. Elaborate in a participatory way a document that articulates into
project activities the local knowledge and practices of men and women
related to the management of agroclimatic risk, both in the crop and in
other aspects, such as the home, the agroecological calendar, irrigation
strategies and practices and tools to manage drought. This information will
also be disseminated within action 1.1.1 of component 1. | Document that articulates into project
activities the local knowledge and
practices of men and women related to
the management of agroclimatic risk
elaborated | 0 | 9 | During
operation | Producer
Associations
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $36,000
1.1.4. Design and implement actions to train men and women producers in
Information Literacy with an ethnic, age and gender focus | Actions to train men and women
producers in Information Literacy with
an ethnic, age and gender focus
designed and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations
CIAT, Gender Team | $35,903
1.1.5 Design and implement a plan to cofinance electronic communication
devices (smartphones) for (direct and indirect) women beneficiaries of the
program.
Women have lower levels of access to ICT, not only due to knowledge
gaps, but also to access to resources. The co-financing plan includes an
electronic device financing strategy for women to ensure access to
program information. | Plan to cofinance electronic
communication devices (smartphones)
for (direct and indirect) women
beneficiaries of the program, designed
and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team | $61,875

--- Table 3 on Page 149 ---
1.1.5 Design and implement a plan to cofinance electronic communication
devices (smartphones) for (direct and indirect) women beneficiaries of the
program.
Women have lower levels of access to ICT, not only due to knowledge
gaps, but also to access to resources. The co-financing plan includes an
electronic device financing strategy for women to ensure access to
program information.

=== PAGE 150 ===
1.2.1 Design and implement a training and socialization plan on women's
empowerment issues. The plan addresses at least the following topics:
- Leadership, gender, and inequality
- Gender-based violence
- Local, regional, and national decision-making bodies and positions Training and socialization plan on Pre and Producer
- Assertive communication women's empowerment issues 0 1 during Associations, $133,681
- Associativity designed and implemented operation CIAT, Gender Team
- Process of formalizing organizations, associations, or businesses
Special emphasis will be placed on the participation of women in instances
such as the Agroclimatic Technical Tables
(Women-only activities)
1.2.2. In addition, design and implement a plan to promote the
participation of women in local and regional decision-making bodies of the
agricultural sector, that liaise with local and regional authorities (mayor’s
offices, governorates). The plan includes activities to disseminate
Producer
information on calls for applications to decision-making positions, work
Associations,
sessions with local authorities. Plan to promote the participation of
Pre and CIAT, Gender Team,
Special emphasis will be placed on the participation of women in instances women in local and regional decision-
0 1 during Ministry of $3,333
such as the Agroclimatic Technical Tables. making bodies of the agricultural
operation Agriculture (Rural
(Women-only activities) sector, designed and implemented
Women
It will be linked to the Rural Women Directorate of the Ministry of
Directorate)
Agriculture and Rural Development so that through its Rural Women
Information System (FOMUR) the registration of participating women is
promoted and in this way, there is better communication about the plans,
p rograms, and projects at the national level.
1.2.3 Include and implement a module within the training plan and
participation plan for young rural women that includes the following
Producer
elements:
Associations,
- Dissemination of information on decision-making bodies or positions
Training and participation module for Pre and CIAT, Gender Team,
exclusive for the rural youth (including, among others, the Municipal Youth
young rural women, included and 0 1 during Ministry of $4,222
Councils)
implemented operation Agriculture (Rural
- Training on the Statute of Youth Participation
Women
- Dissemination and training on institutional programs for young people.
Directorate)
This, with the support of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development and its consolidated offer for young people.
Specific Objective related to CSICAP´s second component: Strengthen the capacities of rural women for sustainable, climate-resilient agriculture that guarantees food security for them and their households
Gender outcomes related to CSICAP´s second component
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, that adopted good 1.0% 1.4%
agricultural practices due to the Producer
Men and women producers have equitable access to information to take
extension service During and Associations,
advantage of and implement technologies and practices for the adoption
Percentage of agricultural holdings after CIAT, Gender Team, $460,333
of sustainable production systems that promote resilience to climate
(farms) with female producers making operation Ministry of
variability, efficient use of water and low-carbon agriculture
decisions, that improved the Agriculture
0.2% 0.3%
management of ecosystem services
and biodiversity conservation due to
the extension service
4

--- Table 1 on Page 150 ---
 | 1.2.1 Design and implement a training and socialization plan on women's |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | empowerment issues. The plan addresses at least the following topics: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Leadership, gender, and inequality |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Gender-based violence |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Local, regional, and national decision-making bodies and positions |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Assertive communication |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Associativity |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Process of formalizing organizations, associations, or businesses |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Special emphasis will be placed on the participation of women in instances |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | such as the Agroclimatic Technical Tables |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (Women-only activities) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
1.2.2. In addition, design and implement a plan to promote the
participation of women in local and regional decision-making bodies of the
agricultural sector, that liaise with local and regional authorities (mayor’s
offices, governorates). The plan includes activities to disseminate
information on calls for applications to decision-making positions, work
sessions with local authorities.
Special emphasis will be placed on the participation of women in instances
such as the Agroclimatic Technical Tables.
(Women-only activities)
It will be linked to the Rural Women Directorate of the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development so that through its Rural Women
Information System (FOMUR) the registration of participating women is
promoted and in this way, there is better communication about the plans,
p rograms, and projects at the national level. |  |  | Plan to promote the participation of
women in local and regional decision-
making bodies of the agricultural
sector, designed and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture (Rural
Women
Directorate) | $3,333
1.2.3 Include and implement a module within the training plan and
participation plan for young rural women that includes the following
elements:
- Dissemination of information on decision-making bodies or positions
exclusive for the rural youth (including, among others, the Municipal Youth
Councils)
- Training on the Statute of Youth Participation
- Dissemination and training on institutional programs for young people.
This, with the support of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development and its consolidated offer for young people. |  |  | Training and participation module for
young rural women, included and
implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture (Rural
Women
Directorate) | $4,222
Specific Objective related to CSICAP´s second component: Strengthen the capacities of rural women for sustainable, climate-resilient agriculture that guarantees food security for them and their households |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Gender outcomes related to CSICAP´s second component |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Men and women producers have equitable access to information to take
advantage of and implement technologies and practices for the adoption
of sustainable production systems that promote resilience to climate
variability, efficient use of water and low-carbon agriculture |  |  | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, that adopted good
agricultural practices due to the
extension service | 1.0% | 1.4% | During and
after
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $460,333
 |  |  | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, that improved the
management of ecosystem services
and biodiversity conservation due to
the extension service | 0.2% | 0.3% |  |  | 

=== PAGE 151 ===
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, that introduced changes or 0.5% 0.6%
improvement in the selection of seeds
or genetic material
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms), with female producers making
59.4% 60.6%
decisions, that implemented soil
management practices
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
62.6% 62.7%
decisions, that implemented pest
control practices
Gender outputs related to CSICAP´s second component
Strategy for the productive inclusion of
(direct and indirect) women
0 1 Producer
beneficiaries designed and
2.1. Strategy designed and implemented for the productive inclusion of Pre and Associations,
implemented
(direct and indirect) women beneficiaries based on new opportunities of during CIAT, Gender Team, $460,333
Number of women receiving
sustainable production practices throughout the value chain links. 0 2,310 operation Ministry of
agricultural extension service
Agriculture
Percentage of female-headed rural
66.2% 67.7%
households that are not monetary poor
Gender activities related to CSICAP´s second component
2.1.1 Engage women beneficiaries as leaders in the process of
implementing CSICAP´s plans and activities for the conservation, Women-led plans for the conservation,
Pre and Producer
preservation and restoration of strategic areas and ecosystems. preservation and restoration of
0 1 during Associations, $0
The banana sector has expressed interest in signing agreements on the strategic areas and ecosystems,
operation CIAT, Gender Team
conservation of natural resources. Similarly, the sugar cane sector will designed and implemented
support the conservation of hydrographic basins.
2.1.2 Design and implement a plan for the recovery and/or promotion of
Producer
quality native seeds and species with commercial gains, managed by rural Women-led plan for the recovery
Pre and Associations,
women (direct and indirect beneficiaries). This plan will be linked to the and/or promotion of quality native
0 1 during CIAT, Gender Team, $90,611
project´s activities developing climate-resilient varieties, especially for the seeds and species with commercial
operation Ministry of
potato, corn, rice and sugar cane crops, as well as the National Seed Plan gains, designed and implemented
Agriculture
led by Agrosavia.
5

--- Table 1 on Page 151 ---
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms), with female producers making
decisions, that implemented soil
management practices | 59.4% | 60.6%
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, that implemented pest
control practices | 62.6% | 62.7%

--- Table 2 on Page 151 ---
Gender outputs related to CSICAP´s second component |  |  |  |  |  | 
2.1. Strategy designed and implemented for the productive inclusion of
(direct and indirect) women beneficiaries based on new opportunities of
sustainable production practices throughout the value chain links. | Strategy for the productive inclusion of
(direct and indirect) women
beneficiaries designed and
implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $460,333
 | Number of women receiving
agricultural extension service | 0 | 2,310 |  |  | 
 | Percentage of female-headed rural
households that are not monetary poor | 66.2% | 67.7% |  |  | 
Gender activities related to CSICAP´s second component |  |  |  |  |  | 
2.1.1 Engage women beneficiaries as leaders in the process of
implementing CSICAP´s plans and activities for the conservation,
preservation and restoration of strategic areas and ecosystems.
The banana sector has expressed interest in signing agreements on the
conservation of natural resources. Similarly, the sugar cane sector will
support the conservation of hydrographic basins. | Women-led plans for the conservation,
preservation and restoration of
strategic areas and ecosystems,
designed and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team | $0
2.1.2 Design and implement a plan for the recovery and/or promotion of
quality native seeds and species with commercial gains, managed by rural
women (direct and indirect beneficiaries). This plan will be linked to the
project´s activities developing climate-resilient varieties, especially for the
potato, corn, rice and sugar cane crops, as well as the National Seed Plan
led by Agrosavia. | Women-led plan for the recovery
and/or promotion of quality native
seeds and species with commercial
gains, designed and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $90,611

--- Table 3 on Page 151 ---
2.1.1 Engage women beneficiaries as leaders in the process of
implementing CSICAP´s plans and activities for the conservation,
preservation and restoration of strategic areas and ecosystems.
The banana sector has expressed interest in signing agreements on the
conservation of natural resources. Similarly, the sugar cane sector will
support the conservation of hydrographic basins.

=== PAGE 152 ===
2.1.3. Design and implement a training and support plan for the
production and commercialization of organic fertilizers and bioproducts
for the management of pests and diseases, led by women farmers´ groups
and/or organizations (direct and indirect beneficiaries of the project).
Training and support plan for the
The training module, to be carried out with all the crops/chains involved in
production and commercialization of Producer
the project, includes at least the following topics:
organic fertilizers and bioproducts for Pre and Associations,
- Agricultural production, marketing and distribution
the management of pests and diseases, 0 1 during CIAT, Gender Team, $225,000
- Associativity (It is articulated with action 1.2.1 of component 1 and with
led by women farmers´ groups and/or operation Ministry of
Action 3.2.2 of component 3 of this action plan).
organizations, designed and Agriculture
- Phytosanitary risks
implemented
- Consequences of the use of agrochemicals.
- Design of business plans
- Financial literacy
Additionally, co-financing of the projects will be sought.
Producer
Training and dissemination module for
2.1.4. Design and implement a training and dissemination module for Pre and Associations,
young rural women on primary
young rural women on primary processing, management, marketing, 0 1 during CIAT, Gender Team, $47,500
processing, management, marketing,
among other topics. operation Ministry of
designed and implemented
Agriculture
2.1.5. Design and implement a training plan exclusively for women on
issues of climate resilient agriculture that focuses on the tasks performed
Training plan exclusively for women on
by women within each crop/chain, such as: seed selection, diversification
issues of climate resilient agriculture Pre and CIAT, Gender Team,
of crops, subsistence farming, pre and post-harvest.
that focuses on the tasks performed by 0 1 during Producer $97,222
Given that women in the banana, potato and panela cane sectors are
women within each crop/chain, operation Associations
especially excluded from productive activities, this plan will be specially
designed and implemented
formulated for them (direct and indirect women beneficiaries).
(Women-only training plan).
Specific Objective related to CSICAP´s third component: Reduce structural barriers that hinder the entry and full participation of rural women in agricultural value chains
Gender outcomes related to CSICAP´s third component
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making 33.30% 36.9%
decisions
Percentage of female-headed rural
29.5% 34.8%
households
Average time spent by rural women in Producer
7:52 7:20
unpaid care work Associations,
The agricultural innovation processes respond to the ethnic, regional, age During and
Rural female employment rate 37.5% 38.4% CIAT (Gender
and gender characteristics of the producers engaged in the project, in after $845,967
Percentage of agricultural holdings Team),
order to guarantee an equal participation. operation
(farms) with female producers making Ministry of
17.9% 18.0%
decisions, with access to credit or Agriculture
funding
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
20.7% 22.5%
decisions, participating in farmers´
groups or organizations
6

--- Table 1 on Page 152 ---
 | 2.1.3. Design and implement a training and support plan for the |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | production and commercialization of organic fertilizers and bioproducts |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | for the management of pests and diseases, led by women farmers´ groups |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and/or organizations (direct and indirect beneficiaries of the project). |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | The training module, to be carried out with all the crops/chains involved in |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the project, includes at least the following topics: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Agricultural production, marketing and distribution |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Associativity (It is articulated with action 1.2.1 of component 1 and with |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Action 3.2.2 of component 3 of this action plan). |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Phytosanitary risks |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Consequences of the use of agrochemicals. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Design of business plans |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Financial literacy |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Additionally, co-financing of the projects will be sought. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
2.1.4. Design and implement a training and dissemination module for
young rural women on primary processing, management, marketing,
among other topics. |  |  | Training and dissemination module for
young rural women on primary
processing, management, marketing,
designed and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $47,500
2.1.5. Design and implement a training plan exclusively for women on
issues of climate resilient agriculture that focuses on the tasks performed
by women within each crop/chain, such as: seed selection, diversification
of crops, subsistence farming, pre and post-harvest.
Given that women in the banana, potato and panela cane sectors are
especially excluded from productive activities, this plan will be specially
formulated for them (direct and indirect women beneficiaries).
(Women-only training plan). |  |  | Training plan exclusively for women on
issues of climate resilient agriculture
that focuses on the tasks performed by
women within each crop/chain,
designed and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | CIAT, Gender Team,
Producer
Associations | $97,222
Specific Objective related to CSICAP´s third component: Reduce structural barriers that hinder the entry and full participation of rural women in agricultural value chains |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Gender outcomes related to CSICAP´s third component |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The agricultural innovation processes respond to the ethnic, regional, age
and gender characteristics of the producers engaged in the project, in
order to guarantee an equal participation. |  |  | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions | 33.30% | 36.9% | During and
after
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT (Gender
Team),
Ministry of
Agriculture | $845,967
 |  |  | Percentage of female-headed rural
households | 29.5% | 34.8% |  |  | 
 |  |  | Average time spent by rural women in
unpaid care work | 7:52 | 7:20 |  |  | 
 |  |  | Rural female employment rate | 37.5% | 38.4% |  |  | 
 |  |  | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, with access to credit or
funding | 17.9% | 18.0% |  |  | 
 |  |  | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, participating in farmers´
groups or organizations | 20.7% | 22.5% |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 152 ---
2.1.4. Design and implement a training and dissemination module for
young rural women on primary processing, management, marketing,
among other topics.

--- Table 3 on Page 152 ---
2.1.5. Design and implement a training plan exclusively for women on
issues of climate resilient agriculture that focuses on the tasks performed
by women within each crop/chain, such as: seed selection, diversification
of crops, subsistence farming, pre and post-harvest.
Given that women in the banana, potato and panela cane sectors are
especially excluded from productive activities, this plan will be specially
formulated for them (direct and indirect women beneficiaries).
(Women-only training plan).

=== PAGE 153 ===
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
30.10% 50.4%
decisions, with access to agricultural
extension service
FNC: 0%;
Fedepanela: 7%;
Fedearroz: 5%;
Percentage of women on the Board of Fedepapa: 5%;
30%
Directors of the Producer Associations Fenalce: 6%;
Fedegan: 9%;
Asbama:11%;
Asocaña: 0%
Gender outputs related to CSICAP´s third component
Strategy for training in gender equality
and gender mainstreaming within the
technical assistance process developed 0 1
by the project, designed and
implemented
3.1. Strategy designed and implemented for training in gender equality Number of men and women producers Producer
and gender mainstreaming within the technical assistance process trained in gender equality and gender 0 16,000 Pre and Associations,
developed by the project. This strategy can be developed with the support mainstreaming during CIAT, Gender Team, $281,133
of the Directorate for Rural Women of the Ministry of Agriculture and Number of extension workers trained operation Ministry of
Rural Development and the Presidential Council for Equity for Women. in gender equality, gender Agriculture
0 200
mainstreaming and gender-based
violence.
Number of women trained and
certified as agricultural extension 0 100
workers
Strategy for the creation of community
networks for knowledge management
and sharing, by engaging women´s
groups and associations as agents of 0 1
knowledge transmission, construction
and adoption, designed and Producer
3.2. Strategy designed and implemented for the creation of community
implemented Pre and Associations,
networks for knowledge management and sharing, by engaging women´s
Number of agricultural holdings (farms) during CIAT, Gender Team, $107,333
groups and associations as agents of knowledge transmission,
with female producers making operation Ministry of
construction, and adoption. 0 540
decisions, participating in farmers´ Agriculture
groups or organizations
Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
20.7% 22.5%
decisions, participating in farmers´
groups or organizations
Strategy to liaise with government
3.3 Strategy designed and implemented to liaise with government officials
officials and engage women
and engage women beneficiaries into public programs aimed to improve Pre and Gender Team,
beneficiaries into public programs
women's access to factors of production. This strategy can be developed 0 1 during Ministry of $10,000
aimed to improve women's access to
with the support of the Directorate for Rural Women of the Ministry of operation Agriculture
factors of production, designed and
Agriculture and Rural Development.
implemented
7

--- Table 1 on Page 153 ---
Percentage of women on the Board of
Directors of the Producer Associations | FNC: 0%;
Fedepanela: 7%;
Fedearroz: 5%;
Fedepapa: 5%;
Fenalce: 6%;
Fedegan: 9%;
Asbama:11%;
Asocaña: 0% | 30%

--- Table 2 on Page 153 ---
Gender outputs related to CSICAP´s third component |  |  |  |  |  | 
3.1. Strategy designed and implemented for training in gender equality
and gender mainstreaming within the technical assistance process
developed by the project. This strategy can be developed with the support
of the Directorate for Rural Women of the Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development and the Presidential Council for Equity for Women. | Strategy for training in gender equality
and gender mainstreaming within the
technical assistance process developed
by the project, designed and
implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $281,133
 | Number of men and women producers
trained in gender equality and gender
mainstreaming | 0 | 16,000 |  |  | 
 | Number of extension workers trained
in gender equality, gender
mainstreaming and gender-based
violence. | 0 | 200 |  |  | 
 | Number of women trained and
certified as agricultural extension
workers | 0 | 100 |  |  | 
3.2. Strategy designed and implemented for the creation of community
networks for knowledge management and sharing, by engaging women´s
groups and associations as agents of knowledge transmission,
construction, and adoption. | Strategy for the creation of community
networks for knowledge management
and sharing, by engaging women´s
groups and associations as agents of
knowledge transmission, construction
and adoption, designed and
implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $107,333
 | Number of agricultural holdings (farms)
with female producers making
decisions, participating in farmers´
groups or organizations | 0 | 540 |  |  | 
 | Percentage of agricultural holdings
(farms) with female producers making
decisions, participating in farmers´
groups or organizations | 20.7% | 22.5% |  |  | 
3.3 Strategy designed and implemented to liaise with government officials
and engage women beneficiaries into public programs aimed to improve
women's access to factors of production. This strategy can be developed
with the support of the Directorate for Rural Women of the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development. | Strategy to liaise with government
officials and engage women
beneficiaries into public programs
aimed to improve women's access to
factors of production, designed and
implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $10,000

=== PAGE 154 ===
Number of women beneficiaries
engaged into public programs aimed to
0 1,500
improve women's access to factors of
production
Number of pilot projects providing local
care services designed and 0 9
Producer
implemented
Associations,
3.4 Pilot projects systematized and implemented to approach the care Pre
CIAT, Gender Team, $297,500
e conomy at the local level for (direct and indirect) women beneficiaries. Number of women beneficiaries with
0 450
operation
Ministry of
care services
Agriculture
Number of male and female children,
seniors, and people with disabilities 0 180
receiving care services
Number of plans for mainstreaming
gender in Producers Associations´
0 9
policies and practices designed and Pre and Gender Team,
3.5 Plans designed and implemented for mainstreaming gender in
implemented during Producer $150,000
Producers Associations´ policies and practices
Number of Producer Associations that operation Associations
mainstreamed gender into their 0 9
policies and practices
Gender activities related to CSICAP´s third component
3.1.1 Develop and deliver training modules with men and women
producers participating in the project on gender equality and gender
mainstreaming that include, at least, the following topics:
- The care economy
- Sexual division of labor
- Gender violence (Hotlines, public services, among others)
Producer
- Women rights
Training modules with men and women Associations
- Masculinities
producers participating in the project Pre and CIAT, Gender Team,
- Economic and financial literacy (household and farm financial
on gender equality and gender 0 1 during Ministry of $133,333
management. It should include awareness about the recognition and
mainstreaming, developed and operation Agriculture (Rural
payment of activities carried out by women: preparing food for day
delivered Women
laborers, among others).
Directorate)
-A specific module for young rural women about sexual and reproductive
rights.
This strategy will be supported by the workshops already being developed
by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development on rights, gender,
and the care economy for rural producers, and the economic and financial
education workshops "My finances count" for rural women and youth.
Training module for women producers
3.1.2. Develop and deliver a training module for women producers
(women-only activities) for the Pre and Gender Team,
(women-only activities), using various methodologies (e.g. female farmer-
implementation of new technologies 0 1 during Producer $20,833
to-female farmer extension), for the implementation of new technologies
provided by the Project, developed and operation Associations
provided by the Project
delivered
8

--- Table 1 on Page 154 ---
3.4 Pilot projects systematized and implemented to approach the care
e conomy at the local level for (direct and indirect) women beneficiaries. |  |  | Number of pilot projects providing local
care services designed and
implemented | 0 | 9 | Pre
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $297,500
 |  |  | Number of women beneficiaries with
care services | 0 | 450 |  |  | 
 |  |  | Number of male and female children,
seniors, and people with disabilities
receiving care services | 0 | 180 |  |  | 
3.5 Plans designed and implemented for mainstreaming gender in
Producers Associations´ policies and practices |  |  | Number of plans for mainstreaming
gender in Producers Associations´
policies and practices designed and
implemented | 0 | 9 | Pre and
during
operation | Gender Team,
Producer
Associations | $150,000
 |  |  | Number of Producer Associations that
mainstreamed gender into their
policies and practices | 0 | 9 |  |  | 
Gender activities related to CSICAP´s third component |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 3.1.1 Develop and deliver training modules with men and women |  | Training modules with men and women
producers participating in the project
on gender equality and gender
mainstreaming, developed and
delivered | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture (Rural
Women
Directorate) | $133,333
 | producers participating in the project on gender equality and gender |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | mainstreaming that include, at least, the following topics: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - The care economy |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Sexual division of labor |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Gender violence (Hotlines, public services, among others) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Women rights |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Masculinities |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Economic and financial literacy (household and farm financial |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | management. It should include awareness about the recognition and |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | payment of activities carried out by women: preparing food for day |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | laborers, among others). |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | -A specific module for young rural women about sexual and reproductive |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | rights. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | This strategy will be supported by the workshops already being developed |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development on rights, gender, |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and the care economy for rural producers, and the economic and financial |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | education workshops "My finances count" for rural women and youth. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
3.1.2. Develop and deliver a training module for women producers
(women-only activities), using various methodologies (e.g. female farmer-
to-female farmer extension), for the implementation of new technologies
provided by the Project |  |  | Training module for women producers
(women-only activities) for the
implementation of new technologies
provided by the Project, developed and
delivered | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Gender Team,
Producer
Associations | $20,833

=== PAGE 155 ===
3.1.3. Design and implement a gender-sensitive plan specifying the
strategy for the inclusion of women in training activities and women´s
access to technology -which will be part of the project's agricultural Producer
extension strategy-. The plan includes: Gender-sensitive plan specifying the Associations,
- Consensus regarding the schedule of activities (considering care work). strategy for the inclusion of women in Pre and CIAT, Gender Team,
- Adequate and pertinent communication methods for the elderly training activities and women´s access 0 1 during Ministry of $36,133
population. to technology, designed and operation Agriculture (Rural
- Follow-up actions on women´s assistance to project activities to ensure implemented Women
that their training process is completed Directorate)
- Provision of care services for children (those who take care of them
during project activities must receive payment for this work)
3.1.4. Design and implement a gender awareness training plan with
agricultural extension workers for the subsequent implementation of the Producer
gender equality training module with producers (Action 3.1.1 Component Gender awareness training plan with Pre and Associations,
3). This plan will include awareness-raising on Gender-Based Violence and agricultural extension workers 0 1 during CIAT, Gender Team, $78,333
will be supported by the workshops that the Ministry of Agriculture and designed and implemented operation Ministry of
Rural Development is already developing on rights, gender and the Agriculture
economy of care for rural producers.
3.1.5 Design and implement a training and certification plan for women
Producer
extension workers, with the support of SENA and in response to the
Training and certification plan for Pre and Associations,
demand for agricultural extension workers from the Producer
women extension workers designed 0 1 during CIAT, Gender Team, $12,500
Associations, in order to facilitate their subsequent engagement. The plan
and implemented operation Ministry of
will emphasize support strategies for the promotion of young rural women
Agriculture
as extension workers.
3.2.1. Develop participatory work sessions with women to discuss the
barriers in accessing agricultural and productive services: time constraints,
Participatory work sessions with
difficulties in accessing technical assistance and recommendations to Producer
women to discuss the barriers in During
provide a extension service tailored to their needs (availability of time and 0 18 Associations, $7,333
accessing agricultural and productive operation
resources), which serves as input for action 3.1.3 component 3. CIAT, Gender Team
services, developed
The work sessions must guarantee the participation of different groups of
women based on their ethnicity and age.
3.2.2. Design and implement local work plans to promote the participation
Producer
of women in (women) farmers´ groups or organizations that promote
Associations,
mutual trust, collaboration and training in agricultural and productive Local work plans to promote the
Pre and CIAT, Gender Team,
issues among them, as a tool to share knowledge and information participation of women in (women)
0 9 during Ministry of $100,000
regarding climate-resilient agriculture and build economic and social farmers´ groups or organizations
operation Agriculture (Rural
processes that allow the sustainability of the implemented strategies. This designed and implemented
Women
strategy can be developed with the support of the Rural Development
Directorate)
Agency.
3.3.1 Implement sessions to share information regarding and engage
women beneficiaries into public programs (led by the Ministry of
Sessions to share information regarding
Agriculture and Finagro such as the Special Credit Line (LEC) for rural
and engage women beneficiaries into Gender Team,
women and youth and other LEC) aimed at improving women's access to During
public programs aimed at improving 0 15 Ministry of $5,000
credit, financial inclusion and literacy. operation
women's access to credit, financial Agriculture
The activities shall include specific sessions for young rural women sharing
inclusion and literacy, implemented
programs that target their population group as well as the courses in
Economic and Financial Education available to the Ministry of Agriculture
9

--- Table 1 on Page 155 ---
3.1.3. Design and implement a gender-sensitive plan specifying the
strategy for the inclusion of women in training activities and women´s
access to technology -which will be part of the project's agricultural
extension strategy-. The plan includes:
- Consensus regarding the schedule of activities (considering care work).
- Adequate and pertinent communication methods for the elderly
population.
- Follow-up actions on women´s assistance to project activities to ensure
that their training process is completed
- Provision of care services for children (those who take care of them
during project activities must receive payment for this work) |  |  |  |  |  | 
3.1.4. Design and implement a gender awareness training plan with
agricultural extension workers for the subsequent implementation of the
gender equality training module with producers (Action 3.1.1 Component
3). This plan will include awareness-raising on Gender-Based Violence and
will be supported by the workshops that the Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development is already developing on rights, gender and the
economy of care for rural producers. | Gender awareness training plan with
agricultural extension workers
designed and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $78,333
3.1.5 Design and implement a training and certification plan for women
extension workers, with the support of SENA and in response to the
demand for agricultural extension workers from the Producer
Associations, in order to facilitate their subsequent engagement. The plan
will emphasize support strategies for the promotion of young rural women
as extension workers. | Training and certification plan for
women extension workers designed
and implemented | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $12,500
3.2.1. Develop participatory work sessions with women to discuss the
barriers in accessing agricultural and productive services: time constraints,
difficulties in accessing technical assistance and recommendations to
provide a extension service tailored to their needs (availability of time and
resources), which serves as input for action 3.1.3 component 3.
The work sessions must guarantee the participation of different groups of
women based on their ethnicity and age. | Participatory work sessions with
women to discuss the barriers in
accessing agricultural and productive
services, developed | 0 | 18 | During
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team | $7,333
3.2.2. Design and implement local work plans to promote the participation
of women in (women) farmers´ groups or organizations that promote
mutual trust, collaboration and training in agricultural and productive
issues among them, as a tool to share knowledge and information
regarding climate-resilient agriculture and build economic and social
processes that allow the sustainability of the implemented strategies. This
strategy can be developed with the support of the Rural Development
Agency. | Local work plans to promote the
participation of women in (women)
farmers´ groups or organizations
designed and implemented | 0 | 9 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture (Rural
Women
Directorate) | $100,000
3.3.1 Implement sessions to share information regarding and engage
women beneficiaries into public programs (led by the Ministry of
Agriculture and Finagro such as the Special Credit Line (LEC) for rural
women and youth and other LEC) aimed at improving women's access to
credit, financial inclusion and literacy.
The activities shall include specific sessions for young rural women sharing
programs that target their population group as well as the courses in
Economic and Financial Education available to the Ministry of Agriculture | Sessions to share information regarding
and engage women beneficiaries into
public programs aimed at improving
women's access to credit, financial
inclusion and literacy, implemented | 0 | 15 | During
operation | Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $5,000

--- Table 2 on Page 155 ---
3.1.3. Design and implement a gender-sensitive plan specifying the
strategy for the inclusion of women in training activities and women´s
access to technology -which will be part of the project's agricultural
extension strategy-. The plan includes:
- Consensus regarding the schedule of activities (considering care work).
- Adequate and pertinent communication methods for the elderly
population.
- Follow-up actions on women´s assistance to project activities to ensure
that their training process is completed
- Provision of care services for children (those who take care of them
during project activities must receive payment for this work)

--- Table 3 on Page 155 ---
3.2.1. Develop participatory work sessions with women to discuss the
barriers in accessing agricultural and productive services: time constraints,
difficulties in accessing technical assistance and recommendations to
provide a extension service tailored to their needs (availability of time and
resources), which serves as input for action 3.1.3 component 3.
The work sessions must guarantee the participation of different groups of
women based on their ethnicity and age.

--- Table 4 on Page 155 ---
Participatory work sessions with
women to discuss the barriers in
accessing agricultural and productive
services, developed

--- Table 5 on Page 155 ---
Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team

--- Table 6 on Page 155 ---
During
operation

=== PAGE 156 ===
and Rural Development and the Special Lines of Credit (LEC) that benefit
women.
3.3.2 Implement sessions to share information regarding and engage
women beneficiaries into public programs (led by the Ministry of
Sessions to share information regarding
Agriculture and the National Land Agency) aimed at improving women's Gender Team,
and engage women beneficiaries into During
access to land. The National Land Agency has awareness plans about the 0 15 Ministry of $5,000
public programs aimed at improving operation
different processes of access and formalization of rural property for Agriculture
women's access to land, implemented
natural persons or persons belonging to ethnic groups.
(Women-only activities).
3.4.1 Create a document prioritizing the areas (municipalities, townships,
Document prioritizing the areas Producer
rural counties) where to install the care services/facilities of the local pilot
(municipalities, townships, rural Pre and Associations,
projects. The document must include at least:
counties) where to install the care 0 9 during CIAT, Gender Team, $0
- Selection criteria
services/facilities of the local pilot operation Ministry of
- Budget. The convergence of different sources of public, private and
projects, created Agriculture
international cooperation funding will be sought
3.4.2 Implement a care needs assessment and design an action plan with
(direct and indirect) women beneficiaries in the prioritized areas (it must
be ensured that not only women belonging to organizations or formal
groups participate) in order to design and implement a pilot project that
offers several care services/facilities aimed to reduce the time allocated to
unpaid care work. It is expected to have the participation not only of the Producer
Care needs assessment and action plan
actors of the CSICAP project but also of public agencies of the social Associations,
of a local care services pilot project Pre
inclusion sector of the national government (Prosperidad Social, ICBF, 0 1 CIAT, Gender Team $14,444
designed and implemented with (direct operation
Ministry of Health) and the Ministry of the Environment, as well as local Ministry of
and indirect) women beneficiaries
governments, among others. Agriculture
The strategy includes, at a minimum:
- Inclusive call for participants
- care needs assessment document
- Pilots´ action plan based on the needs and characteristics of the territory
- Liaison strategy with local and national actors
3.4.3 Design, validate, and implement with a participatory methodology, a
pool of care services bases on what was identified in the previous activity.
Among the possible services, the pilot will provide one service per
Producer Association from among those that follow, and three nurseries
will also be implemented (or care centers that operate year-round or
Producer
during harvest seasons):
Pre and Associations,
- Transportation service for children to public care facilities (Madres Local care services pilot project
0 9 during CIAT, Gender Team $90,556
Comunitarias and other ICBF services) and those provided by the Producer implemented
operation Ministry of
Association
Agriculture
- Community laundry facilities (It must be guaranteed that the spaces
where this service is provided have the conditions to guarantee that the
service is effectively provided).
- Community dining rooms for children, people with disabilities and the
elderly.
10

--- Table 1 on Page 156 ---
3.3.2 Implement sessions to share information regarding and engage
women beneficiaries into public programs (led by the Ministry of
Agriculture and the National Land Agency) aimed at improving women's
access to land. The National Land Agency has awareness plans about the
different processes of access and formalization of rural property for
natural persons or persons belonging to ethnic groups.
(Women-only activities). | Sessions to share information regarding
and engage women beneficiaries into
public programs aimed at improving
women's access to land, implemented | 0 | 15 | During
operation | Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $5,000
3.4.1 Create a document prioritizing the areas (municipalities, townships,
rural counties) where to install the care services/facilities of the local pilot
projects. The document must include at least:
- Selection criteria
- Budget. The convergence of different sources of public, private and
international cooperation funding will be sought | Document prioritizing the areas
(municipalities, townships, rural
counties) where to install the care
services/facilities of the local pilot
projects, created | 0 | 9 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team,
Ministry of
Agriculture | $0
3.4.2 Implement a care needs assessment and design an action plan with
(direct and indirect) women beneficiaries in the prioritized areas (it must
be ensured that not only women belonging to organizations or formal
groups participate) in order to design and implement a pilot project that
offers several care services/facilities aimed to reduce the time allocated to
unpaid care work. It is expected to have the participation not only of the
actors of the CSICAP project but also of public agencies of the social
inclusion sector of the national government (Prosperidad Social, ICBF,
Ministry of Health) and the Ministry of the Environment, as well as local
governments, among others.
The strategy includes, at a minimum:
- Inclusive call for participants
- care needs assessment document
- Pilots´ action plan based on the needs and characteristics of the territory
- Liaison strategy with local and national actors | Care needs assessment and action plan
of a local care services pilot project
designed and implemented with (direct
and indirect) women beneficiaries | 0 | 1 | Pre
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team
Ministry of
Agriculture | $14,444
3.4.3 Design, validate, and implement with a participatory methodology, a
pool of care services bases on what was identified in the previous activity.
Among the possible services, the pilot will provide one service per
Producer Association from among those that follow, and three nurseries
will also be implemented (or care centers that operate year-round or
during harvest seasons):
- Transportation service for children to public care facilities (Madres
Comunitarias and other ICBF services) and those provided by the Producer
Association
- Community laundry facilities (It must be guaranteed that the spaces
where this service is provided have the conditions to guarantee that the
service is effectively provided).
- Community dining rooms for children, people with disabilities and the
elderly. | Local care services pilot project
implemented | 0 | 9 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team
Ministry of
Agriculture | $90,556

=== PAGE 157 ===
- Efficient cookstoves for cooking with firewood, with support from the
Ministry of the Environment
Other specific interventions such as lactation rooms and brochures with a
summary of the municipality's care offer will also be considered.
3.4.4 Create a network of daycare and childcare facilities for (direct and
Network of daycare and childcare
indirect) women beneficiaries of the project. Producer
facilities at the Producer Associations´ During
The facilities will be located at the Producer Associations´ offices to 0 9 Associations, $192,500
offices for (direct and indirect) women operation
promote the reduction of time allocated by women to unpaid care work. CIAT, Gender Team
beneficiaries of the project created
The service provided will be totally free.
3.5.1. Develop a training module on gender equality with all the
Training module on gender equality Pre and Producer
employees of each of the Producer Associations, which includes specific
with all the employees of each of the 0 1 during Associations, $0
sessions according to the roles and positions of the employees (customer
Producer Associations developed operation CIAT, Gender Team
service, managerial roles, etc.).
Gender activities specific to each Producer Association
3.5.2 Asbama, Fedepanela: Strengthen the (existing) Gender Action Plan
that includes:
- Regulations on quotas for the participation of women in boards of
Pre and Producer
directors Producer Association´s Gender Action
0 1 during Associations, $33,333
- Strategy to promote the inclusion of women extension workers within Plan strengthened
operation CIAT, Gender Team
the Producer Association
- Gender-sensitive Budgeting to identify funded activities and/or projects
aimed at improving the conditions of women producers
11

--- Table 1 on Page 157 ---
3.4.4 Create a network of daycare and childcare facilities for (direct and
indirect) women beneficiaries of the project.
The facilities will be located at the Producer Associations´ offices to
promote the reduction of time allocated by women to unpaid care work.
The service provided will be totally free. |  |  | Network of daycare and childcare
facilities at the Producer Associations´
offices for (direct and indirect) women
beneficiaries of the project created | 0 | 9 | During
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team | $192,500
3.5.1. Develop a training module on gender equality with all the
employees of each of the Producer Associations, which includes specific
sessions according to the roles and positions of the employees (customer
service, managerial roles, etc.). |  |  | Training module on gender equality
with all the employees of each of the
Producer Associations developed | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team | $0
Gender activities specific to each Producer Association |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 3.5.2 Asbama, Fedepanela: Strengthen the (existing) Gender Action Plan |  | Producer Association´s Gender Action
Plan strengthened | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team | $33,333
 | that includes: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Regulations on quotas for the participation of women in boards of |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | directors |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Strategy to promote the inclusion of women extension workers within |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the Producer Association |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Gender-sensitive Budgeting to identify funded activities and/or projects |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | aimed at improving the conditions of women producers |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 158 ===
3.5.3 Fedegan, Fenalce: Design the Gender Action Plan that mainstreams
gender within the Association's policies and practices. The Plan must
include:
- Gender monitoring strategy
- Affirmative actions to improve the access of women producers to
agricultural extension services
- Guidelines for the dissemination of information to women producers
(Mainstreaming gender on dissemination activities)
Pre and Producer
- Regulations on quotas for the participation of women in boards of Producer Association´s Gender Action
0 1 during Associations, $33,333
directors Plan designed
operation CIAT, Gender Team
- Strategy to promote the inclusion of women extension workers within
the Producer Association
- Gender-sensitive Budgeting to identify funded activities and/or projects
aimed at improving the conditions of women producers
- Protocol for the prevention and eradication of workplace and sexual
harassment and any form of discrimination
- Engagement strategy with public and non-governmental institutions to
develop initiatives that benefit women producers
3.5.4 Fedepapa, Fedearroz, Augura, Asocaña Design the Gender Action
Plan that mainstreams gender within the Association's policies and
practices. The Plan must include:
- Gender monitoring strategy
- Affirmative actions to improve the access of women producers to
agricultural extension services
- Guidelines for the dissemination of information to women producers
Pre and Producer
(Mainstreaming gender on dissemination activities) Producer Association´s Gender Action
0 1 during Associations, $66,666
- Regulations on quotas for the participation of women in boards of Plan designed
operation CIAT, Gender Team
directors
- Strategy to promote the inclusion of women extension workers within
the Producer Association
- Gender-sensitive Budgeting to identify funded activities and/or projects
aimed at improving the conditions of women producers
- Protocol for the prevention and eradication of workplace and sexual
harassment and any form of discrimination
3.5.5 FNC: Strengthen the (existing) Gender Action Plan that includes: Pre and Producer
Producer Association´s Gender Action
- Protocol for the prevention and eradication of workplace and sexual 0 1 during Associations, $16,666
Plan strengthened
harassment and any form of discrimination operation CIAT, Gender Team
TOTAL GAP BUDGET $1,581,314
GCF Funding $1,215,314
Other sources of funding (Production Associations, CIAT, Agrosavia,
$366,000
Ministry of Agriculture)
Source: Prepared by the authors.
__________
12

--- Table 1 on Page 158 ---
 | 3.5.3 Fedegan, Fenalce: Design the Gender Action Plan that mainstreams |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | gender within the Association's policies and practices. The Plan must |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | include: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Gender monitoring strategy |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Affirmative actions to improve the access of women producers to |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | agricultural extension services |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Guidelines for the dissemination of information to women producers |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (Mainstreaming gender on dissemination activities) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Regulations on quotas for the participation of women in boards of |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | directors |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Strategy to promote the inclusion of women extension workers within |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the Producer Association |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Gender-sensitive Budgeting to identify funded activities and/or projects |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | aimed at improving the conditions of women producers |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Protocol for the prevention and eradication of workplace and sexual |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | harassment and any form of discrimination |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Engagement strategy with public and non-governmental institutions to |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | develop initiatives that benefit women producers |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
3.5.4 Fedepapa, Fedearroz, Augura, Asocaña Design the Gender Action
Plan that mainstreams gender within the Association's policies and
practices. The Plan must include:
- Gender monitoring strategy
- Affirmative actions to improve the access of women producers to
agricultural extension services
- Guidelines for the dissemination of information to women producers
(Mainstreaming gender on dissemination activities)
- Regulations on quotas for the participation of women in boards of
directors
- Strategy to promote the inclusion of women extension workers within
the Producer Association
- Gender-sensitive Budgeting to identify funded activities and/or projects
aimed at improving the conditions of women producers
- Protocol for the prevention and eradication of workplace and sexual
harassment and any form of discrimination |  |  | Producer Association´s Gender Action
Plan designed | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team | $66,666
 | 3.5.5 FNC: Strengthen the (existing) Gender Action Plan that includes: |  | Producer Association´s Gender Action
Plan strengthened | 0 | 1 | Pre and
during
operation | Producer
Associations,
CIAT, Gender Team | $16,666
 | - Protocol for the prevention and eradication of workplace and sexual |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | harassment and any form of discrimination |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
TOTAL GAP BUDGET |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | $1,581,314
GCF Funding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | $1,215,314
 | Other sources of funding (Production Associations, CIAT, Agrosavia, |  |  |  |  |  |  | $366,000
 | Ministry of Agriculture) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 158 ---
3.5.4 Fedepapa, Fedearroz, Augura, Asocaña Design the Gender Action
Plan that mainstreams gender within the Association's policies and
practices. The Plan must include:
- Gender monitoring strategy
- Affirmative actions to improve the access of women producers to
agricultural extension services
- Guidelines for the dissemination of information to women producers
(Mainstreaming gender on dissemination activities)
- Regulations on quotas for the participation of women in boards of
directors
- Strategy to promote the inclusion of women extension workers within
the Producer Association
- Gender-sensitive Budgeting to identify funded activities and/or projects
aimed at improving the conditions of women producers
- Protocol for the prevention and eradication of workplace and sexual
harassment and any form of discrimination
