=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sunny Kim
CreationDate: D:20211001222247+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.7.20095
ModDate: D:20211003131428+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.7.20095
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
4 – 7 October 2021
Virtual meeting
Provisional Agenda Item 11
3 October 2021
Consideration of funding
proposals – Addendum XII
Funding proposal package for FP180
Summary
This addendum contains the following six parts:
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window”
submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA);
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s);
c) Environmental and Social report(s) Disclosure;
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s
assessment; and
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled “Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window”
submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA) is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to
Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally
privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 1
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s) 60
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 86
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 89
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 104
assessment
Gender documentation 110

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window
Africa: Comoros; Mozambique; Seychelles
Asia-Pacific: Fiji; Indonesia; Philippines; Sri Lanka;
Country(ies):
Latin America and the Caribbean: Bahamas; Belize; Brazil; Colombia;
Ecuador; Guatemala; Jamaica; Mexico; Panama
Meditteranean: Jordan
Accredited Entity: Pegasus Capital Advisors LP (Pegasus)
Date of first submission: 2021/05/31
Date of current submission 2021/10/01
Version number 3.6

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 0 OF 59
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to annexes such
as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in the
funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all relevant
documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60. Proposals
exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be disclosed on
the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information
that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on
disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
 | Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template | 
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to annexes such
as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in the
funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all relevant
documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60. Proposals
exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be disclosed on
the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information
that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on
disclosure in section G.4. |  | 

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 1 OF 59
A
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.1. Project or programme Programme A.2. Public or private sector Private
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals,
A.3. Request for Proposals indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the
(RFP) Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.
Choose an item
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets.
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it.
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: GCF contribution:
Enter number%
☐ Energy access and power generation: Enter number%
Low-emission transport:
☐ Enter number%
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:
A.4. Result area(s) ☐ Enter number%
Forestry and land use:
☐
Adaptation: Increased resilience of:1
45%
5%
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
☒
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security: 5%
☒ Infrastructure and built environment: 45%
Ecosystem and ecosystem services:
☒
12,737 direct beneficiaries;
35,236,406 indirect
A.5. Expected mitigation A.6. Expected adaptation
Indicate t CO2eq over lifespan beneficiaries2
impact impact
Indicate % of population
A.7. Total financing (GCF +
USD$ 500 M Choose an item.
co-finance)
A.9. Project size Large (Over USD 250 million)
USD$ 125 M Choose an item.
A.8. Total GCF funding
For multi-country proposals,
requested
please fill out annex 17.
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be
consistent with A.8.
A.10. Financial instrument(s)
requested for the GCF Grant Enter number Equity USD$ 125M
☐ ☒
funding Loan Enter number Results-based
☐ ☐
Guarantee Enter number payment Enter number
☐
a) disbursement period:
$25M first close (GCF sole
first closer)3; 25% to final
A.11. Implementation period A.12. Total lifespan 20+ years
close
b) repayment period: 12 + 3
years
Refer to the AE’s safeguard
A.13. Expected date of AE policy and GCF ESS Standards
June 17, 2021 A.14. ESS category
internal approval to assess your FP category.
I-2

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or programme |  | Programme |  |  | A.2. Public or private sector | Private |  | 
A.3. Request for Proposals
(RFP) |  | If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals,
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.
Choose an item |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.4. Result area(s) |  | Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets.
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it.
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Mitigation: Reduced emissions from:
Energy access and power generation:
☐
Low-emission transport:
☐
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:
☐
Forestry and land use:
☐
Adaptation: Increased resilience of:1
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
☒
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security:
☒ Infrastructure and built environment:
Ecosystem and ecosystem services:
☒ |  |  |  |  | GCF contribution:
Enter number%
Enter number%
Enter number%
Enter number%
45%
5%
5%
45% | 
A.5. Expected mitigation
impact |  | Indicate t CO2eq over lifespan |  |  | A.6. Expected adaptation
impact | 12,737 direct beneficiaries;
35,236,406 indirect
beneficiaries2 |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Indicate % of population |  | 
A.7. Total financing (GCF +
co-finance) |  | USD$ 500 M Choose an item. |  |  | A.9. Project size | Large (Over USD 250 million) |  | 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested |  | USD$ 125 M Choose an item.
For multi-country proposals,
please fill out annex 17. |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.10. Financial instrument(s)
requested for the GCF
funding |  | Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be
consistent with A.8.
Grant Enter number Equity USD$ 125M
☐ ☒
Loan Enter number Results-based
☐ ☐
Guarantee Enter number payment Enter number
☐ |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.11. Implementation period |  |  | a) disbursement period: |  | A.12. Total lifespan | 20+ years |  | 
 |  |  | $25M first close (GCF sole |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | first closer)3; 25% to final |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | close |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | b) repayment period: 12 + 3 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | years |  |  |  |  | 
A.13. Expected date of AE
internal approval |  | June 17, 2021 |  |  | A.14. ESS category | Refer to the AE’s safeguard
policy and GCF ESS Standards
to assess your FP category.
I-2 |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 5 ---
A.3. Request for Proposals
(RFP)

--- Table 3 on Page 5 ---
A.5. Expected mitigation
impact

--- Table 4 on Page 5 ---
A.6. Expected adaptation
impact

--- Table 5 on Page 5 ---
A.7. Total financing (GCF +
co-finance)

--- Table 6 on Page 5 ---
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested

--- Table 7 on Page 5 ---
A.10. Financial instrument(s)
requested for the GCF
funding

--- Table 8 on Page 5 ---
Refer to the AE’s safeguard
policy and GCF ESS Standards
to assess your FP category.
I-2

--- Table 9 on Page 5 ---
A.13. Expected date of AE
internal approval

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 2 OF 59
A
1 The distribution of funding across outcomes cannot be determined in advance since sub-projects will be identified at a
later date.
2 Based on NoLs received. Potential indirect beneficiaries based on full initial country scope of 32 countries was 46,892,587
3 Will be increased to $50mm if the GFCR Fund procures at least $10mm of additional co-investment at the first closing.

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 3 OF 59
A
A.16. Has Readiness or PPF
A.15.Has this FP been
Yes ☒ No ☐ support been used to Yes No
submitted as a CN before? ☐ ☒
prepare this FP?
A.17. Is this FP included in A.18. Is this FP included in
Yes No ☒ Yes No ☒
the entity work programme? ☐ the country programme? ☐
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF,
A.19. Complementarity and
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
coherence
Yes No
☐ ☐
Executing Entities: 4
1. Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P. (“Pegasus”), a Delaware limited partnership and Accredited
Entity by the GCF.
2. The “GFCR Fund” – a pooled investment vehicle to be formed by the Accredited Entity,
which is expected to be a SCSp under Luxembourg law
3. The “General Partner” – an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is
expected to be a S.a r.l. under Luxembourg law. The General Partner will be managed by
employees of the Accredited Entity or its controlled affiliates, except to the extent one or
more managers of the General Partner are required by law to be resident in Luxembourg.
4. The “Manager” – an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is expected to
be a Delaware limited liability company. The Manager will be controlled by employees of
A.20. Executing Entity
the Accredited Entity or its controlled affiliates, except to the extent the Manager is
information
required by law to have one or more employees, managers or directors in its jurisdiction
of formation. The Manager will be owned, directly or indirectly, by the Accredited Entity
5. “GCF Reef Holdings” – an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is
expected to be a Delaware limited partnership. GCF will be the sole limited partner and
sole economic owner of GCF Reef Holdings. Holdings GP will be the general partner of
GCF Reef Holdings.
6. “Holdings GP” – an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is expected to be
a Delaware limited liability company. Holdings GP will be controlled by employees of the
Accredited Entity or its controlled affiliates. Holdings GP will be owned, directly or
indirectly, by the Accredited Entity
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
4 NTD: Names of newly formed legal entities to be determined in consultation with the Secretariat prior to finalizing the FAA.

--- Table 1 on Page 7 ---
A.15.Has this FP been
submitted as a CN before? |  |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ |  | A.16. Has Readiness or PPF |  | Yes No
☐ ☒
 |  |  |  |  | support been used to |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | prepare this FP? |  | 
 | A.17. Is this FP included in |  | Yes No ☒
☐ |  | A.18. Is this FP included in |  | Yes No ☒
☐
 | the entity work programme? |  |  |  | the country programme? |  | 
A.19. Complementarity and
coherence |  |  | Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF,
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
Yes No
☐ ☐ |  |  |  | 
A.20. Executing Entity
information |  |  | Executing Entities: 4
1. Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P. (“Pegasus”), a Delaware limited partnership and Accredited
Entity by the GCF.
2. The “GFCR Fund” – a pooled investment vehicle to be formed by the Accredited Entity,
which is expected to be a SCSp under Luxembourg law
3. The “General Partner” – an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is
expected to be a S.a r.l. under Luxembourg law. The General Partner will be managed by
employees of the Accredited Entity or its controlled affiliates, except to the extent one or
more managers of the General Partner are required by law to be resident in Luxembourg.
4. The “Manager” – an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is expected to
be a Delaware limited liability company. The Manager will be controlled by employees of
the Accredited Entity or its controlled affiliates, except to the extent the Manager is
required by law to have one or more employees, managers or directors in its jurisdiction
of formation. The Manager will be owned, directly or indirectly, by the Accredited Entity
5. “GCF Reef Holdings” – an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is
expected to be a Delaware limited partnership. GCF will be the sole limited partner and
sole economic owner of GCF Reef Holdings. Holdings GP will be the general partner of
GCF Reef Holdings.
6. “Holdings GP” – an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is expected to be
a Delaware limited liability company. Holdings GP will be controlled by employees of the
Accredited Entity or its controlled affiliates. Holdings GP will be owned, directly or
indirectly, by the Accredited Entity |  |  |  | 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 7 ---
A.15.Has this FP been
submitted as a CN before?

--- Table 3 on Page 7 ---
A.19. Complementarity and
coherence

--- Table 4 on Page 7 ---
A.20. Executing Entity
information

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 59
A
Provide an executive summary of the project/programme including:
1. Climate change problem
2. Proposed interventions
3. Climate impacts/benefits
Coral reef ecosystems are critical in providing safety, food security and livelihoods to more than 1 billion people worldwide
through the ecosystem services, coastal protection and economic activities they generate.
Coral reefs contribute significantly to local economies, especially in LDCs and SIDS, with many of those directly impacted being
women. Coral reefs attracted an estimated 70 million visitors annually with an associated expenditure of US $36 billion (prior to
COVID-19) 5. This will be a key are of post-Covid recovery for many countries. Six million reef fishers6 (many of whom are small-
scale, traditional subsistence fishers) depend on coastal-reef fisheries, with an estimated value of US $6.8 billion in 20117. Women
represent about 50% of the workforce in the seafood sector and 80 – 90% in the post-harvest sector8. It is estimated that reefs
protect 150,000 km of shoreline in more than 100 countries and territories, reducing wave energy and heights, erosion and storm
damage; thus, protecting over 1 billion people (and their property) who live within 100 km of reefs around the world. This results
in an estimated reduction of annual expected damages from storms of over $4 billion globally9. As sea levels continue to rise, this
protection becomes vital. Current funding levels, however, are estimated to be 3-7 times lower than what is needed.10
At the same time, coral reefs are among the world’s most threatened ecosystems by climate change impacts. In parallel, multiple
local pressures continue to influence the health and longer-term resilience of coral reefs, including destructive fishing techniques,
overfishing and pollution.
Recent modelling exercises on coral reefs show that protecting areas of the ocean where conditions are most stable is a key tool
for adaptation to climate change. These areas, or “climate refugia”, retain a suitable habitat despite regional climate change and
are likely to be critical in preventing further reef degradation and considerable loss of biodiversity. Their protection is becoming
a commonly prioritized conservation target and they have been recommended by numerous authors as a key component of any
climate change and biodiversity adaptation program11. Studies also show that better management of local stressors can
significantly reduce the impacts of climate change on coral systems, increasing the resilience of reefs and therefore of the
communities that depend on them for food, protection, and livelihoods. By protecting the identified priority networks of climate
refugia coral reefs and reducing local stressors, some ecosystems will survive the impacts of climate change and may help
repopulate neighbouring reefs.
To enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of the communities, productive systems and businesses that depend on coral
reef ecosystems, the GFCR Investment Window (the “GFCR” or the “GFCR Fund”) will unlock and de-risk private investment that
enable activities that ameliorate or eliminate existing local stressors in the most resilient reefs and “climate refugia”. Restoration
efforts will also be supported to accelerate the recovery of reefs that have the highest chance of survival.
To drive better management of local stressors and accelerate restoration, investments will focus across the following sectors:
1. Sustainable ocean production to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques and enhance food security :
a. Sustainable fisheries (e.g. by-catch reduction, ghost net reduction, monitoring control & surveillance, post-
catch processing, supply chain traceability)
b. Sustainable mariculture (e.g. seaweed farming, finfish or shrimp mariculture)
c. Sustainable aquaculture (e.g. shrimp, alternative feed, etc.)
d. Coral farming (e.g. artificial reefs ventures, assisted evolution tech companies, coral gardening and sexual
propagation ventures)
2. Ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism:
a. Sustainably-managed hotel resorts (which can include implementation of coral restoration practices and
technologies in the surrounding reefs)
b. Tourist activities (surf, diving, snorkelling, cruises)
3. Sustainable infrastructure and waste management to address pollution:
a. Plastic waste management (e.g. alternative material, waste collection and sorting, plastic recycling, AI and
digital sorting)
b. Sewage and waste-water treatment
c. Green transportation (including e.g. port reception facilities to address liquid waste emitted by ships)
d. Clean energy affecting reefs

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 59
A
e. Offshore clean energy
f. Sustainable agriculture to reduce nutrient run-off (e.g., alternative fertiliser use, organic farming, precision
farming, nutrient recycling/capture).
The GFCR Fund expects to deploy its capital primarily in control equity positions in its investee companies, although it may
invest in minority positions and/or debt or hybrid securities on a case-by-case basis. The GFCR Fund is targeting a $500 million
total fund size, with $125 million being committed by the GCF in a first-loss position as an anchor investor.
Ultimately, the GFCR Fund expects to generate the following impacts12:
1. 29,000 ha of reef protected, equivalent to $10bn per year of ecosystem services13
2. Over 12,737 direct employment opportunities in sustainable businesses for communities dependent on coral reef
ecosystems
3. 2,990,048 fisherman households benefiting from investments aimed at the adoption of diversified, climate resilient
livelihood options (including fisheries, agriculture, tourism, etc14
4. 35,236,406 indirect beneficiaries, based on the population that is dependent on reefs for protection from climatic
events and for economic outputs (e.g., fishing, tourism)15.
5 Spalding, M, Burke, L, Wood, S, Ashpole, J, Hutchison, J & Zu Ermgassen, P 2017, 'Mapping the global value and distribution of coral reef
tourism', Marine Policy, vol. 82, pp. 104-1 13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.014
6 Teh LSL, Teh LCL, Sumaila UR (2013) A Global Estimate of the Number of Coral Reef Fishers. PLoS ONE 8(6): e65397.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0065397
7 Burke, L., Reytar, K., Spalding, M., Perry, A. (2011) Reefs at Risk Revisited. WRI publication. Available at:
https://www.wri.org/publication/reefs-risk-revisited.
8 Northrop, E., et al. 2020. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID-19 Crisis.’’ Report. Washington, DC: World
Resources Institute. Available online at http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery
9 Beck, M.W., Losada, I.J., Menéndez, P. et al. The global flood protection savings provided by coral reefs. Nat Commun 9, 2186 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-04568-z
10 Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
11 Keppel G, Van Niel KP, Wardell-Johnson GW et al. (2012) Refugia: identifying and understanding safe havens for biodiversity under
climate change. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 21, 393–404
Tzedakis, P.C., Lawson, I.T., Frogley, M.R., Hewitt,G.M., and Preece, R.C., 2002, Buffered tree pop-ulation changes in a Quaternary
refugium: Evo-lutionary implications: Science, v. 297,p. 2044–2047.;
C. D. Jones, P. Ciais, S. J. Davis, P. Friedlingstein, T. Gasser, G. P. Peters, J. Rogelj, D. P. Van Vuuren, J. G. Canadell, A. Cowie, R. B.
Jackson, M. Jonas, E. Kriegler, E. Littleton, J. A. Lowe, J. Milne, G. Shrestha, P. Smith, A. Torvanger, A. Wiltshire (2016). Simulating the
Earth system response to negative emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 11(9), doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/11/9/095012
12 Assuming the full $500 million is raised and deployed.
13 Assumes Total Economic Value of ecosystem services at $352.24k/ha/year - see Global estimates of the value of ecosystems and their
services in monetary units
14 Based on NOLs received. The number of potential fisher household benefitting from the programme based on full initial country scope of
32 countries was 3,906,147.
15
See Annexes 17 and 23. Potential indirect beneficiaries based on full initial country scope of 32 countries was 46,892,587

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 59
B
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Climate change problem: Describe the climate change problem the proposal is expected to address. Describe the mitigation
needs (GHG emissions profile) and/or adaptation needs (climate hazards and associates risks based on impacts, exposure, and
vulnerabilities) that the proposed interventions are expected to address. Also describe the most likely scenario (prevailing
conditions or other alternative) that would remain or continue in the absence of the proposed interventions. Include baseline
information. The methodologies used to derive such information, including the mitigation and adaptation needs, should be
included in the feasibility study.
Context: In describing the mitigation and/or adaptation needs, briefly describe the target region/area of the proposed
interventions including information on the demographics, economy, topography, etc.
Related projects/interventions: Also describe any recent or ongoing projects/interventions that are related to the proposal from
other domestic or international sources of funding, such as the Global Environment Facility, Adaptation Fund, Climate
Investment Funds, etc., and how they will be complemented by this project/programme (e.g. scaling up, replication, etc.). Please
identify current gaps and barriers regarding recent or ongoing projects and elaborate further how this project/programme
complements or addresses these.
IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON CORAL REEFS
Climate change is warming the oceans. The consequences of climate change are already significant and will intensify into the
future with global temperature expected to increase by 1.5 – 4.8oC by 2100 and precipitation patterns predicted to undergo
spatial and temporal alterations16. For the global marine environment, the average sea surface temperatures (SST) of the Indian,
Atlantic, and Pacific Oceans have already increased by 0.65°C, 0.41°C, and 0.31°C respectively during 1950–200917 (Figure 1).
Average global sea levels are increasing by an average of 3.2 mm per year (over the period of 1993 to 2010). This is driven by the
expansion of the warming ocean and the melting of land ice18. Under current climate trajectories (RCP 8.5) the increase in sea
surface temperature (SST) across six major coral reef ocean provinces is expected to rise between 0.67°C to 0.83°C by 2040 and
2.66°C and 3.14°C by 2100. Even under moderate emissions scenarios (RCP 4.5) the SST in the major coral regions is expected to
rise between 1.18 and 1.44°C by the end of the century.
Figure 1: Sea Surface Temperature Projections19
16 IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Cha nge [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 151 pp.
17 Hoegh-Guldberg, O., R. Cai, E.S. Poloczanska, P.G. Brewer, S. Sundby, K. Hilmi, V.J. Fabry, and S. Jung, 2014: The Ocean. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M.
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1655-1731.
18 IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex
and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1535 pp,
doi:10.1017/CBO9781107415324.
19 Hoegh-Guldberg, O., R. Cai, E.S. Poloczanska, P.G. Brewer, S. Sundby, K. Hilmi, V.J. Fabry, and S. Jung, 2014: The Ocean. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M.
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1655-1731.

--- Table 1 on Page 10 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION | 
 | B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) | 
Climate change problem: Describe the climate change problem the proposal is expected to address. Describe the mitigation
needs (GHG emissions profile) and/or adaptation needs (climate hazards and associates risks based on impacts, exposure, and
vulnerabilities) that the proposed interventions are expected to address. Also describe the most likely scenario (prevailing
conditions or other alternative) that would remain or continue in the absence of the proposed interventions. Include baseline
information. The methodologies used to derive such information, including the mitigation and adaptation needs, should be
included in the feasibility study.
Context: In describing the mitigation and/or adaptation needs, briefly describe the target region/area of the proposed
interventions including information on the demographics, economy, topography, etc.
Related projects/interventions: Also describe any recent or ongoing projects/interventions that are related to the proposal from
other domestic or international sources of funding, such as the Global Environment Facility, Adaptation Fund, Climate
Investment Funds, etc., and how they will be complemented by this project/programme (e.g. scaling up, replication, etc.). Please
identify current gaps and barriers regarding recent or ongoing projects and elaborate further how this project/programme
complements or addresses these.
IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON CORAL REEFS
Climate change is warming the oceans. The consequences of climate change are already significant and will intensify into the
future with global temperature expected to increase by 1.5 – 4.8oC by 2100 and precipitation patterns predicted to undergo
spatial and temporal alterations16. For the global marine environment, the average sea surface temperatures (SST) of the Indian,
Atlantic, and Pacific Oceans have already increased by 0.65°C, 0.41°C, and 0.31°C respectively during 1950–200917 (Figure 1).
Average global sea levels are increasing by an average of 3.2 mm per year (over the period of 1993 to 2010). This is driven by the
expansion of the warming ocean and the melting of land ice18. Under current climate trajectories (RCP 8.5) the increase in sea
surface temperature (SST) across six major coral reef ocean provinces is expected to rise between 0.67°C to 0.83°C by 2040 and
2.66°C and 3.14°C by 2100. Even under moderate emissions scenarios (RCP 4.5) the SST in the major coral regions is expected to
rise between 1.18 and 1.44°C by the end of the century.
Figure 1: Sea Surface Temperature Projections19 |  | 

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 59
B
Corals die if they get too hot. Globalized and intensifying anthropogenic impacts on coral reefs, coupled with increasing seawater
temperatures and changing ocean chemistry, have transformed coral and fish communities, reduced coral growth rates,
diminished the capacity of coral reef ecosystems to be resilient to shocks, undermined the ability of coral reef ecosystems to
maintain structures, and severely weakened their ability to continue providing valuable ecosystem goods and services to people.
Increasing anthropogenic and climate pressures have caused the loss of half the live coral cover on coral reefs over the last 30–
50 years. Local pressures have also severely impacted 60% of reefs and the combination of local anthropogenic disturbance and
ocean warming means that up to 75% of reefs are already considered threatened20. Of even greater concern is that even lower
greenhouse gas emission scenarios (such as Representative Concentration Pathway RCP 4.5) are likely to drive the elimination of
most warm-water coral reefs by 2040–2050. Coral reefs are projected to decline to 10-30 per cent of former cover at 1.5°C
warming and to less than 1 per cent at 2°C warming (IPBES 2019). At current rate of warming (RCP 8.5) the coral biome could be
effectively extinct (<1% live cover) by the middle of this century.
Figure 3: Coral Reef Provinces21
Coral Triangle &
Coral Triangle & Western Pacific
SE Asia
SE Asia
Eastern Pacific
Western Indian
Eastern Indian
Ocean
Ocean
20 L. Burke, K. Reytar, M. D. Spalding, A. L. Perry, Reefs at Risk Revisited (World Resources Institute, The Nature Conservancy, WorldFish
Center, International Coral Reef Action N etwork, UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre, and Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network,
Washington, DC, 2011).
21 Hoegh-Guldberg O and Poloczanska ES (2017) Editorial: The Effect of Climate Change across Ocean Regions. Front. Mar. Sci. 4:361. doi:
10.3389/fmars.2017.00361

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 59
B
Some reefs are more vulnerable than others. Although the decline in coral reefs is a globally consistent phenomenon (with all
reefs showing some form of decline), the rate and extent of reef condition decline contains significant regional and localised
variation due to both variation in global and regional ocean conditions and the intensity of local stressors. The western Atlantic
appears to have warmed sooner than other areas and began to experience regular bleaching events sooner than most other
locations. The abundance of reef building corals had already declined across the Caribbean by more than 80% by the turn of the
millennia (1977–2001)22. This is in addition to the problems of intense local stressors on coral reefs in the region whereby the
end of last century there had been dramatic phase shift from corals to seaweeds occurring on Jamaican reefs23. At the same time
within the Great Barrier Reef, the decline in coral cover was about 51%. A global study of bleaching over the last two decades
reinforces this regional and localised variation with significant bleaching being more widespread and significant within the
Caribbean reef areas (figure 4 below).
Figure 4: A global analysis of coral bleaching over the past two decades24
Coral bleaching distribution. Prevalence of coral bleaching presented as a percentage of the coral assemblage that bleached at survey, measured at 3351
sites in 81 countries, from 1998 to 2017. White circles indicate no bleaching. Coloured circles indicate 1% bleaching (blue) through 100% bleaching
(yellow)
IMPACT OF OTHER HUMAN ACTIVITIES ON CORAL REEFS
Climate change is not the only problem reefs have to contend with. Further to global warming and climate change, ambitions
for economic development and a higher quality of life have led to unsustainable practices that degrade coral reef ecosystems.
These include overfishing, destructive fishing (e.g., blast and cyanide fishing), nutrient loading from agricultural runoff, litter (e.g.,
plastics and derelict fishing gear), the drainage of coastal wetlands, discharge of sewage, fertilizers and other contaminants into
coastal waters and the deforestation and reclamation of mangrove forests in particular for urban development and aquaculture,
irresponsible tourism and poor waste management (e.g., untreated sewage effluent, chemical leaks). These local drivers of
degradation are deteriorating the resilience of coral reef ecosystems to climate change and jeopardizing vital ecosystem services
for which the reef-dependent communities in the targeted countries have few other alternatives for income, subsistence and
coastal protection. Root causes of local degradation of coral reef ecosystems include:
• Overfishing and poor management of reef resources. A major driver of reef degradation is the impact of both artisanal and
industrial fisheries. Excessive catch sizes coupled with destructive methods can decimate fish populations and damage the
reef structure. The problem is often compounded by the absence of a coherent management strategy for reef resources.
Interventions such as fishing licenses, marine protected areas and minimum size controls can all reduce the pressure on coral
reefs. Most important is the need for adequate funding and enforcement of management policies. Greater funding and
integration of relevant climate information into the MPA management structure is needed to ensure that MPA coverage is
22 Gardner, T.A.; Côté, I.M.; Gill, J.A.; Grant, A.; Watkinson, A.R. Long-Term Region-Wide Declines in Caribbean Corals. Science2003,301,
958–960.
23 Hughes, T. P. 1994. Catastrophes, phase shifts, and large-scale degradation of a Caribbean coral reef. Science 265:1547–1551.
24 Sully, S., Burkepile, D.E., Donovan, M.K. et al. A global analysis of coral bleaching over the past two decades. Nat Commun 10, 1264 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09238-2

--- Table 1 on Page 12 ---
Coral bleaching distribution. Prevalence of coral bleaching presented as a percentage of the coral assemblage that bleached at survey, measured at 3351
sites in 81 countries, from 1998 to 2017. White circles indicate no bleaching. Coloured circles indicate 1% bleaching (blue) through 100% bleaching
(yellow) | 
 | Coral bleaching distribution. Prevalence of coral bleaching presented as a percentage of the coral assemblage that bleached at survey, measured at 3351
sites in 81 countries, from 1998 to 2017. White circles indicate no bleaching. Coloured circles indicate 1% bleaching (blue) through 100% bleaching
(yellow)
 | 

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 59
B
increased, climate-proofed and managed effectively to sustain ecosystem services and adaptation benefits provided by coral
reefs and related ecosystems.
• Poverty and the lack of economic opportunities. Reef-dependent communities often consist of vulnerable populations,
mostly women, girls and indigenous communities who are disproportionately affected by climate variabilities, with few
opportunities to generate income. In the targeted countries more than 85 million people (17% of total) live on less than
US$1.90 per day and over 323 million people (63% of total) live on less than US$5.50 per day25. To support their families,
individuals will resort to overfishing, destructive fishing, destruction of mangroves for timber and unsustainable aquaculture
(such as intensive shrimp farming). These economic models deliver short-term benefits but have been shown to be ill suited
to supporting wealth creation for the poorest and most marginalised26. More sustainable models of aquaculture, fishing and
tourism need to be adopted. In addition, diversified economic opportunities are needed for reef-dependent communities to
reduce pressure on reefs.
• Increasing coastal development. Development of coastal areas, including large tourism and infrastructure projects, often
fail to account for the detrimental effect they have on coral reefs and related ecosystems. Such activities impact reefs directly
through both direct destruction and increased sedimentation from poorly managed construction. Coastal development must
take into account the impact on coral reefs and associated ecosystems. In particular, we need to factor in the importance of
the role reefs play in climate resilience.
• Unsustainable or uncontrolled tourism. Most tour operators and managers have limited knowledge about the impacts of
climate change on coral reefs and its potential impact on tourism and their livelihoods. Furthermore, a lack of understanding
of the impacts of irresponsible coral reef tourism means that reefs can be severely degraded by tourists touching, polluting
or breaking off parts of the reef. Overcapacity of sites can lead to stressful conditions for marine and coastal species.
Responsible or regenerative tourism practices must be integrated to transform the sector away from coral reef degradation
in target countries.
• Pollution & waste. Communities in the targeted countries often have poor systems in place for the treatment of sewage,
wastewater, floodwater and agricultural runoff including erosion and sedimentation. This can lead to increased algal growth,
the smothering of reefs from sediments and compromised coral physiological and ecological functioning. Financing for
renovations in water treatment, and stronger control of agricultural runoff are needed. The management of plastics and
other waste can be severely lacking in some coral reef sites. Marine plastics cause untold damage to coral reefs and related
ecosystems. Educational campaigns and waste management infrastructure are needed to reduce litter reaching coral reefs,
which compromises the health of the entire ecosystem.
• Limits to our ability to restore coral reefs. Once degraded or destroyed, coral reefs are extremely hard to restore. Coral reef
restoration is a dynamic space that is evolving as new advances emerge. At this stage, it is still difficult to scale-up and speed-
up coral reef restoration efforts to keep pace with the rate of degradation. There is a need for greater investment into
restoration efforts to identify climate change resilient coral species and techniques to maximize their growth and
recolonization in degraded reef habitats.
Local impacts on coral reefs can compound the impact of climate change. Direct human-induced negative impacts on marine
biodiversity and coastal habitats exacerbate the impact of ocean warming and acidification. Increasing global climate and local
anthropogenic pressures have caused the loss of warm-water coral reefs by at least 50% over the past 30–50 years in large
parts of the world's tropical regions. Warm-water coral reefs are largely dependent on the physical and chemical changes
occurring in the surface layers of the ocean. Already weakened, coral reefs are more prone to suffer diseases and outbreaks of
invasive alien species, which further degrade the ecosystem. Uncontrolled tourism, land reclamation and poorly managed
coastal zone development also contributes to the demise of the ecosystem, which undermines the natural assets on which
national and local economies are built. These pressures are observed in each of the target countries. From a reef management
25 World Bank Database
26 See for example, Amoako Johnson, F. , Hutton, C.W., Hornby, D. et al. Is shrimp farming a successful adaptation to salinity intrusion? A
geospatial associative analysis of poverty in the populous Ganges–Brahmaputra–Meghna Delta of Bangladesh. Sustain Sci 11, 423–439 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-016-0356-6

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 59
B
and policy perspective, climate change and ocean acidification increase the need to abate other stress factors on reefs.27
Local action can help protect coral reefs from climate change. Although, the global outlook for corals is bleak there is evidence
from a range of field studies and modelling exercises that suggest that efforts to manage local impacts on coral reefs can
ameliorate the impact of rising temperatures and ocean acidification. For example, models suggest that the ability of coral reefs
to maintain reef building capabilities and keep up with sea level rise is significantly enhanced if targeted management of local
fishing and water quality are undertaken28.
ECONOMIC VALUE OF CORAL REEFS
The global value of coral reefs as an ecosystem service or asset to the economy is well understood. There are several studies
which collectively demonstrate that the value in terms of ecosystem services to the tourism and fisheries sectors, as well as
coastal protection and safeguarding of coastal infrastructure is indeed very significant.
Reef fisheries provide incomes to the most vulnerable. Six million reef fishers (many of whom are small-scale, traditional
subsistence fishers) depend on coastal-reef fisheries, with an estimated value of US $6.8 billion in 201129. Women represent
about 50% of the workforce in the seafood sector and 80 – 90% in the post-harvest sector30. It is estimated that reefs protect
150,000 km of shoreline in more than 100 countries and territories, reducing wave energy and heights, erosion and storm
damage; thus, protecting over 1 billion people (and their property) who live within 100 km of reefs around the world. This
results in an estimated reduction of annual expected damages from storms of over $4 billion globally31. As sea levels continue
to rise, this protection becomes vital.
Coral reefs are a major tourist attraction. Coral reefs underpin the tourism proposition of many tropical countries. Globally
speaking, according to ResourceWatch32, coral reefs attracted an estimated 70 million visitors annually with an associated
expenditure of US $36 billion (prior to COVID-19)33.Researchers looked at how the value of coral reef tourism was spatially
distributed34. It concludes that that over 30% of the world’s reefs are of value in the tourism sector with a total estimated value
of $36 billion; over 9% of all coastal tourism value in the world’s reef countries.
Coral reefs are economically important across the world. UNEP, the Prince of Wales International Sustainability Unit (ISU) and
ICRI conducted a study35 which aims to make the business case for the private and public sectors to invest in protection,
preservation and enhancement of coral reef health. The researchers developed a quantitative model of selected interactions
between live coral cover and economic returns generated by three sectors: tourism, coastal development and commercial
fisheries; in two regions: Coral Triangle and Mesoamerican Reef. More importantly, the study compares future returns between
2017 and 2030 under a “future healthy scenario” or a “degraded reef scenario”. ICRI has also estimated the value of coral reefs
in the Indian Ocean and South East Asia regions. And The Nature Conservancy did a similar study for the Caribbean. Some key
takeaways from these studies:
27 Ove Hoegh-Guldberg , Elvira S. Poloczanska , William Skirving and Sophie Dove 2017,Coral Reef Ecosystems under Climate Change and
Ocean Acidification Front. Mar. Sci., 29 M ay 2017 Https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00158
28 Cacciapaglia, C.W. and van Woesik, R. (2020), Reduced carbon emissions and fishing pressure are both necessary for equatorial coral reefs
to keep up with rising seas. Ecography, 43: 789-800. https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.04949
29 Burke, L., Reytar, K., Spalding, M., Perry, A. (2011) Reefs at Risk Revisited. WRI publication. Available at:
https://www.wri.org/publication/reefs-risk-revisited.
30 Northrop, E., et al. 2020. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID-19 Crisis.’’ Report. Washington, DC: World Resources
Institute. Available online at http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery
31 Beck, M.W., Losada, I.J., Menéndez, P. et al. The global flood protection savings provided by coral reefs. Nat Commun 9, 2186 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-04568-z
32 Coral Reefs | Resource Watch
33 Spalding, M, Burke, L, Wood, S, Ashpole, J, Hutchison, J & Zu Ermgassen, P 2017, 'Mapping the global value and distribution of coral reef
tourism', Marine Policy, vol. 82, pp. 104-113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.014
34 Spalding, M, Burke, L, Wood, S, Ashpole, J, Hutchison, J & Zu Ermgassen, P 2017, 'Mapping the global value and distribution of coral reef
tourism', Marine Policy, vol. 82, pp. 104-113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.014
35 “The Coral Reef Economy”, ICRI, UN Environment, ISU. October 2018.

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 59
B
• Mesoamerican Reef (Mexico, Belize, Guatemala and Honduras). Total economic returns between 2017 and 2030 under the
healthy scenario are estimated at $108 billion to 2030 under the healthy scenario, compared to $73 billion to 2030 under
the degraded scenario. This represents a net-benefit from healthy reefs of $34.6 billion in the 14 years.36
• Coral Triangle (Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia, PNG, Solomon Islands. East Timor). Total economic returns between 2017
and 2030 under the healthy scenario are estimated at $225 billion to 2030 under the healthy scenario, compared to $188
billion to 2030 under the degraded scenario. This represents a net-benefit from healthy reefs of $36.7 billion in the 14
years.
37
• Indian Ocean. It is estimated that 28,000 km2 of reefs provide US $2 billion annually to the economies of the countries
bordering the Indian Ocean. 70% of the benefits are in the tourism sector, while fisheries represent the remainder. Almost
3,000 businesses depend on coral reef health and at least 1.5 million people rely on reef fisheries for their livelihood.38
• Southeast Asia. Some 70,000 km2 of reefs in the region provide tangible benefits of US $10.6 billion annually to the
economies of the countries. Tourism represents almost 55% of this value, while fisheries represents the remainder39.
• Caribbean. Researchers reveal that the total value for all reef-associated tourism is estimated to be over $7.9 billion of
expenditure annually, from 11 million visitors40.
ADAPTATION RATIONALE
Coral reefs will need all the help they can get in the coming decades. As explained above, widespread loss and degradation of
coral reefs due to climate change is expected over the coming decades, however the impact of climate change and the resilience
of coral reefs is greatly influenced by the presence and management of local stressors. Although mitigating the global increase in
sea surface temperature and ocean acidification are widely out of the control of local efforts, protecting priority coral reef
ecosystems and addressing local anthropogenic stressors makes reefs more resilient to the effects of climate change and better
adapted to rebound from bleaching events.
Reef adaptation requires new economic models for coastal communities. To adapt to the threat of climate change, reef-
dependent communities need to transform their relationship with coral reefs in a way that brings together the sustainability of
the ecosystem and ecosystem services and dependent livelihoods. New sustainable business models and practices, particularly
in the tourism, fisheries, and coastal industries are needed to eliminate drivers of degradation and galvanize the resilience of
coral reefs and thus the communities that rely on them. For this to occur, additional investment, particularly from the private
sector, needs to be mobilised.
Prioritise protecting the reefs with the greatest potential to survive. To increase the resilience of coral reefs and the ecosystem
services they provide to climate change, significant global reductions in greenhouse gas emissions are urgently needed. At the
same time and just as urgently, we need to focus on protecting those reefs that have the greatest potential to survive in a warming
and acidifying ocean from local stressors, in order to significantly enhance their adaptive capacity to climate change. These reefs
then have the potential to act as source reefs from which corals can regenerate in the future if climate conditions can be
stabilised. Key strategies to include in these actions include identifying and protecting reef areas that are naturally resistant to
climate change impacts, reducing sources of pollution that increase sensitivity of corals or increase their susceptibility to disease,
preventing damage to reefs through poor boating practices or destructive fishing, preventing overfishing of herbivorous fish and
restoring places of ecological priority following stress events.
36 “The Coral Reef Economy”, ICRI, UN Environment, ISU. October 2018.
37 “The Coral Reef Economy”, ICRI, UN E nvironment, ISU. October 2018.
38 ICRI. Indian Ocean Fact Sheet. 2018. Available at: https://www.icriforum.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/ICRI%20Indian%20Ocean%20Factsheet_0.pdf
39 ICRI. South East Asia Fact Sheet.2018. Available at: https://www.icriforum.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/ICRI%20South%20East%20Asia%20Factsheet_0.pdf
40 The Nature Conservancy. “Reef-Adjacent Tourism Value of Caribbean Coral Reefs”. 2018.

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 59
B
Preventing reefs from transitioning away from corals. We recognise that the impacts of climate change are likely to be so
pervasive that for most reefs there is little chance of effective system adaptation irrespective of which emissions scenario is
followed. The reality is that, for many current reef ecosystems, there will likely be a localised forced transition to another
ecological state such as an algal dominated community without the reef-associated fish assemblages which human
communities rely for income and subsistence. The GFCR will focus on interventions that prevent this transition from happening
and safeguarding the livelihoods of reef-dependent communities. basis, the adaptation pathway for coral reefs needs to
attempt to avoid such systemic transformation of the basic ecosystem.
Identifying those reefs that can act as climate refugia. Identifying and protecting areas of the ocean where conditions are most
stable a key tool for adaptation to climate change. As was the case during historical periods of climate change, climate refugia —
areas retaining suitable habitat despite regional climate change — are likely to be critical in preventing considerable loss of
biodiversity. Climate refugia have been recommended by numerous authors as a key component of any climate change and
biodiversity adaptation program41. Therefore, their protection is becoming a commonly prioritized conservation target. These
climate refugia should be incorporated into Marine Protected Areas, which can provide a safe haven for species in a changing
environment, buffering them against preventable habitat loss, fragmentation and localized-climate change.42 Ideally, for coral
reefs, refugia should be selected to buffer regional changes in stressors related to climate change, in particular ocean temperature
and acidity over decades or centuries. Specifically, for coral reefs these climate refugia need to be selected and managed to
optimise six key criteria43 These include long-term buffering, multistressor protection, accessibility, microclimatic heterogeneity,
size and low exposure to other disturbances.
Deploying investments to ensure resilience Ultimately, for these refugia to be effective in maximising long term persistence they
need to be incorporated into a coordinated program that integrates global and local threat management and adaptation. This
broader approach relies on strong global climate action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, prioritising investment to regions
with greatest potential to ensure resilience, identification of regional threats and potential solutions and to implement strategies
to reduce local co-stressors on coral reefs44,45. For the latter, key interventions include (1) targeted action to reduce non-climate
impacts (2) protection of key ecosystem features (3) ensuring connectivity between reef systems (4) work to restore the structure
and function of reefs (5) support for evolutionary potential (6) relocate organisms where possible and (7) prioritise the protection
of refugia.
ADAPTATION BARRIERS
The following barriers have hindered the development of a robust pipeline and investment opportunities in coral reef protection
and restoration as well as blue economy businesses, which are defined as the sustainable use of ocean resources for economic
growth, improved livelihoods and jobs, and ocean ecosystem health. Investors are still unfamiliar with the promising
opportunities of investing in businesses that safeguard or restore marine and coastal natural capital, which is accompanied by a
perceived high level of risk that inhibits private finance from being funnelled towards effective protection and management of
coral reef ecosystems on which so many depend for their lives and livelihoods.
• Low awareness of the economic importance of coral reefs. Many decision makers are unaware of the importance of coral
reefs – both to today’s economy and for future climate resilience. The consequence is unsustainable use of coral reef
ecosystem resources for short-term gain and underestimation of the true economic value of coral reefs and related
41 Keppel G, Van Niel KP, Wardell-Johnson GW et al. (2012) Refugia: identifying and understanding safe havens for biodiversity under climate
change. Global Ecology and Biogeograph y, 21, 393–404
Tzedakis, P.C., Lawson, I.T., Frogley, M.R., Hewitt,G.M., and Preece, R.C., 2002, Buffered tree pop-ulation changes in a Quaternary refugium:
Evo-lutionary implications: Science, v. 297,p. 2044–2047.;
C. D. Jones, P. Ciais, S. J. Davis, P. Friedlingstein, T. Gasser, G. P. Peters, J. Rogelj, D. P. Van Vuuren, J. G. Canadell, A. Cowie, R. B.
Jackson, M. Jonas, E. Kriegler, E. Littleton, J. A. Lowe, J. Milne, G. Shrestha, P. Smith, A. Torvanger, A. Wiltshire (2016). Simulating the Earth
system response to negative emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 11(9), doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095012
42 UNEP-WCMC and IUCN. 2016.
43 Kavousi, J., & Keppel, G. (2018). Clarifying the concept of climate change refugia for coral reefs. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 75(1), 43–
49. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsx124
44 Hoegh-Guldberg O, Kennedy EV, Beyer HL, McClennen C, Possingham HP (2018) Securing a Long-term Future for Coral Reefs. Trends in
Ecology & Evolution: 33(12) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2018.09.006.
45 J west et al 2017. Climate-Smart Design for Ecosystem Management: A Test Application for Coral Reefs Environmental Management (2017)
59:102–117 DOI 10.1007/s00267-016-0774-3

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 59
B
ecosystems. There is inadequate information on climate vulnerabilities of coral reef ecosystems for medium- to long-term
local level adaptation planning and investment. This undervaluation has led to a lack of public and private funding for
initiatives that protect and enhance the health of coral reefs and associated ecosystems.
• Policy, institutional and regulatory gaps. International and national policies have not been ambitious or effective enough to
address the impacts of climate change on coral reefs and prevent their degradation. Ministries and Authorities regularly fail
to balance coastal and marine zone development with social or environmental imperatives or integrate climate change
impacts into planning and management, and legal and regulatory frameworks are insufficient to prevent degradation or even
destruction of coral reef ecosystems. Capacity development to improve awareness of (1) the drivers of community
vulnerabilities and livelihoods and (2) the true value of coral reefs and related ecosystems as natural assets that underpin
local economies and subsistence is required to upgrade protection and management of these ecosystems. Integration of
natural capital accounting systems (for coral and related ecosystems) could help overcome this barrier. Equally, opportunities
to link public and private sector investment in activities that incentivise and support effective coral reef protection and
management to enhance their resilience must be encouraged.
• Capacity constraints. There is limited national and local financial and technical capacities to promote climate-adaptive
livelihoods that bolster the resilience of coral reefs and related ecosystems. Communities require technical assistance and
knowledge on the ecological impacts of degraded reefs. They would also benefit from technical assistance on good business
practices to implement innovative financial mechanisms and benefit the community and the reef system. Women in
particular require opportunities to lead initiatives that support coral restoration and revive marine/coastal ecosystems.
• Limited private finance for reef adaptation and conservation. Increasingly private investment capital and innovative finance
tools are needed to efficiently scale-up initiatives to save coral reefs and build the resiliency of communities that depend on
them. Additionally, the enabling financial ecosystem is often lacking to channel finance to coral reef climate resilience and
adaptation. Loan borrowers are subjected to high interest rates that comprise the ability to get sustainable blue economy
projects and business off the ground. Credit requirements can be so high that makes it impossible for local entrepreneurs to
obtain a loan in the first place. Public investment, which provides an important platform for private sector growth and
development, is also frequently limited.
• The impact of the pandemic on tourism. Coral reef tourism accounts for $36 billion US dollars a year in coral reef countries.
Of that, $19 billion comes from “on-reef’ tourism: Diving, snorkelling, glass-bottom boating, and reef-related wildlife
watching. The other $16 billion is from “reef-adjacent’ tourism, which includes enjoying beaches, local seafood, paddle-
boarding, and other activities afforded by sheltering adjacent reefs.13 The tourism industry has been devastated by the
ongoing pandemic. International tourist arrivals decreased by more than half and some $320 billion in exports from tourism
were lost in the first 5 months of 2020. Millions of jobs are affected, many of which are in the informal economy or MSMEs.46
While the economic recession is a barrier to boost conservation finance, there is also a once in a lifetime opportunity to make
sure tourism is built back greener, safer, and in a climate-friendly and equitable manner.
Significant groundwork has been undertaken to identify the key threats to coral reef ecosystems and the communities who
depend upon them. The learnings from which have been integrated throughout this document and its annexes, and which will
inform implementation of the programme.
ADAPTATION PATHWAY FOR THE GFCR-IW
Climate change adaptation interventions focused on ecosystems generally attempts to achieve one more of three broad goals.
1. Maintenance of ecosystem services for a target population or region
2. Maximising the persistence of vulnerable ecological communities or species
3. Maximising biodiversity persistence across a region or geographical space
46 UN. (2020, August 25). COVID-19 Tourism Sector Collapse Requires Green, Equitable Rebuilding, Secretary-General Says at Policy Brief
Launch [Press release].https://www.un.or g/press/en/2020/sgsm20218.doc.htm

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 59
B
For the GFCR Investment Window the first and second goals are the priorities; to protect vulnerable coastal communities and
vulnerable coral reef species. We believe that the third goal – maximising biodiversity – will follow in time if we are able to
shephard coastal communities and coral reef species through the difficult transition period. Therefore, the GFCR Investment
Window intends to target the most resilient reefs (identifying climate refugia) by identifying those areas most likely to be either
more resilient to climate change or those regions localities where the impacts of climate change will be less extreme, e.g. the
“50 Reefs” project47. Within this set of resilient reefs, priority should be focussed towards those refugia that provide important
local ecosystem services and maximise ecological or conservation value .
We propose to locate the most resilient reefs to climate change and to enable activities that ameliorate or eliminate existing local
stressors. It is believed that protecting the identified priority networks of climate refugia coral reefs and reducing local stressors,
some ecosystems will survive the impacts of climate change and may help repopulate neighbouring reefs. In terms of which reefs
to prioritise, we will select those which offer the maximum human development benefits and the best chance of safeguarding
coral reef biodiversity for future repopulation..
1. Maximise support to the most resilient reefs (once identified) to support the most vulnerable populations reliant on
those reefs.
2. To create mechanisms and mobilize resources to conserve low climate vulnerability reefs that have potential to reseed
to other regions once the climate has stabilized. In selecting these climate refugia, we will also look to maximise
biodiversity . Refuge areas with rich biodiversity or high ecological values should receive priority.
There are two risks here. The first is that the process due to inadequate knowledge or poor resolution of data means we do not
identify all of the possible climate refugia. The second is that some of the areas classified as refugia are more at risk than
assumed. In the first case, the scale of the problem is so vast that no one single program will be able to identify and secondly
carry out adaptation activities on all suitable reefs. The assessment we have used is based on the best available data and
information we have to date. If the second occurs it means that some of the effort will be spent in areas with limited ecological
return. We will manage these risks by (1) using multiple data sources to identify climate refugia and (2) recognise that the
resilience-status of the identified refugia remains under review while additional data is collected.
The 50 Reef Initiative. This GFCR’s approach is predicated on the findings of the 50 Reefs initiative, financed by Paul G. Allen
Family Foundation, Tiffany & Co. and Bloomberg Philanthropies, which aims to protect 50 Reefs so they are resilient to climate
change, promote adoption of science-based fisheries and marine protection policies in 10 countries, and support 20 countries
in achieving fishing activity transparency. Importantly, the 50 Reefs initiative has identified an optimum global portfolio of reefs
for targeting coral reef conservation that have the potential to survive the impacts of accelerating climate change. This is based
on a peer reviewed global analysis of existing reefs against a range of climate and non-climatic existing and projected stressors
48 (see figure 7 for schematic of selection process). By making the identified coral reefs priority conservation sites, it is
expected that these areas will also have the ability to repopulate neighbouring reefs that suffer degradation from climate
change. In turn, the project will work with reef-dependent communities to adapt their activities to reduce local impacts on
CRAEs to augment the resiliency of reefs. Taking action for the regeneration and protection of coral reefs constitutes a direct
intervention to preserve exceptional biodiversity and reduce the exposure and vulnerability of reef-dependent populations and
economies at the frontlines of climate change
Projections of Future Coral Bleaching Conditions using IPCC CMIP6 Models. This is a publication by the United Nations
Environment Programme (which identifies Ind onesia , western Australia, the Bahamas, Madagascar, India, and Malaysia as
countries with the highest proportions of climate refugia) and Coral Reef Rescue by WWF: This approach builds on related work
undertaken by UNEP’s Coral Reef Unit and WWF’s Coral Reef Rescue initiative (which focuses on building the resilience of coral
reefs and the communities dependent on them by securing reefs in 7 main countries–Fiji, Solomon Islands, Indonesia,
Philippines, Madagascar, Tanzania and Cuba–that account for 70% of the regeneration capacity of coral reefs globally). It is
believed that protecting the identified priority networks of climate refugia coral reefs and reducing local stressors, some
ecosystems will survive the impacts of climate change and may help repopulate neighbouring reefs.
47 Hawthorne L. Beyer et al (2018) Risksensitive planning for conserving coral reefs under rapid climate change Conservation Letters.
2018;11:e12587
48 Hawthorne L. Beyer et al (2018) Risk‐sensitive planning for conserving coral reefs under rapid climate change Conservation Letters.
2018;11:e12587
‐

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 59
B
These global studies assume that the biological response to thermal thresholds is consistent and that a rise in a metric such as
the Degree Heating Weeks will have a similar impact across the coral reef biome. There is the case however, to consider
additional potential coral refugia regions based on the existence of coral genotypes that are less susceptible to thermal stress.
Recent studies in the Red Sea have postulated that the restriction of water flow at the southernmost section of the Red sea has
established a natural thermal barrier which has led to a naturalselection of coral genotypes that are less susceptible to thermal
stress49 Additional studies have shown that there are relatively high acclimatization potential in the northern populations
particularly in the Gulf of Aqaba but limited ability to cope with ocean warming in southern populations that are already existing
at the upper thermal margin for corals50.
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram)
Describe the theory of change and provide information on how it serves to shift the development pathway towards a low-
emission and/or climate resilient direction. Provide the diagram of the theory of change (approximately 1 page).
The theory of change should include any barriers (social, gender, fiscal, regulatory, technological, financial, ecological,
institutional, etc., as relevant) that need to be addressed. Use a results chain of inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes, and impact
statements, and identify the how and why of causal relations to deliver the project’s expected results.
The goal of the GFCR investment window is to enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of coral reef ecosystems and the
communities that are highly dependent upon them to climate change and biodiversity loss, through unlocking and de-risking
private investment.
The ultimate beneficiaries of the GFCR are the men and women located in the regions where investments will be deployed, who
depend on coral reefs for food, protection, and income. Coral reefs are a crucial ecosystem for life underwater, they protect
coastal areas by reducing the power of waves hitting the coast and provide a crucial source of income for millions of people – in
2019, over 350 million jobs were estimated to be linked to ocean activities and global tourism revenues linked to coral reefs
totalled US$ 36 billion. Immediate beneficiaries will also include citizens who will be directly employed and local and national
authorities where projects will be developed and companies deploy their services, benefitting from improved resilience of their
economic and social, as well as ecological ecosystem. Beneficiaries of the GFCR will include all the project developers and
entrepreneurs that will be supported financially. Compliance with the GFCR Fund’s ESMS criteria, rigorous safeguarding, gender
framework and climate impact design will also build their capacity to engage co-investors.
The programme is designed to deliver ecological, social, and economic resilience to coral reef ecosystems and the communities
that depend on them, which are currently threatened by climate change and other drivers of degradation (e.g., pollution,
overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, etc.) through a blended finance model that can unlock private capital and address
current financing barriers. The GFCR Investment Window is the first at-scale solution focusing on addressing the degradation of
coral reef ecosystems through enhanced adaptation, based on the latest science (see the previous section). This means not only
supporting direct restoration activities on reefs that have the greatest chance of survival, but also creating new economic
opportunities that address key drivers of degradation while sustaining livelihoods in the long-term. Given the dire outlook for
coral reefs survival even in a 1.5-degree Celsius global warming scenario, implementing a strategy that can reduce current
stressors while generating economic and social benefits is key.
The goal of the GFCR Fund is also to mobilise private capital, through an effective use of public capital, for this agenda. The
political momentum and investor interest around ocean ecosystems is growing: 14 countries forming the High-Level Panel for a
49 Fine, M., Gildor, H., & Genin, A. (2013). A coral reef refuge in the Red Sea. Global change biology, 19(12), 3640-3647.
50 Sawall, Y., Al-Sofyani, A., Hohn, S. et al. Extensive phenotypic plasticity of a Red Sea coral over a strong latitudinal temperature gradient
suggests limited acclimatization potential to warming. Sci Rep 5, 8940 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep08940

--- Table 1 on Page 19 ---
These global studies assume that the biological response to thermal thresholds is consistent and that a rise in a metric such as
the Degree Heating Weeks will have a similar impact across the coral reef biome. There is the case however, to consider
additional potential coral refugia regions based on the existence of coral genotypes that are less susceptible to thermal stress.
Recent studies in the Red Sea have postulated that the restriction of water flow at the southernmost section of the Red sea has
established a natural thermal barrier which has led to a naturalselection of coral genotypes that are less susceptible to thermal
stress49 Additional studies have shown that there are relatively high acclimatization potential in the northern populations
particularly in the Gulf of Aqaba but limited ability to cope with ocean warming in southern populations that are already existing
at the upper thermal margin for corals50. |  | 
 | B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) | 
Describe the theory of change and provide information on how it serves to shift the development pathway towards a low-
emission and/or climate resilient direction. Provide the diagram of the theory of change (approximately 1 page).
The theory of change should include any barriers (social, gender, fiscal, regulatory, technological, financial, ecological,
institutional, etc., as relevant) that need to be addressed. Use a results chain of inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes, and impact
statements, and identify the how and why of causal relations to deliver the project’s expected results.
The goal of the GFCR investment window is to enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of coral reef ecosystems and the
communities that are highly dependent upon them to climate change and biodiversity loss, through unlocking and de-risking
private investment.
The ultimate beneficiaries of the GFCR are the men and women located in the regions where investments will be deployed, who
depend on coral reefs for food, protection, and income. Coral reefs are a crucial ecosystem for life underwater, they protect
coastal areas by reducing the power of waves hitting the coast and provide a crucial source of income for millions of people – in
2019, over 350 million jobs were estimated to be linked to ocean activities and global tourism revenues linked to coral reefs
totalled US$ 36 billion. Immediate beneficiaries will also include citizens who will be directly employed and local and national
authorities where projects will be developed and companies deploy their services, benefitting from improved resilience of their
economic and social, as well as ecological ecosystem. Beneficiaries of the GFCR will include all the project developers and
entrepreneurs that will be supported financially. Compliance with the GFCR Fund’s ESMS criteria, rigorous safeguarding, gender
framework and climate impact design will also build their capacity to engage co-investors.
The programme is designed to deliver ecological, social, and economic resilience to coral reef ecosystems and the communities
that depend on them, which are currently threatened by climate change and other drivers of degradation (e.g., pollution,
overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, etc.) through a blended finance model that can unlock private capital and address
current financing barriers. The GFCR Investment Window is the first at-scale solution focusing on addressing the degradation of
coral reef ecosystems through enhanced adaptation, based on the latest science (see the previous section). This means not only
supporting direct restoration activities on reefs that have the greatest chance of survival, but also creating new economic
opportunities that address key drivers of degradation while sustaining livelihoods in the long-term. Given the dire outlook for
coral reefs survival even in a 1.5-degree Celsius global warming scenario, implementing a strategy that can reduce current
stressors while generating economic and social benefits is key.
The goal of the GFCR Fund is also to mobilise private capital, through an effective use of public capital, for this agenda. The
political momentum and investor interest around ocean ecosystems is growing: 14 countries forming the High-Level Panel for a |  | 

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 59
B
Sustainable Ocean Economy have committed to sustainably managing 100% of their waters. In a recent survey, 72% of investors
have confirmed their interest in investing in a sustainable ocean economy51.
However, there are currently a handful of ocean-focused funds globally that usually target only one area of the ocean economy
(e.g. waste infrastructure, food production, plastic pollution, fisheries), but there is no initiative at scale that can enable private
investors to deploy capital in the conservation and restoration of coral reefs in developing countries. The $500 million GFCR
Investment Window seeks to bridge that gap, with the support of the Green Climate Fund’s contribution to the junior tranche of
the Investment Window that will enable greater private investment mobilisation.
The programme level Theory of Change for the GFCR Investment Window is shown in a diagram Figure 8, and an explanation is
detailed below.
Figure 8: GFCR Investment Window Theory of Change
51 Responsible Investor Research and Credit Suisse. 2020. Investors and the Blue Economy. https://www.esg-data.com/reports.

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 59
B
Inputs of the programme include:
Public-private consortium: the programme will be delivered by Pegasus Capital Advisors as the executing entity, with the support
of its extensive network of technical partners such as SYSTEMIQ, BNP Paribas and others. In addition, the Global Fund for Coral
Reefs has the support of the UN Multi-Partner Trust Fund Office (UNDP, UNEP, UNCDF), the German and UK Government and

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 59
B
private foundations Vulcan and Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation. These partners are designing a parallel window providing
grants to support an enabling environment for investment in coral reef and reef-dependent community resilience (the “GFCR
Grant Window”), with funding targeting technical assistance, capacity development, emergency grants, and monitoring and
evaluation, as well as contributing to pipeline incubation and sourcing for the Investment Window. While the GFCR Grant Window
is expected to be a potential source of investments for the GFCR Fund, its remit includes purely philanthropic endeavours and is
therefore distinct from the Investment Window’s commercial goals. Both Pegasus and representatives of the Grant Window will
assume roles on a Fund-Level Advisory Board, to be convened once a year, to provide strategic guidance to both the Investment
and Grant Windows. Section B4. Implementation Arrangements elaborates further on the details of the relationship between the
Grant Window and the Investment Window.
Blended finance model to de-risk private capital: the GFCR Fund is being designed as a blended finance fund, with a junior and
senior tranche. The junior tranche commitment is intended to unlock capital from both public investors (multilateral
development banks, sovereign wealth funds, public pension providers, etc.) and more importantly private investors (private
banks, private pension funds, insurance funds, etc.) who are willing to invest into climate adaptation and coral reef ecosystems
but have limited access to attractive opportunities.
Priority reefs systems approach: As explained in the previous section, the GFCR Investment Window will target those sites that
best fit the “climate refugia” scientific rationale and which can attract and absorb a range of tailored public and private
investments for coral reef protection in developing countries. For each site identified, the GFCR Investment Window will adopt a
reef-to-coast systems approach to investing, focusing its efforts on investments that (i) restore coral reefs through existing and
new technologies and adaptive approaches (e.g. ecotourism activities, innovative restoration technologies); (ii) address key
drivers of degradation by (a) improving the productivity of sustainable ocean resources (e.g. sustainable fisheries, sustainable
mariculture, sustainable aquaculture, seaweed production, etc.); (b) reducing or eliminating land-based pollution (e.g. plastic
waste management, coastal agriculture to reduce nutrient run-off, sewage and waste-water infrastructure, clean energy and
transportation). Businesses and activities will be located on the reef as well as on the coastal area surrounding the reef.
Activities of the programme
Four main categories of activities are identified in the programme TOC.
These include three categories related to three target investment sectors that have been identified: Sustainable ocean
production, Sustainable Tourism, and Sustainable Infrastructure and Waste Management. Further details of how these three
sectors contribute directly to climate change adaptation pathways can be found in the Annex 25, Theories of Change for
Investment Sectors. Additionally, an explanation of the rationale for the choice of these sectors is provided in section B3.
The fourth category relates to the activities required to set up the GFCR investment window. These activities and sub-activities
are elaborated in section B3.
The Investment Window of the GFCR will seek to deliver the following high-level outputs:
Increased sustainable production of food: Investment could encompass supporting fishers to adopt more sustainable fish capture
techniques (such as baited traps in lieu of blast fishing), helping fishers manage stocks more sustainably, developing surveillance
and fishing gear from technological advances or improving the sustainability of transport and processing. Sustainable ocean
production can also be achieved through growth in mariculture and aquaculture in a range of markets including seaweed, finfish
and shrimp.
Increased protection and restoration coral reef ecosystems: Interventions may enable degraded coral reefs to be restored, for
instance through robotic coral farming or artificial reef ventures. Alternatively, tourism investments may improve reef health, such
as through enhancing the safety of reef tourism for coral reef ecosystems, or creating revenue streams to reinvest in MPAs.

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 59
B
Growth in jobs and the local economy: Investment and the resulting expansion in local businesses will increase employment rates.
Expansion in industries serving investees (e.g. the food sector for Sustainable Tourism, the construction sector for Sustainable
Infrastructure etc.) will generate employment creation opportunities. Multiplier effects from additional spending within the local
economy – both by tourists and the local employed population - will drive local economic growth.
Improved quality of both coastal waters and freshwater sources: Water quality in coral reef ecosystems and the that depend on
them may be improved through multiple avenues. These include improved plastic waste management from new business models
and technologies that could contribute to improved plastic use, collection, monitoring, sorting and recycling, improved treatment
of sewage and wastewater, the development and adoption of clean, renewable energy and green transportation, and the adoption
of organic fertilizers, bio-stimulants or precision agriculture in lieu of conventional inorganic fertilizer use. Together, these can
reduce ocean acidity, eutrophication and turbidity, as well as the contamination of drinking water sources used by communities.
Increased innovation to support resilience of coral reefs and communities dependent on coral reef ecosystems: The portfolio may
include investments in outside of the country program to allow technology from another country to be imported and implemented
in local communities so that the impact can occur in target reefs. In other cases, investment may be directly into businesses in coral
reef-dependent communities where the object will be to develop, commercialise and scale technologies and innovations. These
innovations could include solutions to enhance coral reef farming, such as micro fragmentation based commercial coral farming, to
improve the sustainability of fishing, for instance drone surveillance technologies, or innovations to improve infrastructure and
waste management such as digital or artificial intelligence-enabled sorting of plastic waste.
Increased market share of sustainable businesses in reef-dependent areas: by adopting a systems approach in target reefs, the
Investment Window will contribute to building sustainable coastal economies and regional capacity in climate-vulnerable
countries.
The GFCR will seek to deliver two main outcomes:
Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks: The outputs of the programme will together generate
improved food security, reduced exposure to water-borne disease, increased income and diversification of household income,
and empowerment – especially of women. These will improve communities’ adaptive capacities and reduce the impact of climate
shocks.
Increase in reef resilience from reduction in local stressors on reefs and protection and restoration of reefs: The outcomes
identified will together contribute to the maintenance and growth in coverage of coral reefs through conservation and
rehabilitation of degraded reefs. They will also seek to limit the key local stressors that negatively impact or constrain reef
resilience.
The GFCR will ultimately create two main impacts:
Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions dependent on coral reef
ecosystems to climate change.
Improved resilience of coral reef ecosystems and ecosystem services to climate change.
Together, these impacts contribute to the fund aim ofenhanced resilience and adaptive capacity of coral reef ecosystems and
the communities that are highly dependent upon them to the effects of climate change.
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages)
Define the project/programme. Describe the proposed set of components, outputs and activities that lead to the expected Fund-
level impact and outcome results. Components should reflect the project/programme level outcomes.

--- Table 1 on Page 23 ---
Growth in jobs and the local economy: Investment and the resulting expansion in local businesses will increase employment rates.
Expansion in industries serving investees (e.g. the food sector for Sustainable Tourism, the construction sector for Sustainable
Infrastructure etc.) will generate employment creation opportunities. Multiplier effects from additional spending within the local
economy – both by tourists and the local employed population - will drive local economic growth.
Improved quality of both coastal waters and freshwater sources: Water quality in coral reef ecosystems and the that depend on
them may be improved through multiple avenues. These include improved plastic waste management from new business models
and technologies that could contribute to improved plastic use, collection, monitoring, sorting and recycling, improved treatment
of sewage and wastewater, the development and adoption of clean, renewable energy and green transportation, and the adoption
of organic fertilizers, bio-stimulants or precision agriculture in lieu of conventional inorganic fertilizer use. Together, these can
reduce ocean acidity, eutrophication and turbidity, as well as the contamination of drinking water sources used by communities.
Increased innovation to support resilience of coral reefs and communities dependent on coral reef ecosystems: The portfolio may
include investments in outside of the country program to allow technology from another country to be imported and implemented
in local communities so that the impact can occur in target reefs. In other cases, investment may be directly into businesses in coral
reef-dependent communities where the object will be to develop, commercialise and scale technologies and innovations. These
innovations could include solutions to enhance coral reef farming, such as micro fragmentation based commercial coral farming, to
improve the sustainability of fishing, for instance drone surveillance technologies, or innovations to improve infrastructure and
waste management such as digital or artificial intelligence-enabled sorting of plastic waste.
Increased market share of sustainable businesses in reef-dependent areas: by adopting a systems approach in target reefs, the
Investment Window will contribute to building sustainable coastal economies and regional capacity in climate-vulnerable
countries.
The GFCR will seek to deliver two main outcomes:
Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks: The outputs of the programme will together generate
improved food security, reduced exposure to water-borne disease, increased income and diversification of household income,
and empowerment – especially of women. These will improve communities’ adaptive capacities and reduce the impact of climate
shocks.
Increase in reef resilience from reduction in local stressors on reefs and protection and restoration of reefs: The outcomes
identified will together contribute to the maintenance and growth in coverage of coral reefs through conservation and
rehabilitation of degraded reefs. They will also seek to limit the key local stressors that negatively impact or constrain reef
resilience.
The GFCR will ultimately create two main impacts:
Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions dependent on coral reef
ecosystems to climate change.
Improved resilience of coral reef ecosystems and ecosystem services to climate change.
Together, these impacts contribute to the fund aim ofenhanced resilience and adaptive capacity of coral reef ecosystems and
the communities that are highly dependent upon them to the effects of climate change. |  | 
 | B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) | 
Define the project/programme. Describe the proposed set of components, outputs and activities that lead to the expected Fund-
level impact and outcome results. Components should reflect the project/programme level outcomes. |  | 

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 59
B
This should be consistent with the financing by component in section C.2, the results and performance indicators provided in
section E.5, and the implementation timetable in annex 5.
Referring to the feasibility study, describe why this set of interventions was selected instead of alternative solutions and how the
project/programme can help unlock the needed support in a sustainable manner. Also identify trade-offs of the selected
interventions, if applicable.
For Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals and projects/programmes with financial intermediation (loans or on-granting),
describe the selection criteria of the sub-project and types.
The programme’s primary aim is to strengthen the adaptive capacity of resilient reefs and the communities that depend on
them. The programme seeks to achieve this goal by raising a US$ 500 million fund, the GFCR Investment Window, that will
enable the financing of 20-30 companies, projects and platforms across three target sectors (i) sustainable ocean production to
address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, and accelerate restoration, (ii) ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism
and accelerate restoration and (iii) sustainable infrastructure addressing pollution. The GFCR Fund will be structured as a
blended finance vehicle with a junior and senior tranche see figure 9). The public contribution to the junior tranche will seek to
leverage up to 3x private capital in the senior tranche.
Figure 9: GFCR Investment Window structure
Programme Activities
Four main categories of activities are identified in the programme TOC. These include three categories related to three target
investment sectors: Sustainable Ocean Production, Sustainable Tourism, and Sustainable Infrastructure and Waste
Management. Further details of how these three sectors contribute directly to climate change adaptation pathways can be
found in the Annex 25, Theories of Change for Investment Sectors, which provides Theories of Change at the level of each of
these individual sectors, and how they function synergistically to create systemic change.

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 59
B
The fourth category relates to the activities required to set up the GFCR investment window. These activities and sub-activities
are elaborated here.
The Accredited Entity will oversee and be responsible for implementing the activities of the programme with support as needed
from its network of advisors and service providers such as BNP Paribas and the UN agencies (UNDP, UNCDF and UNEP). Details
of the relationship between the Accredited Entity and the Grant Window will be further detailed in the Term Sheet.
Activity E1: Implement the legal structure of, and form, the GFCR Fund and related entities. Consummate first closing with
the GCF.
Sub-Activity E1.1: Procure legal services to prepare underlying documentation – It is expected that Kirkland & Ellis LLP
will be the primary outside counsel for structuring the GFCR Fund and preparing the related documentation. Pegasus
does not expect to engage Kirkland in any material capacity until the Funding Proposal is approved by the Board.
Sub-Activity E1.2: Implement legal structure for GFCR Fund and related entities – See Section B.4 of this Funding
Proposal for a description of the legal structure for the GFCR Fund.
Sub-Activity E1.3: Draft formation documents and related Agreements for GFCR entities – See Section B.4 of this
Funding Proposal for a description of the legal structure for the GFCR Fund.
Sub-Activity E1.4: Consummate Initial Closing of the GFCR Fund with GCF as anchor investor – The GCF (via GCF Reef
Holdings as described in Section B.4 below) will make a capital commitment to the GFCR Fund of $125 million at the
initial closing of the GFCR Fund. Of this commitment, $25 million will be unconditional at the initial closing, although
this amount will be increased to $50 million so long as the GFCR Fund procures at least $10 million of additional co-
investment at the first closing. The remainder of the commitment will become unconditional at subsequent closings
with third-party investors in an amount such that, after giving effect to such closing, the GCF commitment represents
no more than 25% of aggregate commitments to the GFCR Fund. Also at the initial closing, the Accredited Entity or
one or more of its affiliates will make a capital commitment to the GFCR Fund in an amount equal to 1% of the total
commitments to the GFCR Fund.
Activity E2: Fundraise $375mm of additional capital for the senior tranche.
Sub-Activity E2.1: Prepare fundraising material; evaluate GFCR Fund suitability – The Accredited Entity has extensive
fundraising experience, having raised five prior funds and is currently fundraising for the Global Subnational Climate
Fund (approved by the Board at B.27). The Accredited Entity may cause the GFCR Fund to engage one or more
placement agents to assist in the fundraise.
Sub-Activity E2.2: Draft Private Placement Memorandum and Other Marketing Materials. Market Fund to other
investors. The Private Placement Memorandum and other marketing materials will be prepared by the Accredited
Entity.
Sub-Activity E2.3: Negotiate with potential investors and close on additional commitments to the GFCR Fund – It is
expected that the GFCR Fund would hold several closings over the course of up to 15 months after the initial closing
with GCF (subject to extension for up to an additional six months). See the Summary of Principal Terms attached to
Annex 14 to this Funding Proposal.
Activity E3: Identify and maintain a pipeline of potential investments
- Sub-Activity E3.1: Early-stage sourcing – Pegasus has extensive experience sourcing and maintaining a pipeline of
potential transactions. Unlike most private equity sponsors who rely heavily on auction processes for deal flow, Pegasus
has historically sourced the vast majority of its investments outside of an auction process. In fact, every transaction in
Pegasus’ most recent fund was sourced on a proprietary basis. As a result, Pegasus has, over the course of its 25-year
history, built an expansive network of current and former advisors and contacts that it can leverage for potential

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 59
B
transactions (e.g. corporate contacts, incubators, etc.). Furthermore, the Grant Window, in coordination with Convening
Agents and key stakeholders will help incubate, source and mature a pipeline of investible projects to be considered by
Pegasus for the fund portfolio. In addition, on the ground networks of the GW will be activated to source additional
promising deals for the IW in target geographies.52 Details of this synergistic arrangement are further outlined in Section
B.4.
Sub-Activity E3.2: Develop the pipeline – As the investment period of the GFCR Fund is up to five years after the final
closing of the GFCR Fund, Pegasus will regularly evaluate and update the pipeline. Potential transactions will be
screened against minimum eligibility criteria, which will be detailed in the Term Sheet. Those opportunities that the
Manager determines, in its business judgment, are the most promising will be selected for further due diligence.
Activity E4: Manage the investment activities of the GFCR Fund, perform due diligence on potential opportunities and
execute transactions
Sub-Activity E4.1: Perform Due Diligence on proposed deals. The GFCR Fund team seeks to conduct comprehensive
due diligence of prospective investments. The due diligence evaluation typically consists of multiple in-person
meetings, teleconferences and written questionnaires with members of the potential investment’s management. A
financial model is typically built using management’s projections and key assumptions are subjected to sensitivity
analysis. Assuming the GFCR Fund team wishes to proceed, the team will typically enter into a non-binding term sheet
with the target company/project that outlines the key terms on which the GFCR Fund team would be willing to make
an investment. Throughout the initial evaluation process, the GFCR Fund team is in frequent communication with
members of the GFCR Fund’s Investment Committee to gauge overall interest in the opportunity and discuss the
opportunities and risks associated with the potential investment.
After a term sheet is executed and the GFCR Fund team is granted exclusivity, the team will conduct a full due
diligence review of the opportunity, including by engaging third-party advisors as appropriate, including legal, tax,
accounting and regulatory, as needed. The GFCR Fund team also conducts due diligence on ESG risks and opportunities
in accordance with the ESMS, its ESG Management System, and will engage an ESG Specialist, as appropriate. The
depth of the due diligence procedures is based upon the categorization of the investment opportunity and guided, as
stated in the ESMS, by the IFC Performance Standards, Equator Principles and CDC ESG Toolkit. Depending on the
circumstances, technical consultants may be engaged for additional expertise.
Sub-Activity E4.2: Prepare documentation for Investment Committee. The investment team prepares an investment
memo for formal presentation and review by the Investment Committee, which summarizes the investment
opportunity and key deal terms. Often times at this point there are several additional iterations of diligence or
structure before the Investment Committee is prepared to make a final decision on the proposed transaction. The
Investment Committee will then make a formal determination whether or not to proceed with the transaction. Once
the Investment Committee has determined to proceed with the transaction, any material changes relating to the
transaction will need to be further approved by the Investment Committee.
Activity E4.3: Consummate transactions approved by the Investment Committee. Working with external counsel, the
investment team prepares and negotiates final investment agreements. The investment is approved by the AIFM and
the transaction is consummated.
Activity E5: Manage the Investment Portfolio
Sub-Activity E5.1: Provide ad-hoc support to Portfolio Companies. From the time of the initial investment, Pegasus
seeks to be integrally involved with the growth and development of the its portfolio companies. Most often, this is
accomplished through one or more seats on a company’s board of directors or similar governing body. In situations
where Pegasus holds a minority interest, Pegasus will typically seek to negotiate appropriate contractual rights and
52 The GW is not expected to be the sole source of potential transactions for the IW, as the IW expects to also source potential transactions
through its own networks.

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 59
B
minority protections. Pegasus seeks to play active role in value creation and portfolio company management post-
investment, often working with management teams to establish new strategic initiatives, relationships and distribution
channels. When opportunities arise, the Pegasus team and the applicable portfolio company management team work
as a unit to drive forward towards a positive result. Pegasus representatives regularly meet with management teams
to create and assess progress on growth initiatives.
Activity E5.2: Perform regular evaluation of Portfolio Companies.
Activity E6: Report to the Limited Partners
Sub-Activity E6.1: Collect information of investees, implement verification mechanisms, implement data collection
tools
Sub-Activity E6.2: Organize annual audit of the GFCR Fund
Sub-Activity E6.3: Report to LPs on financial results, impacts and beneficiaries. Definitive reporting requirements will
be specified in the GFCR Fund’s limited partnership agreement. Historically, Pegasus has provided unaudited financial
information on a quarterly basis, audited year-end financial statements, and a narrative update on each portfolio
company on a quarterly basis.
Activity E7: Exit assets, return capital plus profit to Limited Partners, close out the Fund
Sub-Activity E7.1: Evaluate exit opportunities. The Investment Committee regularly evaluates potential exit
opportunities for the portfolio companies. Pegasus also maintains a robust network of financial advisors who can be
engaged to assist in the marketing and sale of the GFCR Fund’s investments. Members of the GFCR Fund team have
extensive experience exiting assets through IPOs, sales to both strategic and financial acquirers and recapitalizations.
Due diligence information provided to prospective buyers typically includes information outlining the business case for
ESG and any impact investing approaches. This information may include how value was created from ESG.
Sub-Activity E7.2: Negotiate sales transactions
Sub-Activity E7.3: Execute Exit and Distribute Proceeds. “Exit” refers to the GFCR Fund monetizing its interest in an
investee company. It is expected that the significant majority of exit transactions will consist of a sale for cash
proceeds which are distributed by the GFCR Fund to its limited partners (including GCF), subject to reserves for
expenses and contingent liabilities. The GFCR Fund may also seek to structure an exit that allows the GFCR Fund to
generate interim cash flows – e.g., annual payments from the project as a percent of revenue or net income.
Sub-Activity E7.4: Liquidate the GFCR Fund after all Portfolio Companies have been fully disposed
Target geographies
As explained in section A, the GFCR Investment Window will target those sites that best fit the “climate refugia” scientific rationale
and which can attract and absorb a range of tailored public and private investments for coral reef protection in developing
countries.
To identify potential sites for investment, potential countries were screened against three key factors:
1. Climate Change Resilience - based primarily on 50 Reefs Bioclimatic Units (BCUs) presence/absence - only countries with
priority BCUs for climate resilience. Climate resilience remains the guiding principle of the fund, and therefore countries
with climate resilience references from peer-reviewed studies should be prioritized.
2. UNFCCC Non-annex I Status - Only countries with UNFCCC Non-Annex I Status are eligible due to the grant and
concessional financing approach of the GFCR.
3. Investment and Trade Restrictions - Target investors cannot invest in, nor will a custodian/depositary permit investment
into, countries with UN, US, and EU sanctions, or other trade restrictions.

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 59
B
For the countries meeting these requirements, additional criteria including ecological reef value, investment risk profile, and
reef dependence (% of GDP dependent on reefs) were subsequently applied. Finally, the decision was taken to retain 6
countries as exceptions to this filtering process, either on the basis that they expressed strong interest in involvement in the
programme, or that they are countries that form part of a wider multi-country reef system of which some countries were in
scope. Ultimately, 32 countries were selected and included in the proposal. The market study (Annex II) gathers more details
and information about the sites selected.
The Investment Window will seek to invest in the 17 countries which have provided NOLs, with up to a maximum of 33% of the
value of the Investment Window allocated to a single country. The allocation of financing across countries within the program
will be commensurate to the number of coral reef refugia, the strength of the pipeline, and the size of the reef-dependent
population.
Target Sectors
The GFCR Fund expects to target the following sectors:
1. Sustainable ocean production to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, and accelerate restoration
2. Ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism and accelerate restoration
3. Sustainable infrastructure addressing pollution
These have been selected based on (1) impact: each investment will be enhancing the resilience of priority reef sites by
supporting direct restoration activities, or indirect ones by addressing drivers of degradation; (2) market sizing: including
analysis on market trends, growth areas, and latest investment rounds; (3) potential pipeline scoped. A potential pipeline of
[$US 1 billion] has been identified to be deployed in target sites. More detail can be found in the feasibility study in Annex II
(forthcoming).
Within these sectors, the GFCR Fund will target investments that:
A. restore coral reefs through existing and new technologies and adaptive approaches (e.g. ecotourism activities, innovative
restoration technologies - e.g. artificial reefs ventures, assisted evolution tech companies, coral gardening and sexual
propagation ventures); and/or
B. reduce or eliminate key drivers of coral reef degradation such as overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, nutrient loading
from agricultural run-off, pollution from litter, discharge of sewage and other contaminants in coastal water, deforestation of
mangroves for urban development and aquaculture, non-sustainable tourism and poor waste management.
Structurally, the GFCR Fund expects to primarily take control equity positions in its investee companies, though investments
may be made in debt and/or hybrid securities or in minority positions on a case by case basis. Where an investment is not a
control position, the GFCR Fund will seek to negotiate appropriate minority protections. Individual investments will be
structured on a case-by-case basis in consultation with outside legal and tax advisors, though it is expected that each
investment will be structured through one or more newly created special purpose vehicles controlled by the GFCR Fund.
Investments may be made at the project level or the corporate level. For investments at the corporate level, the GFCR Fund
will ensure that the company deploys an amount of funding in the host countries at least equal to GCF’s pro rata portion of the
invested capital. In addition, the GFCR Fund may invest in one or more platform companies that serves to aggregate multiple
smaller projects in order to leverage and scale project technology and design.53
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
53 These platform companies would not have investment discretion, but rather refers to the GFCR Fund aggregating multiple
related projects/companies under a single SPV.

--- Table 1 on Page 28 ---
For the countries meeting these requirements, additional criteria including ecological reef value, investment risk profile, and
reef dependence (% of GDP dependent on reefs) were subsequently applied. Finally, the decision was taken to retain 6
countries as exceptions to this filtering process, either on the basis that they expressed strong interest in involvement in the
programme, or that they are countries that form part of a wider multi-country reef system of which some countries were in
scope. Ultimately, 32 countries were selected and included in the proposal. The market study (Annex II) gathers more details
and information about the sites selected.
The Investment Window will seek to invest in the 17 countries which have provided NOLs, with up to a maximum of 33% of the
value of the Investment Window allocated to a single country. The allocation of financing across countries within the program
will be commensurate to the number of coral reef refugia, the strength of the pipeline, and the size of the reef-dependent
population.
Target Sectors
The GFCR Fund expects to target the following sectors:
1. Sustainable ocean production to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, and accelerate restoration
2. Ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism and accelerate restoration
3. Sustainable infrastructure addressing pollution
These have been selected based on (1) impact: each investment will be enhancing the resilience of priority reef sites by
supporting direct restoration activities, or indirect ones by addressing drivers of degradation; (2) market sizing: including
analysis on market trends, growth areas, and latest investment rounds; (3) potential pipeline scoped. A potential pipeline of
[$US 1 billion] has been identified to be deployed in target sites. More detail can be found in the feasibility study in Annex II
(forthcoming).
Within these sectors, the GFCR Fund will target investments that:
A. restore coral reefs through existing and new technologies and adaptive approaches (e.g. ecotourism activities, innovative
restoration technologies - e.g. artificial reefs ventures, assisted evolution tech companies, coral gardening and sexual
propagation ventures); and/or
B. reduce or eliminate key drivers of coral reef degradation such as overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, nutrient loading
from agricultural run-off, pollution from litter, discharge of sewage and other contaminants in coastal water, deforestation of
mangroves for urban development and aquaculture, non-sustainable tourism and poor waste management.
Structurally, the GFCR Fund expects to primarily take control equity positions in its investee companies, though investments
may be made in debt and/or hybrid securities or in minority positions on a case by case basis. Where an investment is not a
control position, the GFCR Fund will seek to negotiate appropriate minority protections. Individual investments will be
structured on a case-by-case basis in consultation with outside legal and tax advisors, though it is expected that each
investment will be structured through one or more newly created special purpose vehicles controlled by the GFCR Fund.
Investments may be made at the project level or the corporate level. For investments at the corporate level, the GFCR Fund
will ensure that the company deploys an amount of funding in the host countries at least equal to GCF’s pro rata portion of the
invested capital. In addition, the GFCR Fund may invest in one or more platform companies that serves to aggregate multiple
smaller projects in order to leverage and scale project technology and design.53 |  | 
 | B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) | 

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 59
B
Provide a description of the project/programme implementation structure, outlining legal, contractual, institutional and
financial arrangements from and between the GCF, the Accredited Entity (AE) and/or the Executing Entity(ies) (EE) or any third
parties (if applicable) and beneficiaries.
- Provide information on governance arrangements (supervisory boards, consultative groups among others) set to
oversee and guide project implementation. Provide a composition of the decision-making body and oversight function,
particularly for Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals.
- Provide information on the financial flows and implementation arrangements (legal and contractual) between the AE
and the EE, between the EE or any third party and beneficiaries. For EEs that will administer GCF funds, indicate if a
Capacity Assessment has been carried out. Where applicable, summarize the results of the assessment.
- Describe the experience and track record of the AE and EEs with respect to the activities (sector and country/region)
that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.
Provide a diagram(s) or organogram(s) that maps such arrangements including the governance structure, legal arrangements,
and the flow and reflow of funds between entities.
Governance of the GFCR Fund:
The investment activities of the GFCR Fund will be overseen by the Accredited Entity, via the GFCR Investment Committee. The
Investment Committee will be comprised of a majority of members appointed by the Accredited Entity and will act by majority
vote. Pegasus has 25+ years of experience in private equity investment, having deployed five equity funds with an impact-driven
approach to investment focused on sustainability, health, and wellness. Senior advisers also retain experience in government
engagement and ocean-related investments.
Relationship between the Grant Window and Investment Window
The Grant Window (“GW”) and Investment Window (“IW”) will perform independent but complementary and coordinated roles
to seek to maximise impact of the GFCR. The GW aims to establish an enabling environment for the IW, more broadly to financing
coral reef resilience initiatives, and ultimately to de-risk private sector involvement in the sustainable blue economy. Grant
funding from the GW targets technical assistance, capacity development, emergency grants, and monitoring and evaluation, and
contributes to pipeline incubation and sourcing for the IW. The GW also has a philanthropic mandate such that not all of the
projects funded by the GW will be appropriate for the IW. The GW delivers its mission with the support of the UN Multi-Partner
Trust Fund Office (UNDP, UNEP, UNCDF), the German, French and UK Governments, and private foundations Paul G. Allen Family
Foundation and Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation. Support will also be provided by The Nature Conservancy, Wildlife
Conservation Society, WWF, Conservation International, MAR Fund and Blue Finance (collectively, the “Convening Agents”).
Although the remit of each Window is distinct, their mandate is the same: to enhance the resilience of coral reefs and reef-
dependent communities. To this end, the objectives for each Window and the governance structure of the overall fund have been
designed to ensure that the IW and GW work in tandem to deliver key synergies that will maximise the impact of the GFCR.
The integrated dual Window model enables the GFCR to build on the respective strengths and remits of the two Windows, and
ultimately to mobilize finance from prospective partners on a global scale to support countries in improving their progress to
achieving adaptation to climate change. This collaboration materialises in an iterative, reinforcing dialogue that includes:
- IW sharing inputs to help identifying GW priorities. While sourcing its pipeline and engaging with Grant Window
Convening Agents and key stakeholders in target geographies, the IW will identify and raise to GW’s attention the
pipeline gaps (sectors, technologies, infrastructure, etc.), needs for capacity building, or need for support in policy
reforms and enforcement, that can then be addressed through disbursement of targeted grants by the GW.
- GW supporting development of pipeline for the IW. The GW, in coordination with Convening Agents and key
stakeholders will help incubate, source and mature a pipeline of investible projects to be considered by the IW for the
fund portfolio, working for instance with local accelerators and incubators, providing financial support to small and
medium enterprises (SMEs), start-up companies and NGOs to develop their commercial activities, and undertaking site-
based studies to identify drivers of degradation and potential business models that could address these drivers. In

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 59
B
addition, on the ground networks of the GW will be activated to source additional promising deals for the IW in target
geographies.54 The IW can also source potential investees independently of the GW. In these cases, the GW will be able
to jointly review the investment proposal and Due Diligence as observers in the Investment Committee.
- GW supporting the IW in the Due Diligence process. GW capabilities (including technical and scientific expertise),
methodologies, local knowledge, and on-the-ground networks can be mobilised to reduce transaction costs and support
ex-ante risk measurement and feasibility studies in relation to due diligence work (see Figure 10) as it relates to the
impact on coral reef ecosystems and local communities.
- GW improving and de-risking the business environment. GW support in target geographies (e.g., increased local
capacity, technical assistance, facilitation of dialogue with local policy-makers) is expected to support the sustainable
development and growth of IW portfolio companies.
- GW and IW collaborating on impact methodologies and measurement. The two Windows will collaborate to ensure
the impact of the GFCR is defined, tracked and reported in the most science-based, systematic and transparent way
through monitoring by Convening Agents and supported by UNEP.
Four main mechanisms have been designed to enable the GW and IW to collaborate productively and in an agile way:
1. GW as observer in the IW Investment Committee. Key stakeholders from the GW – the UNEP, UNDP and UNCDF – will
be involved in pre- and post-investment activities, including sourcing, due diligence, monitoring and reporting, and will
be able to provide guidance, knowledge and access to relevant networks as required.
2. IW (through Pegasus) as an observer and advisor to the Executive Board of the GW, whose remit includes approving
grant allocations by the GW. This forum will provide the opportunity for Pegasus to enhance their visibility of and
influence over the key focus areas for the GW.
3. Fund-level Advisory Board, to be convened once a year, explicitly adopting a shared focus on the strategy for and
progress of the two Windows and advising on strategic issues advanced by both the Investment Committee and the
Executive Board. The Advisory Board’s scope includes the development of guidance to both Windows based on the
evolution of best practices in the fields of coral reef conservation, impact investing (including investment standards),
blended finance, investment standards and sustainable business development. The Terms of Reference for the Advisory
Board are still under development. However, there is potential for GCF to assume a Technical Advisor role on the Fund-
Level Advisory Board as part of the National Governments & Public Institutions members contingent, which would
provide line of sight on the future direction of both Windows.
4. Regular and ad-hoc meetings taking place between the IW and the GW. The UN Global Team and Investment
Committee explicitly intend to meet at least bi-annually to align on project and investment priorities. This channel of
communication allows for ongoing and reactive knowledge sharing and evolving discussions on strategic priorities.
Further details of the nature of the arrangement between the GW and the IW will be elaborated in the Term Sheet.
Figure 10: Key Stakeholders from the Grant Window will be involved at multiple stages of the Investment Window investment
process
54 The GW is not expected to be the sole source of potential transactions for the IW, as the IW expects to also source potential transactions
through its own networks.

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 59
B
The founding and convening members of the Grant Window together offer deep experience and expertise on coral reefs and the
blue economy. The relationship between the Grant Window and the Investment Window will therefore be a key source of
expertise and knowledge for Pegasus and the investment process to draw upon.
The Paul G. Allen Family Foundation is a leading philanthropic organisation launched in 1988. The Foundation supports ocean,
climate and biodiversity projects, including the Allen Coral Atlas and research on human-assisted evolution of coral to develop
stocks of climate resilient coral that can survive increases in sea temperature. The Foundation also partnered with Bloomberg
Philanthropies and Tiffany and Co. Foundation on the 50 Reefs global coral reef action agenda, which seeks to identify the top
key reef systems that offer the most hope in withstanding future changes in ocean conditions and developing conservation
strategies to protect their ecosystems and re-populate lost reefs.
The Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation has long been active in marine conservation issues. The Foundation currently supports
initiatives such as The Because the Ocean Initiative, Association Monégasque sur l’Acidification des Océans, and Beyond Plastic
Med. The Foundation’s projects revolve around the themes of conservation of endangered species, development of MPAs, ocean
acidification, and studies on climate change and its effects. The Prince has also organized several high-profile events to promote
awareness and mobilize collective action for ocean issues. For example, in 2017 he presented the Coral Reef Life Declaration at
the Our Ocean Conference in Malta, which has been signed by more than 16 countries. Additionally, the Prince of Monaco hosts
an annual Ocean Week bringing together Member States, the UN, NGOs and others to discuss proactive solutions to some of the
most pressing ocean issues.
UN Environment is mandated to work on the sustainable management of coral reefs through its Coral Reef Unit, Governing
Council decision 21/12, and United Nation Environment Assembly Resolutions 2/12 and 4/13. It will support the GFCR by
providing strategic direction for Fund activities, technical advice/expertise on issues affecting coral reefs, and effective solutions
to the coral reef crisis.
UN Development Programme (UNDP) is the leading United Nations organization working to end the injustice of poverty and
inequality, and tackling climate and nature crises for achieving sustainable development. UNDP’s broad network of experts and
partners in 170 countries facilitates access to resources such as knowledge, skills, networks, technology, finance, and business
opportunities. UNDP efforts in the blue economy are critical for bringing actors together to deliver integrated development
solutions that deliver SDG impacts. Its country level presence makes mapping potential markets, by simplifying and making it
more feasible to identify and collaborate with local clients.

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 59
B
Blue Finance is a not-for-profit organization developing impact investment projects focused on sustainable finance for marine
protected areas (MPA). Their approach is one of the most direct blended finance approaches for coral reef conservation and they
have recently been awarded a design grant from Convergence for their work. They are active in multiple coral reef countries with
priority BCUs (Indonesia, Philippines, Fiji, Bahamas, Dominican Republic and more).
Conservation International (CI) is a large environmental NGO that works in the world’s biodiversity hotspots. Combining
fieldwork with innovations in science, policy and finance, they’ve helped protect more than 6 million square kilometers (2.3
million square miles) of land and sea across more than 70 countries. Additionally, Conservation International has a USD 25M
conservation focused venture fund called CI Ventures. They partner with Althelia/Mirova and have a strong interest in blue
economy investments. CI also plays a leading role in the Blue Nature Alliance.
The Mesoamerican Reef Fund (MAR Fund) was established in 2004 as a private Conservation Trust Fund (CTF) to drive regional
funding and partnerships for the conservation, restoration, and sustainable use of the Mesoamerican Reef. Its programmes
include: Saving our Sanctuaries – supporting the establishment and protection of an interconnected network of priority coastal
and marine protected areas in the region; Fishing for the Future - community participation in co-management of their fisheries;
Climate Change - Monitoring climate change effects on the reef and supporting adaptation to climate change. They have also
recently developed the Mesoamerican Reef Technical Assistance Facility (MARTAF), to provide financial and logistic support for
development of conservation-oriented businesses in the region. Examples of initiatives have included a conservation focused
hotel and a wastewater treatment plant.
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) currently operates across more than 100 marine conservation projects. Several of the innovative
financing mechanisms being developed by TNC have direct impacts on coral reefs and include an ambitious, global programme
to develop Blue Bonds through Debt Conversions, reef insurance mechanisms and the development of novel Blue Carbon Resilient
Credits.
The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has an active global conservation programme operating in some of the most intact and
resilient places on the planet. WCS has programmes in some of the most important GFCR focal areas including East Africa, the
Coral Triangle, and more. The organization has supported business-based approaches to conservation in multiple landscapes.
The WWF is a world-leading conservation organisation. There are synergies between WWF and GFCR in likely cooperating
countries, and potential for collaboration to accelerate project pipeline development and the financing for sustainable coastal
resources management and blue economies for coral safe businesses. Under a project called the Coral Reef Resilience Initiative,
WWF is seeking GCF grant funding to provide the necessary institutional enabling conditions and technical assistance to develop
pipeline projects and support reef-dependent communities.
Legal Structure of the GFCR Fund
Figure 11: Structure Chart of the GFCR Fund

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 59
B
GFCR Fund – Structure Chart
Pegasus Capital
LP Advisors, LP
(Delaware)
GP
Pegasus Capital
Green Climate Fund
Advisors GP, LLC
(Delaware)
100%
Holdings GP
(Delaware LLC) 100% economic
GP Ownership GP
Holdings LPA Holdings LPA
Manager
GCF (Delaware limited Delegated portfolio management Lux AIFM
Portfolio Management Agreement (Luxembourg)
Reef partnership)
Holdings
(Delaware, limited
Third Party
partnership) Portfolio Manager
Investors
Fund LPA
Senior LP Interest Junior LP Interest
Fund LPA Fund LPA General Partner AIFM
(Luxembourg S.a r.l) AIFM Agreement
GP
Fund LPA
Administrator,
Custodian and
Administration Agreement
Depositary(1)
Custody Agreement
GFCR
Depositary Agreement Fund
(Luxembourg
SCSp)
SPV 1(2) SPV 2(2) SPV N(2)
(1) Shown as a single entity for simplicity, but may be more than one service provider.
(2) The structure of each underlying investment will be determined on a case-by-case basis in consultation with legal and tax advisors.
Pegasus anticipates the GFCR Fund will be a newly formed Luxembourg SCSp, and its general partner will be a newly formed
company wholly controlled by employees of the Accredited Entity, and which Pegasus expects to form as a Luxembourg S.a. r.l.
The GFCR Fund will engage a third party licensed alternative investment fund manager (the “Lux AIFM”) within the meaning of
the Luxembourg law of 12 July 2013 on alternative investment fund manages (as amended, the “AIFM Law”). The Lux AIFM will
delegate investment decision-making authority to a newly formed entity wholly controlled by employees of the Accredited Entity
(the “Manager”).
GCF’s participation in the GFCR Fund will be in the form of a junior limited partnership interest (the “Junior Interest”); provided
that, if after the final closing of the GFCR Fund, GCF Reef Holdings represents more than 25% of the total commitments to the
GFCR Fund, the portion of GCF Reef Holdings’ commitment in excess of 25% will automatically be converted into senior limited
partnership interests (the “Senior Interests”). It is expected that GCF (via GCF Reef Holdings (described below)) will be the sole
investor in the Junior Interests. See Annex 1 to this Term Sheet for more details on the Junior Interests.
The GCF proceeds will be channelled to the GFCR Fund through the Accredited Entity on behalf of the GCF. Specifically, the
Accredited Entity proposes to establish a holding company with the sole purpose of holding the GCF’s Junior Interest (“GCF Reef

--- Table 1 on Page 33 ---

LP

--- Table 2 on Page 33 ---
10 | 0%

--- Table 3 on Page 33 ---
100%
Own
Holdi | economi
ership
ngs LPA

--- Table 4 on Page 33 ---
Portfolio
Fund | Manager
LPA

--- Table 5 on Page 33 ---
AIF
AIFM Ag | M
reement

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 59
B
Holdings”). The Accredited Expects to form GCF Reef Holdings as a Delaware limited partnership, with the Accredited Entity or a
controlled affiliate of the Accredited Entity serving as general partner of GCF Reef Holdings (“Holdings GP”).
Third-party investors will acquire Senior Interests in the GFCR Fund pro rata in accordance with the size of their respective capital
commitment to the GFCR Fund. The General Partner or its affiliates will also make a commitment to the GFCR Fund in the form
of Senior Interests.
Implementation Agreements
The Accredited Entity has proposed that GCF Reef Holdings, acting for the benefit of GCF, will subscribe for the Junior Interests
pursuant to the terms of a Subscription Agreement to be entered into between the GFCR Fund and GCF Reef Holdings (the “Fund
Subscription Agreement”). The Fund Subscription Agreement will set forth the capital commitment of GCF Reef Holdings to the
GFCR Fund, which will be $125 million, and further specify that (i) GCF Reef Holdings will unconditionally commit $25 million at
the initial closing, which amount will be increased to $50 million if the GFCR Fund procures at least $10 million of additional co-
investment at the first closing and (ii) the remainder of the commitment will become unconditional at subsequent closings in an
amount such that, after giving effect to such closing, GCF Reef Holdings represents no more than 25% of aggregate commitments
to the GFCR Fund.
GCF Reef Holdings will also be a party, together with the General Partner (on its own behalf) and each additional limited partner
in the GFCR Fund, to the Limited Partnership Agreement (the “LPA”) of the GFCR Fund, which will set forth the rights and
obligations of GCF Reef Holdings as a limited partner.
GCF Reef Holdings and the General Partner signing on behalf of the GFCR Fund, will also enter into a Side Letter to grant GCF Reef
Holdings certain additional rights that are specific to the GCF. To the extent necessary, these rights may also be reflected in the
partnership agreement for GCF Reef Holdings.
The Subscription Agreement, the LPA and the Side Letter will be executed on GCF’s behalf by a representative of the Accredited
Entity in such individual’s capacity as an authorized signatory of GCF Reef Holdings. It is expected that the Subscription
Agreement, the LPA and the Side Letter will be governed by Luxembourg law and any disputes in relation thereto will be resolved
through arbitration by ICC Arbitration rules to be held in London, United Kingdom, although the final structure will be determined
in consultation with outside counsel.
The Accredited Entity has proposed that GCF will subscribe for a limited partnership interest in GCF Reef Holdings pursuant to
the terms of a Subscription Agreement to be entered into between GCF and GCF Reef Holdings (the “Holdings Subscription
Agreement”). GCF will also be a party, together with the Holdings GP, to the Limited Partnership Agreement of GCF Reef Holdings
(the “Holdings LPA”). It is anticipated that the only partners in GCF Reef Holdings will be the GCF (as sole limited partner and
sole economic owner) and the Holdings GP, as the general partner.
The Holdings Subscription Agreement and Holdings LPA will be executed on GCF’s behalf by a representative of the Accredited
Entity pursuant to a power of attorney granted by the GCF to the Accredited Entity, which will be included as part of the FAA.
The General Partner on behalf of the GFCR Fund will appoint the Lux AIFM to act as alternative investment fund manager within
the meaning of the AIFM Law for the GFCR Fund and enter into an agreement for the purpose thereof which will set out the
duties and obligations of the Lux AIFM in relation to the management of the GFCR Fund (the “AIFM Agreement”). The AIFM
Agreement will be governed by Luxembourg law and any disputes in relation thereto will be subject to Luxembourg courts.
The Manager and the Lux AIFM, in the presence of the General Partner will enter into a portfolio management agreement which
will govern the relationship between the Lux AIFM and the Manager in relation to the investment management of the GFCR Fund
(the “Portfolio Management Agreement”). It is expected that the Portfolio Management Agreement will be governed by e
Luxembourg law and any disputes in relation thereto will be subject to resolution in Luxembourg courts. The governing law and
dispute resolution will be determined with the advice of outside counsel.

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 59
B
Neither the AIFM Agreement nor the Portfolio Management Agreement will be a Subsidiary Agreement. Instead, the Accredited
Entity will enter into a Side Letter with the Lux AIFM (the “AIFM Letter”) whereby the AIFM acknowledges that Pegasus (as
Accredited Entity) has contractually agreed to ensure the AIFM’s compliance with certain terms of the FAA, (ii) confirms that it
has been made aware of and has considered such terms and (iii) shall use reasonable best efforts to comply with the applicable
obligations contemplated thereby.
The Accredited Entity and the Manager will enter into a Management and Fee Sharing Agreement (the “Management and Fee
Sharing Agreement”) pursuant to which the Accredited Entity will provide investment advisory services to the Manager in
exchange for the management fees received by the Manager.
The Accredited Entity will also enter into a separate agreement (the “Pegasus Implementation Agreement”) with (i) the GFCR
Fund, represented by the GP, (ii) the GP acting on its own behalf, (iii) the Manager, (iv) GCF Reef Holdings, represented by
Holdings GP, (v) Holdings GP acting on its own behalf and (vi) each other Executing Entity (if any) with respect to implementation
of the Funded Activity in order to pass down the relevant obligations under the AMA and the FAA is to such entities.
The Pegasus Implementation Agreement, the Management and Fee Sharing Agreement and the AIFM Letter are intended to be
a “Subsidiary Agreement” under the FAA.
Responsibilities of Executing Entities
The Activities and Sub-Activities of the GFCR will be implemented by the Executing Entities as follows:
Activity Sub-Activity Responsible Executing
Entity(ies)
1. E1: Form the 1. E1.1: Procure legal services to prepare Accredited Entity
GFCR; set up the underlying documentation
General Partner and
the contracts with 2. E1.2: Implement the structure the GFCR Accredited Entity
licensed AIFM. Fund and related entities
3. E1.3: Draft formation documents and Accredited Entity
related agreements for GFCR entities
4. E1.4: Consummate Initial Closing of the General Partner; GCF
GFCR Fund with GCF (via GCF Reef Holdings) as Reef Holdings; Accredited
anchor investor Entity
2. E2: Fundraise 1. E2.1: Prepare fundraising material; Accredited Entity
$375mm of private evaluate GFCR Fund suitability
investment into Senior
Interests E2.2: Draft Private Placement Memorandum Accredited Entity;
and Other Marketing Materials. Market Fund General Partner
to other investors.
2. E2.3: Negotiate with potential investors Accredited Entity;
and close on additional commitments to the General Partner
GFCR Fund
3. E3: Manage the 1. E3.1: Early stage sourcing Accredited Entity;
Pipeline and Identify a Manager

--- Table 1 on Page 35 ---
Activity | Sub-Activity | Responsible Executing
Entity(ies)
1. E1: Form the
GFCR; set up the
General Partner and
the contracts with
licensed AIFM. | 1. E1.1: Procure legal services to prepare
underlying documentation | Accredited Entity
 | 2. E1.2: Implement the structure the GFCR
Fund and related entities | Accredited Entity
 | 3. E1.3: Draft formation documents and
related agreements for GFCR entities | Accredited Entity
 | 4. E1.4: Consummate Initial Closing of the
GFCR Fund with GCF (via GCF Reef Holdings) as
anchor investor | General Partner; GCF
Reef Holdings; Accredited
Entity
2. E2: Fundraise
$375mm of private
investment into Senior
Interests | 1. E2.1: Prepare fundraising material;
evaluate GFCR Fund suitability | Accredited Entity
 | E2.2: Draft Private Placement Memorandum
and Other Marketing Materials. Market Fund
to other investors. | Accredited Entity;
General Partner
 | 2. E2.3: Negotiate with potential investors
and close on additional commitments to the
GFCR Fund | Accredited Entity;
General Partner
3. E3: Manage the
Pipeline and Identify a | 1. E3.1: Early stage sourcing | Accredited Entity;
Manager

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 59
B
Portfolio of Bankable
2. E3.2: Develop the pipeline Accredited Entity;
Projects
Manager
4. E4: Manage 1. E4.1: Perform Due Diligence on proposed Accredited Entity;
investment activities; deals Manager
perform Due
Diligence; prepare 2. E4.2: Prepare documentation for Accredited Entity;
investment Investment Committee Manager
documentation for
the Investment
3. E4.3: Consummate transactions approved Accredited Entity;
Committee and AIFM
by the Investment Committee Manager
5. E5: Manage the 1. E5.1: Provide ad-hoc support to Portfolio Accredited Entity;
portfolio, assist Companies Manager
portfolio companies in
achieving climate 2. E5.2: Perform regular evaluation of Accredited Entity;
mitigation and Portfolio Companies Manager
adaptation, business,
as well as SDG and
NbS objectives
6. E6: Report to the 1. E6.1: Collect information of investees, Accredited Entity;
Limited Partners implement verification mechanisms, Manager
implement data collection tools
2. E6.2: Organize annual audit of the GFCR Accredited Entity;
Fund Manager; General Partner
3. E6.3: Report to LPs on financial results, Accredited Entity;
impacts and beneficiaries General Partner
7. E7: Exit Assets, 1. E7.1: Evaluate exit opportunities Accredited Entity;
return capital plus Manager
profit to limited
partners, close out the 2. E7.2: Negotiate sales transactions Accredited Entity;
Fund.
Manager
3. E7.3: Execute Exit and Distribute Proceeds Manager; General Partner
4. E7.4: Liquidate the GFCR Fund after all General Partner
Portfolio Companies have been fully disposed.
Co-financing
In addition to the GCF Proceeds, the Accredited Entity expects to raise the remaining $375 million of co-financing from various
third-party investors (each, a “Co-financier” and the amounts raised, the “Co-financing”).
The Accredited Entity will lead the fundraising efforts for the GFCR Fund. Although the Accredited Entity expects to do some light
pre-marketing in advance, it is anticipated that the Accredited Entity would not commence fundraising efforts in earnest until

--- Table 1 on Page 36 ---
Portfolio of Bankable
Projects | 2. E3.2: Develop the pipeline | Accredited Entity;
Manager
4. E4: Manage
investment activities;
perform Due
Diligence; prepare
investment
documentation for
the Investment
Committee and AIFM | 1. E4.1: Perform Due Diligence on proposed
deals | Accredited Entity;
Manager
 | 2. E4.2: Prepare documentation for
Investment Committee | Accredited Entity;
Manager
 | 3. E4.3: Consummate transactions approved
by the Investment Committee | Accredited Entity;
Manager
5. E5: Manage the
portfolio, assist
portfolio companies in
achieving climate
mitigation and
adaptation, business,
as well as SDG and
NbS objectives | 1. E5.1: Provide ad-hoc support to Portfolio
Companies | Accredited Entity;
Manager
 | 2. E5.2: Perform regular evaluation of
Portfolio Companies | Accredited Entity;
Manager
6. E6: Report to the
Limited Partners | 1. E6.1: Collect information of investees,
implement verification mechanisms,
implement data collection tools | Accredited Entity;
Manager
 | 2. E6.2: Organize annual audit of the GFCR
Fund | Accredited Entity;
Manager; General Partner
 | 3. E6.3: Report to LPs on financial results,
impacts and beneficiaries | Accredited Entity;
General Partner
7. E7: Exit Assets,
return capital plus
profit to limited
partners, close out the
Fund. | 1. E7.1: Evaluate exit opportunities | Accredited Entity;
Manager
 | 2. E7.2: Negotiate sales transactions | Accredited Entity;
Manager
 | 3. E7.3: Execute Exit and Distribute Proceeds | Manager; General Partner
 | 4. E7.4: Liquidate the GFCR Fund after all
Portfolio Companies have been fully disposed. | General Partner

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 59
B
after the Funding Proposal receives GCF Board approval. Accordingly, it is expected that the initial closing of the GFCR Fund will
occur with the GCF commitment only. The Accredited Entity anticipates that there would be a series of additional closings with
third-party investors after the GCFR’s initial closing that would take place up to fifteen months after closing on the GCF’s anchor
commitment, subject to an extension for up to an additional six months.
The Accredited Entity intends to focus on four broad groups that it believes are aligned with the GFCR Funds’ goals:
1. U.S. foundations and endowments;
2. European institutional investors;
3. High-net worth individuals from developed and developing countries; and
4. Public and Private Finance institutions and DFIs
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Explain why the project/programme requires GCF funding, i.e. Why is the project/programme not currently being financed by
public and/or private sector? Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any other domestic or
international sources of financing?
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall financing package.
i.e. What is the coherence between activities financed by grants and those financed by reimbursable funds? How were co-financing
amounts and prices determined? How does the concessionality of the GCF financing compare to that of the co-financing? If
applicable, provide a short market read on the prevailing of the pricing and/or financial markets for similar projects/programmes.
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial instrument(s) is the minimum required to make the investment viable.
Additionally, how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept of minimum concessionality? Who
benefits from concessionality?
In your answer, please consider the risk sharing structure between the public and private sectors, the barriers to investment and
the indebtedness of the recipient. Please reference relevant annexes, such as the feasibility study, economic analysis or financial
analysis when appropriate.
Investor demand for sustainable investments is on the rise, as shown by the growing supply of thematic financial products and i
ncreasing investor (and asset manager) focus on ESG- and impact-related investments. A study from Credit Suisse and Responsi
ble Investor shows that over a third of large institutional investors see Blue Economy as one of the most important sustainable i
nvestment topics in 2020, yet it remains one of the least invested themes across impact investors (even decreasing by 11% over
the period 2013-17)55 due to the lack of investable solutions.
The co-financing provided by the GCF will enable the GFCR Investment Window to create a catalytic instrument that provides th
e opportunity to move away from the “business as usual” scenario that has hindered access to finance for coral reef rescue.
GCF financing tackles 4 main constraints that public and private investors alone cannot tackle:
i. Scale: the GCF can provide critical catalytic capital to de-risk the fund structure and mobilise additional capital to bring
the GFCR to a significant size that will enable it to (i) target several priority reefs at once and (ii) deliver substantial imp
act in terms of adaptation and systemic change by adopting a systems approach and investing in several critical sectors
. This scale will enable the participation of private investors by aggregating projects, providing monitoring and reportin
g and overall lowering transaction costs for individual investors who want to participate in the blue economy;
55 Sustainable Ocean For All, OECD, 2020

--- Table 1 on Page 37 ---
after the Funding Proposal receives GCF Board approval. Accordingly, it is expected that the initial closing of the GFCR Fund will
occur with the GCF commitment only. The Accredited Entity anticipates that there would be a series of additional closings with
third-party investors after the GCFR’s initial closing that would take place up to fifteen months after closing on the GCF’s anchor
commitment, subject to an extension for up to an additional six months.
The Accredited Entity intends to focus on four broad groups that it believes are aligned with the GFCR Funds’ goals:
1. U.S. foundations and endowments;
2. European institutional investors;
3. High-net worth individuals from developed and developing countries; and
4. Public and Private Finance institutions and DFIs |  | 
 | B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) | 
Explain why the project/programme requires GCF funding, i.e. Why is the project/programme not currently being financed by
public and/or private sector? Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any other domestic or
international sources of financing?
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall financing package.
i.e. What is the coherence between activities financed by grants and those financed by reimbursable funds? How were co-financing
amounts and prices determined? How does the concessionality of the GCF financing compare to that of the co-financing? If
applicable, provide a short market read on the prevailing of the pricing and/or financial markets for similar projects/programmes.
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial instrument(s) is the minimum required to make the investment viable.
Additionally, how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept of minimum concessionality? Who
benefits from concessionality?
In your answer, please consider the risk sharing structure between the public and private sectors, the barriers to investment and
the indebtedness of the recipient. Please reference relevant annexes, such as the feasibility study, economic analysis or financial
analysis when appropriate.
Investor demand for sustainable investments is on the rise, as shown by the growing supply of thematic financial products and i
ncreasing investor (and asset manager) focus on ESG- and impact-related investments. A study from Credit Suisse and Responsi
ble Investor shows that over a third of large institutional investors see Blue Economy as one of the most important sustainable i
nvestment topics in 2020, yet it remains one of the least invested themes across impact investors (even decreasing by 11% over
the period 2013-17)55 due to the lack of investable solutions.
The co-financing provided by the GCF will enable the GFCR Investment Window to create a catalytic instrument that provides th
e opportunity to move away from the “business as usual” scenario that has hindered access to finance for coral reef rescue.
GCF financing tackles 4 main constraints that public and private investors alone cannot tackle:
i. Scale: the GCF can provide critical catalytic capital to de-risk the fund structure and mobilise additional capital to bring
the GFCR to a significant size that will enable it to (i) target several priority reefs at once and (ii) deliver substantial imp
act in terms of adaptation and systemic change by adopting a systems approach and investing in several critical sectors
. This scale will enable the participation of private investors by aggregating projects, providing monitoring and reportin
g and overall lowering transaction costs for individual investors who want to participate in the blue economy; |  | 

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 59
B
ii. Signalling: the support of the GCF will demonstrate the commitment to grow a pipeline of investable opportunities in t
he coral reef space, attracting more private investors to the GFCR;
iii. Scope: a significant portion of de-risking capital in the GFCR structure will enable it to focus on more early-stage assets
with nascent business models – preliminary pipeline scoping indicates this is the case for most impactful projects;
iv. Scarcity: there are still limited public and development resources directed at adaptation and resilience. Supporting the
first adaptation fund for coral reefs of this size will serve to increase financial flows for these important climate goals.
Several structures across the blended finance universe were analysed and consultations with potential investors carried out to
determine the target 25 percent contribution (see Annex 7 on stakeholder engagement and Annex 22 on blended finance
structures with subordinate tranches of up to 45%).
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Explain how the project/programme sustainability (financial, institutional, social, gender equality, environmental) will be
ensured in the long run after project closure, including how the project’s results and benefits will be sustained.
Include information pertaining to the longer-term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations and maintenance of
investments (e.g. key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements). In case of private sector, please describe the GCF’s
financial exit strategy through IPOs, trade sales, etc.
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as a consequence of the
project/programme implementation for scaling up and continuing best practices.
The Investment Window will seek to enhance the environmental, social and economic resilience of coral-dependent
communities. This will mean it will invest in bankable businesses and projects that restore or indirectly halt the degradation of
corals by reducing or eliminating local stressors. These business and projects are expected to live beyond the lifetime of the
GFCR Fund. As described elsewhere in this Funding Proposal, it is expected that the GFCR Fund’s underlying investments will
ultimately be sold to third-parties for cash proceeds, which are then distributed by the GFCR Fund to its limited partners. The
GFCR Fund will be liquidated (and the programme will be completed) once the final investment is disposed of, and all remaining
proceeds are distributed to the limited partners and any remaining liabilities are finally resolved.

--- Table 1 on Page 38 ---
ii. Signalling: the support of the GCF will demonstrate the commitment to grow a pipeline of investable opportunities in t
he coral reef space, attracting more private investors to the GFCR;
iii. Scope: a significant portion of de-risking capital in the GFCR structure will enable it to focus on more early-stage assets
with nascent business models – preliminary pipeline scoping indicates this is the case for most impactful projects;
iv. Scarcity: there are still limited public and development resources directed at adaptation and resilience. Supporting the
first adaptation fund for coral reefs of this size will serve to increase financial flows for these important climate goals.
Several structures across the blended finance universe were analysed and consultations with potential investors carried out to
determine the target 25 percent contribution (see Annex 7 on stakeholder engagement and Annex 22 on blended finance
structures with subordinate tranches of up to 45%). |  | 
 | B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
Explain how the project/programme sustainability (financial, institutional, social, gender equality, environmental) will be
ensured in the long run after project closure, including how the project’s results and benefits will be sustained.
Include information pertaining to the longer-term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations and maintenance of
investments (e.g. key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements). In case of private sector, please describe the GCF’s
financial exit strategy through IPOs, trade sales, etc.
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as a consequence of the
project/programme implementation for scaling up and continuing best practices.
The Investment Window will seek to enhance the environmental, social and economic resilience of coral-dependent
communities. This will mean it will invest in bankable businesses and projects that restore or indirectly halt the degradation of
corals by reducing or eliminating local stressors. These business and projects are expected to live beyond the lifetime of the
GFCR Fund. As described elsewhere in this Funding Proposal, it is expected that the GFCR Fund’s underlying investments will
ultimately be sold to third-parties for cash proceeds, which are then distributed by the GFCR Fund to its limited partners. The
GFCR Fund will be liquidated (and the programme will be completed) once the final investment is disposed of, and all remaining
proceeds are distributed to the limited partners and any remaining liabilities are finally resolved. |  | 

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 59
C
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested GCF funding (i + ii Total amount Currency
+ iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 125 million USD ($)
GCF financial instrument Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
(i) Senior loans Enter amount Enter years Enter years Enter %
(ii) Subordinated loans Enter amount Enter years Enter years Enter %
As set forth in
(iii) Equity 125 15 the Term Sheet
(iv) Guarantees Enter amount Enter years
(v) Reimbursable grants Enter amount
(vi) Grants Enter amount
(vii) Results-based payments Enter amount
Total amount Currency
(b) Co-financing information
375 million USD ($)
Financial Tenor &
Name of institution Amount Currency Pricing Seniority
instrument grace
Enter 15 6-8% senior
million USD
Senior Investors Equity 375 years
($)
=
1% of total million USD 15 years 6-8% senior
GP Commitment Equity
commitments ($) Enter years
Enter years Enter% Options
Click here to enter text. Options Enter amount Options
Enter years
Enter years Enter% Options
Click here to enter text. Options Enter amount Options
Enter years
Amount Currency
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) 500 million USD ($)
Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type
of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax
exemptions and contributions of assets.
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.
An affiliate of the Accredited Entity will make a capital commitment to the GFCR Fund in an
(d) Other financing
amount equal to 1% of total commitments, which will be funded pro rata as and when the
arrangements and contributions
General Partner calls capital from the limited partners in the GFCR Fund.
(max. 250 words, approximately
0.5 page) The Accredited Entity will lead the fundraising efforts for the GFCR Fund. Although the
Accredited Entity expects to do some light pre-marketing in advance, it is anticipated that
the Accredited Entity would not commence fundraising efforts in earnest until after the
GFCR Funding Proposal receives GCF Board approval. Accordingly, it is expected that the
initial closing of the GFCR Fund will occur with the GCF commitment only. The Accredited
Entity anticipates that there would be a series of additional closings with third-party
investors after the GCFR’s initial closing that would take place up to fifteen months after
closing on the GCF’s anchor commitment.

--- Table 1 on Page 39 ---
 | FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) Requested GCF funding (i + ii |  |  |  |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) |  |  |  |  |  | 125 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF financial instrument |  |  |  |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  |  | Pricing |  | 
 | (i) |  |  | Senior loans |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  |  | 
 | (ii) |  |  | Subordinated loans |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  |  | 
(iii) |  |  | Equity |  |  | 125 |  |  |  |  | 15 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | As set forth in
the Term Sheet |  |  | 
 | (iv) |  |  | Guarantees |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (v) |  |  | Reimbursable grants |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vi) |  |  | Grants |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vii) |  |  | Results-based payments |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(b) Co-financing information |  |  |  |  |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 375 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Name of institution |  |  |  |  |  |  | Financial |  | Amount |  |  |  | Currency |  |  | Tenor & |  | Pricing |  |  |  | Seniority | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | grace |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Senior Investors |  |  |  |  |  | Equity |  |  | 375 |  |  |  | million USD
($) |  | Enter 15
years
= |  |  | 6-8% |  |  |  | senior | 
GP Commitment |  |  |  |  |  | Equity |  |  | 1% of total
commitments |  |  |  | million USD
($) |  | 15 years
Enter years |  |  | 6-8% |  |  |  | senior | 
Click here to enter text. |  |  |  |  |  | Options |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Options |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | Options | 
Click here to enter text. |  |  |  |  |  | Options |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Options |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | Options | 
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) |  |  |  |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 500 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(d) Other financing
arrangements and contributions
(max. 250 words, approximately
0.5 page) |  |  |  |  |  | Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type
of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax
exemptions and contributions of assets.
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.
An affiliate of the Accredited Entity will make a capital commitment to the GFCR Fund in an
amount equal to 1% of total commitments, which will be funded pro rata as and when the
General Partner calls capital from the limited partners in the GFCR Fund.
The Accredited Entity will lead the fundraising efforts for the GFCR Fund. Although the
Accredited Entity expects to do some light pre-marketing in advance, it is anticipated that
the Accredited Entity would not commence fundraising efforts in earnest until after the
GFCR Funding Proposal receives GCF Board approval. Accordingly, it is expected that the
initial closing of the GFCR Fund will occur with the GCF commitment only. The Accredited
Entity anticipates that there would be a series of additional closings with third-party
investors after the GCFR’s initial closing that would take place up to fifteen months after
closing on the GCF’s anchor commitment. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 39 ---
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b)

--- Table 3 on Page 39 ---
(d) Other financing
arrangements and contributions
(max. 250 words, approximately
0.5 page)

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 59
C
The Accredited Entity intends to focus on four broad groups that it believes are aligned
with the GFCR Funds’ goals:
1. U.S. foundations and endowments;
2. European institutional investors;
3. High-net worth individuals from developed and developing countries; and
4. Public and Private Finance institutions and DFIs
C.2. Financing by component
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and disaggregate by
source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output. Provide the summarised cost
estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million USD million USD Instrument million USD Instrument Institutions
($)
($) ($)
Investments $125 Equity $375 + 1% Equity Private
to enhance of total Investors +
resiliency of commitmen GP
coral reefs ts commitmen
$500
and t (1%)Click
Investment into
populations here to
the GFCR that depend enter text.
on them
Click here to Enter Choose an Enter Choose an Click here
enter text. Enter amount amount item. amount item. to enter
text.
Indicative total cost (USD) $500 + 1% GP
$125M $375M + 1% GP commitment
commitment
Given that the GFCR Fund is an investment fund rather than a project it is not possible to specify the funding by Component.
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other annexes
including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.
In case of a multi-country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in annex 17, if
available.
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? Yes No
☐ ☒
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? Yes No
☒ ☐
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a brief
description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent possible.

--- Table 1 on Page 40 ---
 |  | The Accredited Entity intends to focus on four broad groups that it believes are aligned
with the GFCR Funds’ goals:
1. U.S. foundations and endowments;
2. European institutional investors;
3. High-net worth individuals from developed and developing countries; and
4. Public and Private Finance institutions and DFIs |  |  | 
 | C.2. Financing by component |  |  |  | 
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and disaggregate by
source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output. Provide the summarised cost
estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million USD million USD Instrument million USD Instrument Institutions
($)
($) ($)
Investments $125 Equity $375 + 1% Equity Private
to enhance of total Investors +
resiliency of commitmen GP
coral reefs ts commitmen
$500
and t (1%)Click
Investment into
populations here to
the GFCR that depend enter text.
on them
Click here to Enter Choose an Enter Choose an Click here
enter text. Enter amount amount item. amount item. to enter
text.
Indicative total cost (USD) $500 + 1% GP
$125M $375M + 1% GP commitment
commitment
Given that the GFCR Fund is an investment fund rather than a project it is not possible to specify the funding by Component.
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other annexes
including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.
In case of a multi-country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in annex 17, if
available. |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) |  |  |  | 
 | C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? |  |  | Yes No
☐ ☒ | 
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? |  |  | Yes No
☒ ☐ | 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a brief
description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent possible. |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 40 ---
Component | Output | Indicative
cost
million USD
($) |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Financial |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Name of
Institutions | Name of | 
 |  |  |  | million USD |  |  | Instrument |  |  | million USD |  |  |  | Institutions | 
 |  |  |  | ($) |  |  |  |  |  | ($) |  |  |  |  | 
Investment into
the GFCR | Investments
to enhance
resiliency of
coral reefs
and
populations
that depend
on them | $500 | $125 |  |  | Equity |  |  | $375 + 1%
of total
commitmen
ts |  |  | Equity | Private
Investors +
GP
commitmen
t (1%)Click
here to
enter text. |  | 
 | Click here to
enter text. | Enter amount | Enter
amount |  |  | Choose an
item. |  |  | Enter
amount |  |  | Choose an
item. | Click here
to enter
text. |  | 
Indicative total cost (USD) |  | $500 + 1% GP
commitment | $125M |  |  |  |  |  | $375M + 1% GP commitment |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 40 ---
Indicative
cost
million USD
($)

--- Table 4 on Page 40 ---
Financial
Instrument

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 59
C
In some cases, the GFCR Fund will invest in companies that operate and have developed technologies in developed countries,
and the GFCR Fund’s investment proceeds will be used to deploy such technologies in the target countries. Investments will
ensure technologies are deployed in target countries and implemented by local communities.

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 59
D
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s Initial
Investment Framework.
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Describe the potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the GFCR Fund’s objectives and result
areas. As applicable, describe the envisaged project/programme impact for mitigation and/or adaptation. Provide the impact
for mitigation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to low-emission sustainable development pathways.
Provide the impact for adaptation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to increased climate-resilient
sustainable development. Calculations should be provided as an annex. This should be consistent with section E.2 reporting
GCF’s core indicators.
• Beneficiaries: the GFCR Investment Window is expected to directly benefit those individuals engaged in reef-first
businesses and livelihoods, and indirectly benefit the coastal communities that depend on the targeted reef. The
number of expected direct beneficiaries are 12,737 –people who will have new jobs created by projects supported
GFCR.
• Increased resilience of the coral reef biome: The GFCR Investment Window will seek to invest in the world’s most
resilient reefs because this gives reefs, globally the best chance of survival. Healthy reefs will, in turn increase the
health and resilience of related ecosystem services (such as fish stocks and disaster-risk reduction/ buffers to coastal
erosion).
• Resilient and ecologically-sustainable livelihoods: healthy reefs and coastal ecosystems are the bedrock for
sustainable livelihoods for reef-dependent communities. The GFCR Investment Window is expected to have significant
co-benefits in the following economic activities: eco-tourism, sustainable fishing and aquaculture, small- scale
agriculture, income generation from reef restoration, and waste management.
• Financial returns for the private sector and economic engines in target countries: The GFCR Investment Window will
invest in businesses which will prioritize the conservation and regeneration of coral reefs, which is estimated to have
significant economic returns generated by three sectors, mainly: tourism, coastal development and commercial
fisheries. A quantitative analysis by ICRI and UNEP found that healthy reefs can deliver additional economic benefits
amounting to over $30 billion in the Mesoamerican Reef and in the Coral Triangle, between 2017 and 2030.56
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Describe the degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project or programme investment.
Describe the following, if applicable:
• Potential for scaling up and replication
• Potential for knowledge sharing and learning
• Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment
• Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies
• Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change
adaptation strategies and plans
This programme is the first GCF solution to unlock critical new sources of funds and increase long-term flows of innovative and
blended finance to eliminate the current ‘coral reef funding gap’ and rescue coral reefs in the face of accelerating climate
change and – in so doing – secure the basis for survival and adaptation of vulnerable reef-dependent communities. It provides a
paradigm shift firstly by enabling private and public institutional investors to participate in coral reef conservation activities.
Secondly, it also addresses long-term sustainability issues by creating not only environmental, but also social and economic
resilience by developing sustainable local economies, creating alternative livelihoods and embedding adaptive technologies and
techniques that will outlive the programme’s duration. Finally, the GFCR Investment Window programme sets a blueprint for
other conservation efforts by seeking to address the threat of climate change by adopting a science-based and systems
approach – in this case targeting the most resilient reefs and focusing on addressing the drivers of degradation.
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
56 UN Environment, ISU, ICRI and Trucost. (2018). The Coral Reef Economy: The business case for investment in the protection,
preservation and enhancement of coral re ef health, p. 36. Available at:
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/26694/Coral_Reef_Economy.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y

--- Table 1 on Page 42 ---
 | EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA | 
 | This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s Initial | 
 | Investment Framework. | 
 | D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | Describe the potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the GFCR Fund’s objectives and result | 
 | areas. As applicable, describe the envisaged project/programme impact for mitigation and/or adaptation. Provide the impact | 
 | for mitigation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to low-emission sustainable development pathways. | 
 | Provide the impact for adaptation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to increased climate-resilient | 
 | sustainable development. Calculations should be provided as an annex. This should be consistent with section E.2 reporting | 
 | GCF’s core indicators. | 
 |  | 
 | • Beneficiaries: the GFCR Investment Window is expected to directly benefit those individuals engaged in reef-first | 
 | businesses and livelihoods, and indirectly benefit the coastal communities that depend on the targeted reef. The | 
 | number of expected direct beneficiaries are 12,737 –people who will have new jobs created by projects supported | 
 | GFCR. | 
 | • Increased resilience of the coral reef biome: The GFCR Investment Window will seek to invest in the world’s most | 
 | resilient reefs because this gives reefs, globally the best chance of survival. Healthy reefs will, in turn increase the | 
 | health and resilience of related ecosystem services (such as fish stocks and disaster-risk reduction/ buffers to coastal | 
 | erosion). | 
 | • Resilient and ecologically-sustainable livelihoods: healthy reefs and coastal ecosystems are the bedrock for | 
 | sustainable livelihoods for reef-dependent communities. The GFCR Investment Window is expected to have significant | 
 | co-benefits in the following economic activities: eco-tourism, sustainable fishing and aquaculture, small- scale | 
 | agriculture, income generation from reef restoration, and waste management. | 
 | • Financial returns for the private sector and economic engines in target countries: The GFCR Investment Window will | 
 | invest in businesses which will prioritize the conservation and regeneration of coral reefs, which is estimated to have | 
 | significant economic returns generated by three sectors, mainly: tourism, coastal development and commercial | 
 | fisheries. A quantitative analysis by ICRI and UNEP found that healthy reefs can deliver additional economic benefits | 
 | amounting to over $30 billion in the Mesoamerican Reef and in the Coral Triangle, between 2017 and 2030.56 | 
 |  | 
 | D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | Describe the degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project or programme investment. | 
 | Describe the following, if applicable: | 
 | • Potential for scaling up and replication | 
 | • Potential for knowledge sharing and learning | 
 | • Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment | 
 | • Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies | 
 | • Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change | 
 | adaptation strategies and plans | 
 | This programme is the first GCF solution to unlock critical new sources of funds and increase long-term flows of innovative and | 
 | blended finance to eliminate the current ‘coral reef funding gap’ and rescue coral reefs in the face of accelerating climate | 
 | change and – in so doing – secure the basis for survival and adaptation of vulnerable reef-dependent communities. It provides a | 
 | paradigm shift firstly by enabling private and public institutional investors to participate in coral reef conservation activities. | 
 | Secondly, it also addresses long-term sustainability issues by creating not only environmental, but also social and economic | 
 | resilience by developing sustainable local economies, creating alternative livelihoods and embedding adaptive technologies and | 
 | techniques that will outlive the programme’s duration. Finally, the GFCR Investment Window programme sets a blueprint for | 
 | other conservation efforts by seeking to address the threat of climate change by adopting a science-based and systems | 
 | approach – in this case targeting the most resilient reefs and focusing on addressing the drivers of degradation. | 
 |  | 
 | D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 59
D
Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals and
provide an estimation of the impact potential in terms of:
• Environmental co-benefits
• Social co-benefits including health impacts
• Economic co-benefits
• Gender-sensitive development impact
Ecosystem services provided by coral reefs and associated ecosystems are especially vital for achieving nature-dependent United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including SDG 14 ‘Life Below Water’. In total, coral reef initiatives contribute directly to 13 SDGs through
entry points that include coral reef tourism, food security and nutrition, shoreline protection, and human health and wellbeing. This is illustrated
in Figure 8 below, which shows how coral reef-centred interventions contribute to the 2030 Agenda and multiple SDGs.
Figure 11: SDGs tackled through the GFCR
Social co-benefits:
• Local skills and knowledge – Development, implementation and running of portfolio companies will leverage existing local capabilities,
including indigenous knowledge.
• Capacity building – Capacity building assistance in priority countries.
• Enhanced empowerment and stewardship for coastal communities – Local communities are supported to independently manage the
sustainability coastal and ocean resources as collectives.
• Food security – Increased – or better managed - volumes of production from aquatic food industries – and a greater diversity of
industries – will improve food security and resilience of the food sector to climate change.
• Improved health and reduced disease prevalence from sustainable infrastructure limiting exposure to pollution and waste and
improved nutrition from enhanced food security and increased protein availability.
Environmental co-benefits:
• Coral reef ecosystem integrity and resilience – Restoration activities will directly address existing degradation and enhance the
capacity of coral reef ecosystems to withstand local stressors and bleaching events, thereby limiting the extent of future degradation.
• Restored fish stocks and long-term protection of fishing industry– Reduced pressure on fisheries due to increase in mariculture and
aquaculture production.
• Reduction in ocean contamination from land-based and ocean-based pollution.
• Enhanced Marine Protected Areas – Expansion and/or improved management of MPAs.
Econ
•
om
S
i
u
c
s t
c
a
o
in
-
a
b
b
e
le
n
l
e
iv
f
e
it
li
s
h
:
oods and local economic growth – Expansion in local businesses will generate employment creation opportunities.
Multiplier effects from additional spending within the local economy will drive local economic growth.
• Access to capital markets – Investment in local businesses may enhance foreign investor familiarity and comfort with operating in the
region, thereby improving access to capital for adjacent businesses.

--- Table 1 on Page 43 ---
 | Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals and | 
 | provide an estimation of the impact potential in terms of: | 
 | • Environmental co-benefits | 
 | • Social co-benefits including health impacts | 
 | • Economic co-benefits | 
 | • Gender-sensitive development impact | 
 |  | 
 | Ecosystem services provided by coral reefs and associated ecosystems are especially vital for achieving nature-dependent United Nations | 
 | Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including SDG 14 ‘Life Below Water’. In total, coral reef initiatives contribute directly to 13 SDGs through | 
 | entry points that include coral reef tourism, food security and nutrition, shoreline protection, and human health and wellbeing. This is illustrated | 
 | in Figure 8 below, which shows how coral reef-centred interventions contribute to the 2030 Agenda and multiple SDGs. | 
 |  | 
 | Figure 11: SDGs tackled through the GFCR | 
 |  | 
 | Social co-benefits: | 
 | • Local skills and knowledge – Development, implementation and running of portfolio companies will leverage existing local capabilities, | 
 | including indigenous knowledge. | 
 | • Capacity building – Capacity building assistance in priority countries. | 
 | • Enhanced empowerment and stewardship for coastal communities – Local communities are supported to independently manage the | 
 | sustainability coastal and ocean resources as collectives. | 
 | • Food security – Increased – or better managed - volumes of production from aquatic food industries – and a greater diversity of | 
 | industries – will improve food security and resilience of the food sector to climate change. | 
 | • Improved health and reduced disease prevalence from sustainable infrastructure limiting exposure to pollution and waste and | 
 | improved nutrition from enhanced food security and increased protein availability. | 
 | Environmental co-benefits: | 
 | • Coral reef ecosystem integrity and resilience – Restoration activities will directly address existing degradation and enhance the | 
 | capacity of coral reef ecosystems to withstand local stressors and bleaching events, thereby limiting the extent of future degradation. | 
 | • Restored fish stocks and long-term protection of fishing industry– Reduced pressure on fisheries due to increase in mariculture and | 
 | aquaculture production. | 
 | • Reduction in ocean contamination from land-based and ocean-based pollution. | 
 | • Enhanced Marine Protected Areas – Expansion and/or improved management of MPAs. | 
 |  | 
 | • S u s t a in a b le l iv e li h oods and local economic growth – Expansion in local businesses will generate employment creation opportunities.
Econ om i c c o - b e n e f it s : | 
 | Multiplier effects from additional spending within the local economy will drive local economic growth. | 
 | • Access to capital markets – Investment in local businesses may enhance foreign investor familiarity and comfort with operating in the | 
 | region, thereby improving access to capital for adjacent businesses. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 59
D
Gender-sensitive development impact:
• Empowerment from active inclusion of women in consultation processes and positions of leadership, explicit consideration of gender
disaggregated-needs in project design, capacity building of women and girls to enable greater roles in environmental stewardship,
and greater financial independence.
• Formal employment and improved livelihoods for women and girls, improved working conditions and greater gender parity in pay,
and additional incomes that increase the diversity of household incomes, thereby reducing dependence on individual livelihood
activities and enhancing financial resilience which is then less susceptible to periodic shocks.
• Improved capacity of communities to adapt to and cope with shocks to reduce safety risks to women and girls and gender violence.
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups and elaborate how the
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, overall
income level, etc.). Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:
• Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only)
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population
• Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payments gap that prevents government from
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)
• Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity
As explained in section B1 above, scale and intensity of climatic and biodiversity vulnerabilities vary by countries and drivers of
degradation. However, the impacts related to the death of corals remain the same: decrease in food supply, shoreline
vulnerability and decrease in tourism inflows being the main consequences. The most vulnerable communities are therefore
population living on the coast lines in proximity to reefs and more precisely fishing communities.
Many of the 32 countries under the Fund’s scope are developing countries. On top of bio-climatic vulnerabilities, the national
economic and social environment can further increase the vulnerabilities of coral-dependent communities related to the death
of corals. Populations are more vulnerable to extreme events and to the degradation of reef and local governments don’t have
the means to address the needs of the country through large-scale programs. These barriers have been further assessed in
Annex 24.
These vulnerabilities translate into investments in coral positive businesses and finance instruments which are not occurring at
the desired levels. The Fund, thanks to its blended finance vehicle comprising GCF junior tranche, will have the capacity to
invest and scale up these businesses. In return, the scale up and resilience of the investee will contribute directly and indirectly
to the sustainable prosperity of local reef-dependent livelihoods.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. Describe the
following:
• Existing national climate strategy
• Existing GCF country programme
• Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs
• Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver
• Role of National Designated Authority
• Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, women and
other vulnerable groups
The project will promote open engagement with national and local government as well as select private sector entities and
philanthropies to implement effective management of land/seascapes that integrate climate change adaptation, climate
resilience planning and nature-based solutions to enhance the resilience of coral reef ecosystems in select SIDS and LDCs. This
project will be implemented in full alignment with national development plans and global commitments including: Nationally
Determined Contributions, National Adaptation Plans, post-2020 CBD Global Biodiversity Framework, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the UN Decade of Action for SDGs, and the UN Resolution on ‘Sustainable Coral Reef Management’.

--- Table 1 on Page 44 ---
 | Gender-sensitive development impact: | 
 | • Empowerment from active inclusion of women in consultation processes and positions of leadership, explicit consideration of gender | 
 | disaggregated-needs in project design, capacity building of women and girls to enable greater roles in environmental stewardship, | 
 | and greater financial independence. | 
 | • Formal employment and improved livelihoods for women and girls, improved working conditions and greater gender parity in pay, | 
 | and additional incomes that increase the diversity of household incomes, thereby reducing dependence on individual livelihood | 
 | activities and enhancing financial resilience which is then less susceptible to periodic shocks. | 
 | • Improved capacity of communities to adapt to and cope with shocks to reduce safety risks to women and girls and gender violence. | 
 |  | 
 | D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups and elaborate how the | 
 | project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, overall | 
 | income level, etc.). Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs: | 
 | • Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only) | 
 | • Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population | 
 | • Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payments gap that prevents government from | 
 | addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market) | 
 | • Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity | 
 |  | 
 | As explained in section B1 above, scale and intensity of climatic and biodiversity vulnerabilities vary by countries and drivers of | 
 | degradation. However, the impacts related to the death of corals remain the same: decrease in food supply, shoreline | 
 | vulnerability and decrease in tourism inflows being the main consequences. The most vulnerable communities are therefore | 
 | population living on the coast lines in proximity to reefs and more precisely fishing communities. | 
 | Many of the 32 countries under the Fund’s scope are developing countries. On top of bio-climatic vulnerabilities, the national | 
 | economic and social environment can further increase the vulnerabilities of coral-dependent communities related to the death | 
 | of corals. Populations are more vulnerable to extreme events and to the degradation of reef and local governments don’t have | 
 | the means to address the needs of the country through large-scale programs. These barriers have been further assessed in | 
 | Annex 24. | 
 | These vulnerabilities translate into investments in coral positive businesses and finance instruments which are not occurring at | 
 | the desired levels. The Fund, thanks to its blended finance vehicle comprising GCF junior tranche, will have the capacity to | 
 | invest and scale up these businesses. In return, the scale up and resilience of the investee will contribute directly and indirectly | 
 | to the sustainable prosperity of local reef-dependent livelihoods. | 
 |  | 
 | D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. Describe the | 
 | following: | 
 | • Existing national climate strategy | 
 | • Existing GCF country programme | 
 | • Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs | 
 | • Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver | 
 | • Role of National Designated Authority | 
 | • Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, women and | 
 | other vulnerable groups | 
 | The project will promote open engagement with national and local government as well as select private sector entities and | 
 | philanthropies to implement effective management of land/seascapes that integrate climate change adaptation, climate | 
 | resilience planning and nature-based solutions to enhance the resilience of coral reef ecosystems in select SIDS and LDCs. This | 
 | project will be implemented in full alignment with national development plans and global commitments including: Nationally | 
 | Determined Contributions, National Adaptation Plans, post-2020 CBD Global Biodiversity Framework, the 2030 Agenda for | 
 | Sustainable Development, the UN Decade of Action for SDGs, and the UN Resolution on ‘Sustainable Coral Reef Management’. | 

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 59
D
Country’s will be highly involved in site selection for project implementation with clear alignment on assisting vulnerable
communities.
On April 28th, 2021, Pegasus sent the first batch of official NOL request letters to 12 highly impacted countries that have been
identified as high priority for the Investment Window: Bahamas, Belize, Fiji, Guatemala, Honduras, Indonesia, Kenya, Maldives,
Mexico, Philippines, Solomon Island and Tanzania. A brief power point presentation on the GFCR initiative was included along
with the NOL request letters. On May 10, Pegasus sent formal NOL requests to the remaining target countries. Pegasus and its
consortium partners have been engaged in regular dialogue with NDAs and country representatives since then and has provided
them with the funding proposal. The final version of the funding proposal submitted to the GCF for publication will also be
circulated to the NDAs. Lastly, the NDAs have been directed to the ESMS disclosures on Pegasus’ website.
The GFCR approached the following countries for involvement in the programme:
• Africa: Comoros; Kenya; Madagascar; Mozambique; Tanzania; Seychelles
• Asia-Pacific: Cambodia; Fiji; Indonesia; Malaysia; Maldives; Philippines; Solomon Islands; Sri Lanka; Thailand, Timor
Leste; Vietnam
• Latin America and the Caribbean: Bahamas; Belize; Brazil; Colombia; Costa Rica; Dominican Republic; Ecuador;
Guatemala; Honduras; Jamaica; Mexico; Panama
• Middle East: Egypt; Jordan; Saudi Arabia
As of October 1, 2021, we received 17 NOLs from Brazil, Bahamas, Belize, Colombia, Comoros, Ecuador, Fiji, Guatemala, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Jordan, Mexico, Mozambique, Panama, Philippines, Seychelles and Sri Lanka. Pegasus is in advanced discussions with
several other countries, including (without limitation) Kenya, Malaysia, Maldives, Saudi Arabia, Tanzania and Vietnam. These
countries, amongst others, all expressed significant interest in the GFCR but haven’t been able to complete their internal sign-off
processes due to COVID-19 and other reasons. Additional countries may be added to the programme after initial Board approval,
provided they submit an NOL and the addition is approved by the Board.
In addition, following a global RFI, launched by UNDP and CFA in September 2020, several countries’ governments including
Philippines, Indonesia, Maldives, and Kenya have reached out to UNDP to express high level of interest and better understand the
opportunities presented by the GFCR. In the case of Fiji, there is already a joint programme underway (UNDP, UNCDF, UNEP)
aimed at creating an enabling financial environment and build capacity to mobilize private and public investment capital for
initiatives that have a positive impact on Fijian coral reefs and the communities that rely on them. The GCFR and the Joint SDG
Fund are both contributors to this joint programme. Further, the Accredited Entity has successfully gathered 42 NOLs in a separate
process for the Sub-National Climate Fund GCF programme.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including
addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum concessionality to ensure the project is viable
without crowding out private and other public investments. Refer to section B.5 on the justification of GCF funding requested as
necessary.
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the total financing and
mitigation/ adaptation impact the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate
benchmark.
Please specify the expected economic rate of return based on a comparison of the scenarios with and without the
project/programme.
Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the GFCR Fund’s support to illustrate the need for GCF
funding to illustrate overall cost effectiveness.

--- Table 1 on Page 45 ---
 | Country’s will be highly involved in site selection for project implementation with clear alignment on assisting vulnerable | ,
,
,
 | communities. | 
 | On April 28th, 2021, Pegasus sent the first batch of official NOL request letters to 12 highly impacted countries that have been | 
 | identified as high priority for the Investment Window: Bahamas, Belize, Fiji, Guatemala, Honduras, Indonesia, Kenya, Maldives | 
 | Mexico, Philippines, Solomon Island and Tanzania. A brief power point presentation on the GFCR initiative was included along | 
 | with the NOL request letters. On May 10, Pegasus sent formal NOL requests to the remaining target countries. Pegasus and its | 
 | consortium partners have been engaged in regular dialogue with NDAs and country representatives since then and has provided | 
 | them with the funding proposal. The final version of the funding proposal submitted to the GCF for publication will also be | 
 | circulated to the NDAs. Lastly, the NDAs have been directed to the ESMS disclosures on Pegasus’ website. | 
 |  | 
 | The GFCR approached the following countries for involvement in the programme: | 
 | • Africa: Comoros; Kenya; Madagascar; Mozambique; Tanzania; Seychelles | 
 | • Asia-Pacific: Cambodia; Fiji; Indonesia; Malaysia; Maldives; Philippines; Solomon Islands; Sri Lanka; Thailand, Timor | 
 | Leste; Vietnam | 
 | • Latin America and the Caribbean: Bahamas; Belize; Brazil; Colombia; Costa Rica; Dominican Republic; Ecuador; | 
 | Guatemala; Honduras; Jamaica; Mexico; Panama | 
 | • Middle East: Egypt; Jordan; Saudi Arabia | 
 |  | 
 | As of October 1, 2021, we received 17 NOLs from Brazil, Bahamas, Belize, Colombia, Comoros, Ecuador, Fiji, Guatemala, Indonesia | 
 | Jamaica, Jordan, Mexico, Mozambique, Panama, Philippines, Seychelles and Sri Lanka. Pegasus is in advanced discussions with | 
 | several other countries, including (without limitation) Kenya, Malaysia, Maldives, Saudi Arabia, Tanzania and Vietnam. These | 
 | countries, amongst others, all expressed significant interest in the GFCR but haven’t been able to complete their internal sign-off | 
 | processes due to COVID-19 and other reasons. Additional countries may be added to the programme after initial Board approval | 
 | provided they submit an NOL and the addition is approved by the Board. | 
 |  | 
 | In addition, following a global RFI, launched by UNDP and CFA in September 2020, several countries’ governments including | 
 | Philippines, Indonesia, Maldives, and Kenya have reached out to UNDP to express high level of interest and better understand the | 
 | opportunities presented by the GFCR. In the case of Fiji, there is already a joint programme underway (UNDP, UNCDF, UNEP) | 
 | aimed at creating an enabling financial environment and build capacity to mobilize private and public investment capital for | 
 | initiatives that have a positive impact on Fijian coral reefs and the communities that rely on them. The GCFR and the Joint SDG | 
 | Fund are both contributors to this joint programme. Further, the Accredited Entity has successfully gathered 42 NOLs in a separate | 
 | process for the Sub-National Climate Fund GCF programme. | 
 |  | 
 |  | 
 | D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including | 
 | addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum concessionality to ensure the project is viable | 
 | without crowding out private and other public investments. Refer to section B.5 on the justification of GCF funding requested as | 
 | necessary. | 
 |  | 
 | Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the total financing and | 
 | mitigation/ adaptation impact the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate | 
 | benchmark. | 
 |  | 
 | Please specify the expected economic rate of return based on a comparison of the scenarios with and without the | 
 | project/programme. | 
 |  | 
 | Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the GFCR Fund’s support to illustrate the need for GCF | 
 | funding to illustrate overall cost effectiveness. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 59
D
Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If applicable, specify the
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.
GCF capital has an expected mobilisation ratio of 1:3 at the fund level (investment window) – aligned with other off balance sheet
blended finance vehicles of a similar size and considered a “catalytic” use of funding by groups like the Blended Finance Taskforce
There is further mobilisation expected at the portfolio company level where the leverage ratio is just over 1:3 (i.e. every dollar of
GFCR capital deployed will mobilise an additional $2.4 of debt or equity). The GFCR aims to adhere to the OECD blended finance
principles of additionality and minimum concessionality to ensure the viability of the Fund while mobilising private capital rather
than crowding out private investments. A more detailed explanation on the expected mobilisation ratios at the portfolio level
(i.e. the measure of how catalytic the GCF capital will be) is laid out below calculated by looking at the mobilisation of equity and
debt for different types of investments:
a. Equity-only leveraging effect is 1:0.3 @ 90% of the Fund
 At portfolio company level, the GFCR will largely take control equity positions on the target
investments. In many cases, however, GFCR expects to have additional equity co-investors.
 In a conservative scenario, each $1 of equity invested in a company, is expected to generate on average
$0.33 of additional equity
 Taking control equity positions will allow to Fund to most effectively implement strategic initiatives,
maintain rigorous E&S standards and support companies to become blueprints of sustainability to
ensure GFCR outcomes are as the core of the investee strategy. This will help develop the market to
mainstream nature as an “asset class” – with outsized (though indirect) mobilisation effects
b. Debt-only leveraging effect is 1:1.5
i. Taking a conservative approach, Pegasus believes that, given its track record (see SCF approach), the
average investee balance sheet could be made of 60% debt and 40% equity
ii. The debt is expected to be provided by additional third parties like local or international banks
c. VC leveraging effect is 1:3 @ ~10% of the Fund
i. It is expected that approximately 10% of the portfolio may be dedicated to VC investments and/or
convertible debt / mezzanine positions. Given the nature of VC investment, the assumption is that the
fund will hold on average 25% of the portfolio company, granting a control over the decisions of the
investee while giving room for additional equity funding rounds
ii. The mobilisation ratio of these types of investments is 1:3 (i.e. for every dollar in the portfolio
company, an additional $3 of equity will be invested)
iii. Dedicating part of the fund to venture capital investments allows the Fund to participate to the
effective scale up of disruptive technologies which will be sustainability game changers especially in
the sustainable ocean production industries into which the Fund intends to invest
d. Aggregating 90% equity (with a 1:0.3 mobilisation ratio); 40% debt (with a 1:1.5 mobilisation ratio) and 10% VC
or other instruments (with a 1:3 mobilisation ratio) the projected leverage downstream in the portfolio
companies is around 1:2.4
b. Note that the GFCR mobilisation approach takes into account the following:
a. The GFCR is a pioneer blended finance adaptation fund – the first of its kind with this level of ambition on
investment in SDG 14 for critical reef and coastal ecosystems and the livelihoods upon which those ecosystems
depend
b. The GFCR hopes to become a blueprint for other vehicles – helping standardise this approach to reduce
transaction costs
In other words, the GFCR should be seen as a flagship demonstration fund: its success intends to mainstream the optimal
financial structure for a biodiversity vehicle which combines public, private and philanthropic capital
c. Through the support of the GW (pipeline incubation, capacity building, dialogue with policy makers, technical
assistance, etc.) and direct investments of the IW into promising ventures and projects, the GFCR expects to set
up solid foundations to stimulate a pipeline of investible sustainable projects and de-risk the business
environment for other funds to follow

--- Table 1 on Page 46 ---
 | Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If applicable, specify the | 
 | innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. | 
 |  | 
 | GCF capital has an expected mobilisation ratio of 1:3 at the fund level (investment window) – aligned with other off balance sheet | 
 | blended finance vehicles of a similar size and considered a “catalytic” use of funding by groups like the Blended Finance Taskforce | 
 | There is further mobilisation expected at the portfolio company level where the leverage ratio is just over 1:3 (i.e. every dollar of | 
 | GFCR capital deployed will mobilise an additional $2.4 of debt or equity). The GFCR aims to adhere to the OECD blended finance | 
 | principles of additionality and minimum concessionality to ensure the viability of the Fund while mobilising private capital rather | 
 | than crowding out private investments. A more detailed explanation on the expected mobilisation ratios at the portfolio level | 
 | (i.e. the measure of how catalytic the GCF capital will be) is laid out below calculated by looking at the mobilisation of equity and | 
 | debt for different types of investments: | 
 | a. Equity-only leveraging effect is 1:0.3 @ 90% of the Fund | 
 |  At portfolio company level, the GFCR will largely take control equity positions on the target | 
 | investments. In many cases, however, GFCR expects to have additional equity co-investors. | 
 |  In a conservative scenario, each $1 of equity invested in a company, is expected to generate on average | 
 | $0.33 of additional equity | 
 |  Taking control equity positions will allow to Fund to most effectively implement strategic initiatives, | 
 | maintain rigorous E&S standards and support companies to become blueprints of sustainability to | 
 | ensure GFCR outcomes are as the core of the investee strategy. This will help develop the market to | 
 | mainstream nature as an “asset class” – with outsized (though indirect) mobilisation effects | 
 | b. Debt-only leveraging effect is 1:1.5 | 
 | i. Taking a conservative approach, Pegasus believes that, given its track record (see SCF approach), the | 
 | average investee balance sheet could be made of 60% debt and 40% equity | 
 | ii. The debt is expected to be provided by additional third parties like local or international banks | 
 | c. VC leveraging effect is 1:3 @ ~10% of the Fund | 
 | i. It is expected that approximately 10% of the portfolio may be dedicated to VC investments and/or | 
 | convertible debt / mezzanine positions. Given the nature of VC investment, the assumption is that the | 
 | fund will hold on average 25% of the portfolio company, granting a control over the decisions of the | 
 | investee while giving room for additional equity funding rounds | 
 | ii. The mobilisation ratio of these types of investments is 1:3 (i.e. for every dollar in the portfolio | 
 | company, an additional $3 of equity will be invested) | 
 | iii. Dedicating part of the fund to venture capital investments allows the Fund to participate to the | 
 | effective scale up of disruptive technologies which will be sustainability game changers especially in | 
 | the sustainable ocean production industries into which the Fund intends to invest | 
 | d. Aggregating 90% equity (with a 1:0.3 mobilisation ratio); 40% debt (with a 1:1.5 mobilisation ratio) and 10% VC | 
 | or other instruments (with a 1:3 mobilisation ratio) the projected leverage downstream in the portfolio | 
 | companies is around 1:2.4 | 
 |  | 
 | b. Note that the GFCR mobilisation approach takes into account the following: | 
 | a. The GFCR is a pioneer blended finance adaptation fund – the first of its kind with this level of ambition on | 
 | investment in SDG 14 for critical reef and coastal ecosystems and the livelihoods upon which those ecosystems | 
 | depend | 
 | b. The GFCR hopes to become a blueprint for other vehicles – helping standardise this approach to reduce | 
 | transaction costs | 
 | In other words, the GFCR should be seen as a flagship demonstration fund: its success intends to mainstream the optimal | 
 | financial structure for a biodiversity vehicle which combines public, private and philanthropic capital | 
 | c. Through the support of the GW (pipeline incubation, capacity building, dialogue with policy makers, technical | 
 | assistance, etc.) and direct investments of the IW into promising ventures and projects, the GFCR expects to set | 
 | up solid foundations to stimulate a pipeline of investible sustainable projects and de-risk the business | 
 | environment for other funds to follow | 

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 59
D
d. This is expected to also have a catalytic effect that will be more difficult to directly attribute to the Fund but is
at the heart of the GFCR’s theory of change: two of the GFCR outputs (“Increased innovation to support
resilience of coral reefs and communities reliant on coral reefs” and “Increased market share of sustainable
businesses in reef-dependent areas” – see figure 9 of section B.2) are directly related to the investment work
described above.
e. Investments by the GW and the IW will both strengthen the enabling environment for investees to raise
additional capital (either debt and equity) and thus provide a leveraging effect seeking to optimize the efficiency
of funds raised: each of the individual companies in which the Fund invests will have its own capital structure,
with the Fund typically providing the equity portion (potentially with co-investors at the company level as well)
and third-parties providing the debt.

--- Table 1 on Page 47 ---
 | d. This is expected to also have a catalytic effect that will be more difficult to directly attribute to the Fund but is | 
 | at the heart of the GFCR’s theory of change: two of the GFCR outputs (“Increased innovation to support | 
 | resilience of coral reefs and communities reliant on coral reefs” and “Increased market share of sustainable | 
 | businesses in reef-dependent areas” – see figure 9 of section B.2) are directly related to the investment work | 
 | described above. | 
 | e. Investments by the GW and the IW will both strengthen the enabling environment for investees to raise | 
 | additional capital (either debt and equity) and thus provide a leveraging effect seeking to optimize the efficiency | 
 | of funds raised: each of the individual companies in which the Fund invests will have its own capital structure, | 
 | with the Fund typically providing the equity portion (potentially with co-investors at the company level as well) | 
 | and third-parties providing the debt. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 59
E
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement
Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes as a whole, including in
respect of any co-financing.
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both.
Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways
☐
Increased climate resilient sustainable development
☒
E.2. Core indicator targets
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. Methodologies for the
calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in section A.
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon
Annual Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to be
reduced or avoided (mitigation and
Lifetime Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq
cross-cutting only)
(a) Total project financing USD 500m Choose an item.
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, (b) Requested GCF amount USD 125m Choose an item.
defined as total investment cost /
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions NA t CO2eq
expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross- (d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) NA Choose an item. / t CO2eq
cutting only) (e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed (e = b
NA Choose an item. / t CO2eq
/ c)
(f) Total finance leveraged 375m +1% GP commitment
E.2.3. Expected volume of finance to USD
be leveraged by the proposed
(g) Public source co-financed 125m
project/programme as a result of the
GFCR Fund’s financing, (h) Private source finance leveraged 375m +1% GP commitment
disaggregated by public and private (i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) ____1:3_
sources (mitigation and cross-cutting
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b) 1:1
only)
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 1:3
12737
Direct
49% of female
E.2.4. Expected total number of
35,236,406
direct and indirect beneficiaries, Indirect
50% of female
(disaggregated by sex)
For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data
per country in annex 17.
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries Direct See Annex 17
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex) Indirect See Annex 17
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.

--- Table 1 on Page 48 ---
 | LOGICAL FRAMEWORK | 
 | This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement | 
 | Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes as a whole, including in | 
 | respect of any co-financing. | 
 | E.1. Paradigm shift objectives | 
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both.
Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways
☐
Increased climate resilient sustainable development
☒ |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 48 ---
 | E.2. Core indicator targets |  |  |  |  |  | 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. Methodologies for the
calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in section A. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon |  | Annual |  | Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq |  | 
 | dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to be |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | reduced or avoided (mitigation and |  | Lifetime |  | Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq |  | 
 | cross-cutting only) |  |  |  |  |  | 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 eq,
defined as total investment cost /
expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) |  |  |  | (a) Total project financing |  | USD 500m Choose an item. | 
 |  |  |  | (b) Requested GCF amount |  | USD 125m Choose an item. | 
 |  |  |  | (c) Expected lifetime emission reductions |  | NA t CO2eq | 
 |  |  |  | (d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) |  | NA Choose an item. / t CO2eq | 
 |  |  |  | (e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed (e = b
/ c) |  | NA Choose an item. / t CO2eq | 
E.2.3. Expected volume of finance to
be leveraged by the proposed
project/programme as a result of the
GFCR Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and private
sources (mitigation and cross-cutting
only) |  |  |  | (f) Total finance leveraged |  | 375m +1% GP commitment
USD | 
 |  |  |  | (g) Public source co-financed |  | 125m | 
 |  |  |  | (h) Private source finance leveraged |  | 375m +1% GP commitment | 
 |  |  |  | (i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) |  | ____1:3_ | 
 |  |  |  | (j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b) |  | 1:1 | 
 |  |  |  | (k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) |  | 1:3 | 
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
(disaggregated by sex) |  |  | Direct |  | 12737
49% of female |  | 
 |  |  | Indirect |  | 35,236,406
50% of female |  | 
 |  |  | For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data
per country in annex 17. |  |  |  | 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex) |  |  | Direct |  | See Annex 17 |  | 
 |  |  | Indirect |  | See Annex 17 |  | 
 |  |  | For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17. |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 48 ---
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 eq,
defined as total investment cost /
expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only)

--- Table 4 on Page 48 ---
E.2.3. Expected volume of finance to
be leveraged by the proposed
project/programme as a result of the
GFCR Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and private
sources (mitigation and cross-cutting
only)

--- Table 5 on Page 48 ---
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
(disaggregated by sex)

--- Table 6 on Page 48 ---
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex)

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 59
E
E.3. Fund-level impacts
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and corresponding indicators
from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected impact result. The
result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above. Add rows as needed.
Means of Target
Expected Results Indicator Verification Baseline Assumptions
Mid-term Final
(MoV)
A1.2 Number of males Employment data to
and females benefiting be provided by
A1.0 Increased resilience
from the adoption of investees. 3,800 direct 12,700 direct Investees are
and enhanced livelihoods
diversified, climate Templates and jobs created in jobs are created not exclusively
of the most vulnerable 0
resilient livelihood supporting material sustainable in sustainable capital-intensive
people, communities and
options (including will be provided to businesses57 businesses58 businesses
regions
fisheries, agriculture, facilitate data
tourism, etc.) collection.
Data to be provided Globally, 11,650ha will 29,000ha by Supportive
by investees. approximately have significant end of Fund policy
Templates and 455,000ha of coral increase in period will have environment for
A4.1 Coverage/scale supporting material reefs are managed resilience in significant enforcement.
of ecosystems will be provided to so as to prevent the response to increase in
A4.0 Improved resilience
protected and facilitate data removal of reductions in resilience in There are
of ecosystems and
strengthened in collection. 3rd party functional animal multiple response to economically
ecosystem services
response to climate assessment when and plant groups stressors reductions in viable private
variability and change deemed necessary (Mora et al., 2006; multiple sector avenues
UNEP)59 stressors60 that reduce
pressures on
reefs
Annual Economic Total economic Identify $10bn of coral Supportive
valuation study value of ecosystem portfolio of reef ecosystem policy
services implied by investments to services environment for
target area for enable maintained enforcement.
A4.2 Value (US$) of
resilient coral reefs maintenance of
A4.0 Improved resilience ecosystem services
of ecosystems and generated or is $10bn $10bn in coral There are
reef ecosystem economically
ecosystem services protected in response 61
services viable private
to climate change
sector avenues
that reduce
pressures on
reefs
E.4. Fund-level outcomes
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and corresponding
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected outcome.
Add rows as needed.
Means of Target
Expected Outcomes Indicator Verification Baseline Assumptions
Mid-term Final
(MoV)
57 Mid-term targets assume that 30% of the fund is spent by the mid-term.
58 See Annex 23 for methodology
59 Mora et al. 2006: 1.6% of coral reefs are managed so as to prevent the removal of functional animal and plant groups. UNEP: The world’s total reef area is
284,803 km2. Sources: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/6990589_Coral_Reefs_and_the_Global_Network_of_Marine_Protected_Areas and
http://coral.unep.ch/Coral_Reefs.html
60 See Annex 23 for detailed methodology
61 Target area is 29,000 ha of coral reef ecosystems protected (see A4.1). Assumed Total Economic Value is assumed to be $352.24k/ha/year. Source: De
Groot et al. 2017 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2012.07.005

--- Table 1 on Page 49 ---
 | E.3. Fund-level impacts |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and corresponding indicators
from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected impact result. The
result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above. Add rows as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected Results |  | Indicator |  | Means of |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  | Assumptions | 
 |  |  |  | Verification |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | (MoV) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A1.0 Increased resilience
and enhanced livelihoods
of the most vulnerable
people, communities and
regions |  | A1.2 Number of males
and females benefiting
from the adoption of
diversified, climate
resilient livelihood
options (including
fisheries, agriculture,
tourism, etc.) | Employment data to
be provided by
investees.
Templates and
supporting material
will be provided to
facilitate data
collection. |  |  | 0 | 3,800 direct
jobs created in
sustainable
businesses57 |  | 12,700 direct
jobs are created
in sustainable
businesses58 |  | Investees are
not exclusively
capital-intensive
businesses | 
A4.0 Improved resilience
of ecosystems and
ecosystem services |  | A4.1 Coverage/scale
of ecosystems
protected and
strengthened in
response to climate
variability and change | Data to be provided
by investees.
Templates and
supporting material
will be provided to
facilitate data
collection. 3rd party
assessment when
deemed necessary |  |  | Globally,
approximately
455,000ha of coral
reefs are managed
so as to prevent the
removal of
functional animal
and plant groups
(Mora et al., 2006;
UNEP)59 | 11,650ha will
have significant
increase in
resilience in
response to
reductions in
multiple
stressors |  | 29,000ha by
end of Fund
period will have
significant
increase in
resilience in
response to
reductions in
multiple
stressors60 |  | Supportive
policy
environment for
enforcement.
There are
economically
viable private
sector avenues
that reduce
pressures on
reefs | 
A4.0 Improved resilience
of ecosystems and
ecosystem services |  | A4.2 Value (US$) of
ecosystem services
generated or
protected in response
to climate change | Annual Economic
valuation study |  |  | Total economic
value of ecosystem
services implied by
target area for
resilient coral reefs
is $10bn
61 | Identify
portfolio of
investments to
enable
maintenance of
$10bn in coral
reef ecosystem
services |  | $10bn of coral
reef ecosystem
services
maintained |  | Supportive
policy
environment for
enforcement.
There are
economically
viable private
sector avenues
that reduce
pressures on
reefs | 

--- Table 2 on Page 49 ---
 | E.4. Fund-level outcomes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and corresponding
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected outcome.
Add rows as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected Outcomes |  | Indicator |  | Means of |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  | Assumptions | 
 |  |  |  | Verification |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | (MoV) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 59
E
Survey of
investee
A7.1 Use by employees.
vulnerable Templates and
households, supporting Increase in Majority of
communities, material will be proportion of revenue in Investees pay fair
businesses and provided to household households of and living wages
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive public-sector facilitate data To be determined revenue of fund fund to employees
capacity and reduced exposure to services of Fund- collection. during investment beneficiaries beneficiaries
climate risks supported tools support from due diligence derived from is derived
instruments, 3rd party sustainable from
strategies and assessment activities sustainable
activities to respond (external activities
to climate change consultants)
and variability where needed
Data from
investees
regarding At least one Active Investees have
engagement awareness- involvement the knowledge
with local related activity of the and capacity to
A8.1 Number of communities or campaign investee meaningfully
A8.0 Strengthened awareness of males and females and awareness- raising communities contribute to
climate threats and risk-reduction made aware of raising activities 0 awareness of in adaptation community-wide
processes climate threats and related to climate change and awareness and
related appropriate climate change. and adaptation safeguarding understandings of
responses 3rd party undertaken by of the climate change
surrounding
(external investees
environment
consultants)
where needed

--- Table 1 on Page 50 ---
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive
capacity and reduced exposure to
climate risks | A7.1 Use by
vulnerable
households,
communities,
businesses and
public-sector
services of Fund-
supported tools
instruments,
strategies and
activities to respond
to climate change
and variability |  | Survey of |  | To be determined
during investment
due diligence | Increase in
proportion of
household
revenue of fund
beneficiaries
derived from
sustainable
activities | Majority of
revenue in
households of
fund
beneficiaries
is derived
from
sustainable
activities | Investees pay fair
and living wages
to employees
 |  |  | investee |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | employees. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Templates and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | supporting |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | material will be |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | provided to |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | facilitate data |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | collection. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | support from
3rd party |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | assessment |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | (external |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | consultants) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | where needed |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A8.0 Strengthened awareness of
climate threats and risk-reduction
processes | A8.1 Number of
males and females
made aware of
climate threats and
related appropriate
responses |  | Data from |  | 0 | At least one
awareness-
related activity
or campaign
raising
awareness of
climate change
and adaptation
undertaken by
investees | Active
involvement
of the
investee
communities
in adaptation
and
safeguarding
of the
surrounding
environment | Investees have
the knowledge
and capacity to
meaningfully
contribute to
community-wide
awareness and
understandings of
climate change
 |  |  | investees |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | regarding |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | engagement |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | with local |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | communities |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | and awareness- |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | raising activities |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | related to
climate change. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 3rd party |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | (external |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | consultants) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | where needed |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 50 ---



Investees pay fair
and living wages
to employees

--- Table 3 on Page 50 ---
A7.1 Use by
ulnerable
ouseholds,
ommunities,
usinesses and
ublic-sector
ervices of Fund-
upported tools
nstruments,
trategies and
ctivities to respond
o climate change
nd variability

--- Table 4 on Page 50 ---
Increase in
proportion of
household
revenue of fund
beneficiaries
derived from
sustainable
activities

--- Table 5 on Page 50 ---
Majority of
revenue in
households of
fund
beneficiaries
is derived
from
sustainable
activities

--- Table 6 on Page 50 ---
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive
capacity and reduced exposure to
climate risks

--- Table 7 on Page 50 ---
To be determined
during investment
due diligence

--- Table 8 on Page 50 ---

Investees have
the knowledge
and capacity to
meaningfully
contribute to
community-wide
awareness and
understandings of
climate change

--- Table 9 on Page 50 ---
At least one
awareness-
related activity
or campaign
raising
awareness of
climate change
and adaptation
undertaken by
investees

--- Table 10 on Page 50 ---
Active
involvement
of the
investee
communities
in adaptation
and
safeguarding
of the
surrounding
environment

--- Table 11 on Page 50 ---
A8.0 Strengthened awareness of
climate threats and risk-reduction

--- Table 12 on Page 50 ---
males and females
made aware of
limate threats and
elated appropriate
esponses

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 59
E
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing conditions,
progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as needed.
Means of Target
Expected Results Indicator Baseline Assumptions
Verification (MoV) Mid-term Final
Global sustainable
1. Increased seafood production The investment
Increase in
production of Data from investees on in 2018 was By mid-term, a climate is open in
production
food from production capacity, approximately 25m full portfolio of target countries
Change in production capacity and
sustainable employees and T sold; T62. Country or private sector
of sustainable fishery, production for all
fisheries, independent studies; region-specific data companies Fisheries can be
mariculture and sustainable
mariculture, support from 3rd party to be determined producing sufficiently
aquaculture fisheries,
aquaculture assessment (external during investment sustainable incentivized to
businesses mariculture and
and in reef- consultants) where due diligence and seafood is transition to
aquaculture
connected needed market study where identified. sustainable
investees
communities. investment will be measures
established
Data to be provided by Approximately Actively Actively
investees. Templates 455,000ha of coral contribute to contribute to Supportive policy
Coverage of reefs and supporting material reefs are managed so fund-level fund level targets environment for
ecosystems protected will be provided to as to prevent the targets of of 29,000ha enforcement of
and strengthened in facilitate data collection. removal of functional 8,700ha through through sustainable
2. Increased response to climate 3rd party assessment animal and plant protection, protection, practices.
protection and (external consultants) groups (Mora et al., restoration, coral restoration, coral
variability and change
restoration where needed 2006; UNEP) 63 farming and farming and There are clear
through protection,
coral reef reduction in reduction in legal and
restoration, coral
ecosystems drivers of drivers of regulatory
farming and reduction
degradation degradation signals for the
in drivers of
maintenance of
degradation
reef integrity
Employment data to be
provided by investees. 3,800 direct jobs 12,700 direct Investees are not
3. Growth in jobs Number of direct jobs
Templates and created in jobs are created exclusively
and the local created in sustainable 0
supporting material will sustainable in sustainable capital-intensive
economy businesses
be provided to facilitate businesses64 businesses65 businesses
data collection.
Significant
improvement in
pollution avoided
Processing and
in all reefs where Infrastructure
treatment data to be
infrastructure projects not only
provided by investees. To be determined Pollution
Extent of pollution in investments are involve increased
Templates and during investment reduced to levels
4. Improved water reef areas measured made measured capacity but are
supporting material will due diligence and such that biome
quality in reef on a scale of threat to against cubic accompanied by
be provided to facilitate market study where no longer
ecosystems the coral reef biome metres of water ongoing
data collection. 3rd party investment will be threatened by
treated; T of maintenance
assessment (external established local pollution
plastic collected regimes
consultants) where
/ recycled; T of
needed
agricultural
nutrient runoff
avoided
5. Increased Adoption of Data to be provided by Technological Transfer of Full adoption by Transferred
innovation to technology and investees. Templates readiness to be technology in the local technologies are
support innovations to and supporting material determined during target geography stakeholders of appropriate
62 Globally, 178m tonnes of seafood was produced from fisheries and aquaculture (FAO 2018). 14% of seafood production is produced sustainably (State of
Sustainability Initiative, 2016). Sources: http://w ww.fao.org/state-of-fisheries-aquaculture and https://www.iisd.org/publications/state-sustainability-initiatives-
review-standards-and-blue-economy
63 Sources: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/6990589_Coral_Reefs_and_the_Global_Network_of_Marine_Protected_Areas and
http://coral.unep.ch/Coral_Reefs.html
64 Mid-term targets assume that 30% of the fund is spent by the mid-term.
65 See Annex 23 for methodology

--- Table 1 on Page 51 ---
 | E.5. Project/programme performance indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing conditions,
progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected Results |  |  | Indicator |  |  | Means of
Verification (MoV) |  |  | Baseline |  |  |  | Target |  |  |  |  | Assumptions |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  |  | Final |  |  |  | 
1. Increased
production of
food from
sustainable
fisheries,
mariculture,
aquaculture
and in reef-
connected
communities. |  |  | Change in production
of sustainable fishery,
mariculture and
aquaculture
businesses |  |  | Data from investees on
production capacity,
employees and T sold;
independent studies;
support from 3rd party
assessment (external
consultants) where
needed |  |  |  | Global sustainable |  | By mid-term, a
full portfolio of
private sector
companies
producing
sustainable
seafood is
identified. |  |  | Increase in
production
capacity and
production for all
sustainable
fisheries,
mariculture and
aquaculture
investees |  |  | The investment
climate is open in
target countries
Fisheries can be
sufficiently
incentivized to
transition to
sustainable
measures |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | seafood production |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | in 2018 was |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | approximately 25m |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | T62. Country or |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | region-specific data |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | to be determined |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | during investment |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | due diligence and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | market study where |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | investment will be |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | established |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
2. Increased
protection and
restoration
coral reef
ecosystems |  |  | Coverage of reefs
ecosystems protected
and strengthened in
response to climate
variability and change
through protection,
restoration, coral
farming and reduction
in drivers of
degradation |  |  | Data to be provided by
investees. Templates
and supporting material
will be provided to
facilitate data collection.
3rd party assessment
(external consultants)
where needed |  |  | Approximately
455,000ha of coral
reefs are managed so
as to prevent the
removal of functional
animal and plant
groups (Mora et al.,
2006; UNEP) 63 | Approximately |  | Actively
contribute to
fund-level
targets of
8,700ha through
protection,
restoration, coral
farming and
reduction in
drivers of
degradation |  |  | Actively
contribute to
fund level targets
of 29,000ha
through
protection,
restoration, coral
farming and
reduction in
drivers of
degradation |  |  |  | Supportive policy | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 455,000ha of coral |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reefs are managed so |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | environment for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | as to prevent the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | enforcement of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | removal of functional |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | sustainable | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | animal and plant |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | practices. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | groups (Mora et al., |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2006; UNEP) 63 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | There are clear | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | legal and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | regulatory | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | signals for the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | maintenance of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reef integrity | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
3. Growth in jobs
and the local
economy |  |  | Number of direct jobs
created in sustainable
businesses |  |  |  | Employment data to be |  | 0 |  |  | 3,800 direct jobs
created in
sustainable
businesses64 |  |  | 12,700 direct
jobs are created
in sustainable
businesses65 |  |  | Investees are not
exclusively
capital-intensive
businesses |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | provided by investees. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Templates and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | supporting material will |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | be provided to facilitate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | data collection. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
4. Improved water
quality in reef
ecosystems |  |  | Extent of pollution in
reef areas measured
on a scale of threat to
the coral reef biome |  |  | Processing and
treatment data to be
provided by investees.
Templates and
supporting material will
be provided to facilitate
data collection. 3rd party
assessment (external
consultants) where
needed |  |  | To be determined
during investment
due diligence and
market study where
investment will be
established |  |  |  | Significant |  | Pollution
reduced to levels
such that biome
no longer
threatened by
local pollution |  |  | Infrastructure
projects not only
involve increased
capacity but are
accompanied by
ongoing
maintenance
regimes |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | improvement in |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | pollution avoided |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | in all reefs where |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | infrastructure |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | investments are |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | made measured |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | against cubic |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | metres of water |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | treated; T of |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | plastic collected |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | / recycled; T of |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | agricultural |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | nutrient runoff |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | avoided |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 5. Increased |  | t
i | Adoption of |  |  | Data to be provided by |  |  | Technological |  |  | Transfer of |  |  | Full adoption by |  |  | Transferred | 
 | innovation to |  |  | echnology and |  |  | investees. Templates |  |  | readiness to be |  |  | technology in the |  |  | local |  |  | technologies are | 
 | support |  |  | nnovations to |  |  | and supporting material |  |  | determined during |  |  | target geography |  |  | stakeholders of |  |  | appropriate | 

--- Table 2 on Page 51 ---
1. Increased
production of
food from
sustainable
fisheries,
mariculture,
aquaculture
and in reef-
connected
communities.

--- Table 3 on Page 51 ---
The investment
climate is open in
target countries
Fisheries can be
sufficiently
incentivized to
transition to
sustainable
measures

--- Table 4 on Page 51 ---
Increase in
production
capacity and
production for all
sustainable
fisheries,
mariculture and
aquaculture
investees

--- Table 5 on Page 51 ---
Data from investees on
production capacity,
employees and T sold;
independent studies;
support from 3rd party
assessment (external
consultants) where
needed

--- Table 6 on Page 51 ---
By mid-term, a
full portfolio of
private sector
companies
producing
sustainable
seafood is
identified.

--- Table 7 on Page 51 ---
hange in production
f sustainable fishery,
mariculture and
quaculture
usinesses

--- Table 8 on Page 51 ---
Data to be provided by
investees. Templates
and supporting material
will be provided to
facilitate data collection.
3rd party assessment
(external consultants)
where needed

--- Table 9 on Page 51 ---
Actively
contribute to
fund-level
targets of
8,700ha through
protection,
restoration, coral
farming and
reduction in
drivers of
degradation

--- Table 10 on Page 51 ---
Actively
contribute to
fund level targets
of 29,000ha
through
protection,
restoration, coral
farming and
reduction in
drivers of
degradation


--- Table 11 on Page 51 ---
overage of reefs
cosystems protected
nd strengthened in
esponse to climate
ariability and change
hrough protection,
estoration, coral
arming and reduction
n drivers of
egradation

--- Table 12 on Page 51 ---
2. Increased
protection and
restoration
coral reef
ecosystems

--- Table 13 on Page 51 ---
3,800 direct jobs
created in
sustainable
businesses64

--- Table 14 on Page 51 ---
12,700 direct
jobs are created
in sustainable
businesses65

--- Table 15 on Page 51 ---
Investees are not
exclusively
capital-intensive
businesses

--- Table 16 on Page 51 ---
3. Growth in jobs
and the local
economy

--- Table 17 on Page 51 ---
Number of direct jobs
reated in sustainable
usinesses

--- Table 18 on Page 51 ---
Processing and
treatment data to be
provided by investees.
Templates and
supporting material will
be provided to facilitate
data collection. 3rd party
assessment (external
consultants) where
needed

--- Table 19 on Page 51 ---
Infrastructure
projects not only
involve increased
capacity but are
accompanied by
ongoing
maintenance
regimes


--- Table 20 on Page 51 ---
To be determined
during investment
due diligence and
market study where
investment will be
established

--- Table 21 on Page 51 ---
Pollution
reduced to levels
such that biome
no longer
threatened by
local pollution

--- Table 22 on Page 51 ---
xtent of pollution in
eef areas measured
n a scale of threat to
he coral reef biome


--- Table 23 on Page 51 ---
4. Improved water
quality in reef
ecosystems

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 59
E
resilience of enhance resilience will be provided to investment due technologies and given the needs,
coral reefs and within coral-reef facilitate data collection. diligence Innovations innovations skills and socio-
communities dependent 3rd party assessment developed in related to cultural contexts
reliant on coral communities (external consultants) local restoration and of the target
reefs where needed communities protection of community
achieve coral reefs
commercial
viability
Of total food
production from Of total food
the ocean in the production from
Global data available: local biome, an the ocean in the
Sustainable Seafood: increased local biome, a
14% of seafood proportion is majority is from
Sales and relevant local
production (State of from sustainable sustainable
market data to be There are
Sustainability sources sources
6. Increased provided by investees. economically
Market share by Initiative, 2016)
market share of Templates and viable private
country by type of Ecotourism: 5-7% of Of total tourism Of total tourism
sustainable supporting material will sector avenues
business (ocean travel & tourism activity in the activity in the
businesses in be provided to facilitate that reduce
based production, market (EBSCO, local biome local biome
reef-dependent data collection. 3rd pressures on
tourism) 2009)66. (hotels, (hotels,
areas party assessment reefs
Biome and recreation), an recreation), a
(external consultants)
community-specific increased majority is
where needed
data to be provided proportion is undertaken
during investment undertaken through
pre-screening through sustainable
sustainable businesses
businesses
E.6. Activities
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in the
implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.
Activity Description Sub-activities Deliverables
E1.1: Procure legal services Accredited Entity to engage
to prepare underlying fund counsel and local Negotiate engagement letters Legal engagement letters
documentation counsel as needed
E1.2: Implement structure Accredited Entity and legal
Final structure of the GFCR
for GFCR Fund and related service providers to work Draft and revise documents;
Fund and related entities is
entities with GCF to implement fund consult with external advisors
established
structure
E1.3: Draft formation
documents and related
Self-explanatory Draft and revise documents Final formation documents
Agreements for GFCR
entities
E1.4: Consummate Initial GCF (via GCF Reef Holdings)
Closing of the GFCR Fund executes and delivers a
with GCF as anchor investor binding subscription
agreement to the GFCR Initial Closing of the GFCR
Draft and revise documents
Fund for a $125mm Fund
commitment, with $25mm
of the commitment being
unconditional67
66 Sources: https://www.iisd.org/publications/state-sustainability-initiatives-review-standards-and-blue-economy and
https://ebscosustainability.files.wordpress.com/ 2010/07/ecotourism.pdf
67 GCF’s unconditional commitment at the first closing will increase to $50mm if the GFCR Fund procures at least $10mm of additional co-investment
at the first close.

--- Table 1 on Page 52 ---
resilience of
coral reefs and
communities
reliant on coral
reefs |  | enhance resilience
within coral-reef
dependent
communities |  | will be provided to
facilitate data collection.
3rd party assessment
(external consultants)
where needed | investment due
diligence |  |  |  | technologies and
innovations
related to
restoration and
protection of
coral reefs | given the needs,
skills and socio-
cultural contexts
of the target
community | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Innovations |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | developed in |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | local |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | communities |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | achieve |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | commercial |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | viability |  |  |  | 
6. Increased
market share of
sustainable
businesses in
reef-dependent
areas |  | Market share by
country by type of
business (ocean
based production,
tourism) |  | Sales and relevant local
market data to be
provided by investees.
Templates and
supporting material will
be provided to facilitate
data collection. 3rd
party assessment
(external consultants)
where needed | Global data available:
Sustainable Seafood:
14% of seafood
production (State of
Sustainability
Initiative, 2016)
Ecotourism: 5-7% of
travel & tourism
market (EBSCO,
2009)66.
Biome and
community-specific
data to be provided
during investment
pre-screening |  | Of total food |  | Of total food
production from
the ocean in the
local biome, a
majority is from
sustainable
sources
Of total tourism
activity in the
local biome
(hotels,
recreation), a
majority is
undertaken
through
sustainable
businesses | There are
economically
viable private
sector avenues
that reduce
pressures on
reefs | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | production from |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | the ocean in the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | local biome, an |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | increased |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | proportion is |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | from sustainable |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | sources |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Of total tourism |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | activity in the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | local biome |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (hotels, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | recreation), an |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | increased |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | proportion is |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | undertaken |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | through |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | sustainable |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | businesses |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.6. Activities |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in the
implementation timetable. Add rows as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity |  |  | Description |  | Sub-activities |  |  |  | Deliverables |  | 
E1.1: Procure legal services
to prepare underlying
documentation |  |  | Accredited Entity to engage
fund counsel and local
counsel as needed |  | Negotiate engagement letters |  |  |  | Legal engagement letters |  | 
E1.2: Implement structure
for GFCR Fund and related
entities |  |  | Accredited Entity and legal
service providers to work
with GCF to implement fund
structure |  | Draft and revise documents;
consult with external advisors |  |  |  | Final structure of the GFCR
Fund and related entities is
established |  | 
E1.3: Draft formation
documents and related
Agreements for GFCR
entities |  |  | Self-explanatory |  | Draft and revise documents |  |  |  | Final formation documents |  | 
E1.4: Consummate Initial
Closing of the GFCR Fund
with GCF as anchor investor |  |  | GCF (via GCF Reef Holdings)
executes and delivers a
binding subscription
agreement to the GFCR
Fund for a $125mm
commitment, with $25mm
of the commitment being
unconditional67 |  | Draft and revise documents |  |  |  | Initial Closing of the GFCR
Fund |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 52 ---
resilience of
coral reefs and
communities
reliant on coral
reefs

--- Table 3 on Page 52 ---
nhance resilience
within coral-reef
ependent
ommunities

--- Table 4 on Page 52 ---
will be provided to
facilitate data collection.
3rd party assessment
(external consultants)
where needed

--- Table 5 on Page 52 ---
investment due
diligence

--- Table 6 on Page 52 ---
technologies and
innovations
related to
restoration and
protection of
coral reefs

--- Table 7 on Page 52 ---
given the needs,
skills and socio-
cultural contexts
of the target
community

--- Table 8 on Page 52 ---
Of total food
production from
the ocean in the
local biome, a
majority is from
sustainable
sources

Of total tourism
activity in the
local biome
(hotels,
recreation), a
majority is
undertaken
through
sustainable
businesses


--- Table 9 on Page 52 ---
Global data available:
Sustainable Seafood:
14% of seafood
production (State of
Sustainability
Initiative, 2016)
Ecotourism: 5-7% of
travel & tourism
market (EBSCO,
2009)66.
Biome and
community-specific
data to be provided
during investment
pre-screening

--- Table 10 on Page 52 ---
Sales and relevant local
market data to be
provided by investees.
Templates and
supporting material will
be provided to facilitate
data collection. 3rd
party assessment
(external consultants)
where needed

--- Table 11 on Page 52 ---
There are
economically
viable private
sector avenues
that reduce
pressures on
reefs


--- Table 12 on Page 52 ---
6. Increased
market share of
sustainable
businesses in
reef-dependent
areas

--- Table 13 on Page 52 ---
Market share by
country by type of
business (ocean
based production,
tourism)

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 59
E
E2.1: Prepare fundraising Materials may include
Draft and revise materials;
material; evaluate GFCR overview presentations, Marketing Plan and List of
potential engagement of one or
Fund suitability team track record, pipeline, Priority Investors
more placement agents
etc.
E2.2: Draft Private
Placement Memorandum
Draft and revise material;
and Other Marketing Self-explanatory Final Marketing Materials
investor due diligence
Materials. Market Fund to
other investors.
E2.3: Negotiate with
Other LPs execute and
potential investors and
deliver binding subscription Negotiate side letters with
close on additional Binding LP commitments
agreements to the GFCR investors
commitments to the GFCR
Fund
Fund
E3.1: Early stage sourcing Leverage networks and the
Evolving pipeline of potential
Grant Window to generate
transactions
deal flow
E3.2: Develop the pipeline Evaluate against screening Identification of a smaller
Initial evaluation of pipeline criteria; determine which subset of potential
opportunities opportunities to pursue in further transactions on which to
detail conduct further due diligence
E4.1: Perform Due Diligence More comprehensive Evaluate all aspects of potential
Identify transactions for
on proposed deals investigation into the investment; involve third-party
investment by the GFCR Fund
potential opportunity. experts/consultants as applicable
E4.2: Prepare Investment Committee
Obtain Investment Committee
documentation for Self-explanatory Approval to make the
approval
Investment Committee proposed investment
E4.3: Prepare
documentation for AIFM Self-explanatory Obtain AIFM approval AIFM approval
and execute deals
E5.1: Provide ad-hoc Oversight and support via
support to Portfolio board representation and
Monitor company performance N/A
Companies regular meetings with
management
E5.2: Perform regular Oversight and support via
evaluation of Portfolio board representation and
Monitor company performance N/A
Companies regular meetings with
management
E6.1: Collect information of
investees, implement
verification mechanisms, Self-explanatory Monitor company performance N/A
implement data collection
tools
E6.2: Organize annual audit Identify independent auditor;
Self-explanatory Annual audit report
of the GFCR Fund provide support as necessary
E6.3: Report to LPs on
Financial reports and
financial results, impacts Self-explanatory Prepare investment updates
qualitative updates
and beneficiaries
E7.1: Evaluate exit Engage investment banking
Identify potential acquirors
opportunities services on an as-needed basis

--- Table 1 on Page 53 ---
E2.1: Prepare fundraising
material; evaluate GFCR
Fund suitability | Materials may include
overview presentations,
team track record, pipeline,
etc. | Draft and revise materials;
potential engagement of one or
more placement agents | Marketing Plan and List of
Priority Investors
E2.2: Draft Private
Placement Memorandum
and Other Marketing
Materials. Market Fund to
other investors. | Self-explanatory | Draft and revise material;
investor due diligence | Final Marketing Materials
E2.3: Negotiate with
potential investors and
close on additional
commitments to the GFCR
Fund | Other LPs execute and
deliver binding subscription
agreements to the GFCR
Fund | Negotiate side letters with
investors | Binding LP commitments
E3.1: Early stage sourcing | Leverage networks and the
Grant Window to generate
deal flow |  | Evolving pipeline of potential
transactions
E3.2: Develop the pipeline | Initial evaluation of pipeline
opportunities | Evaluate against screening
criteria; determine which
opportunities to pursue in further
detail | Identification of a smaller
subset of potential
transactions on which to
conduct further due diligence
E4.1: Perform Due Diligence
on proposed deals | More comprehensive
investigation into the
potential opportunity. | Evaluate all aspects of potential
investment; involve third-party
experts/consultants as applicable | Identify transactions for
investment by the GFCR Fund
E4.2: Prepare
documentation for
Investment Committee | Self-explanatory | Obtain Investment Committee
approval | Investment Committee
Approval to make the
proposed investment
E4.3: Prepare
documentation for AIFM
and execute deals | Self-explanatory | Obtain AIFM approval | AIFM approval
E5.1: Provide ad-hoc
support to Portfolio
Companies | Oversight and support via
board representation and
regular meetings with
management | Monitor company performance | N/A
E5.2: Perform regular
evaluation of Portfolio
Companies | Oversight and support via
board representation and
regular meetings with
management | Monitor company performance | N/A
E6.1: Collect information of
investees, implement
verification mechanisms,
implement data collection
tools | Self-explanatory | Monitor company performance | N/A
E6.2: Organize annual audit
of the GFCR Fund | Self-explanatory | Identify independent auditor;
provide support as necessary | Annual audit report
E6.3: Report to LPs on
financial results, impacts
and beneficiaries | Self-explanatory | Prepare investment updates | Financial reports and
qualitative updates
E7.1: Evaluate exit
opportunities | Identify potential acquirors | Engage investment banking
services on an as-needed basis | 

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 59
E
E7.2: Negotiate sales Negotiate and execute
Engage investment banking and
transactions purchase and sale
legal services on an as-needed Negotiated exit transactions
agreement and other
basis
related documents
E7.3: Execute Exit and Consummated exit
Distribute Proceeds N/A Satisfy closing conditions transactions and distribution
of proceeds
E7.4: Liquidate the GFCR
Fund after all Portfolio With assistance of legal
Make liquidating distribution. Dissolution of the GFCR Fund
Companies have been fully counsel as necessary
disposed.
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Besides the arrangements (e.g. annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please give a summary of the project/programme
specific arrangements for monitoring and evaluation. Please provide the types of interim and final evaluations. Describe
Accredited Entity (AE) project reporting relationships, including to the NDA/Focal Point and between AE and Executing Entity (EE)
as relevant, identifying reporting obligations from the EE to the AE. This should relate to the frequency of reporting on project
indicators, implementation challenges and financial status.
Non-financial outputs of the fund are continuously monitored. The process is supervised by the ESMS Manager and includes the
following activities:
• Data collection and performance measurement:
By working closely with each investee, the data required to aggregate the non-financial fund metrics are obtained
o
directly from the investees. This will include data to support the development of country or region-specific baselines
aggregated investee business plans pertaining to market share, sales, and economic activity in the sector/country.
Additional data will be periodically and systematically aggregated during implementation relating to production,
sales volumes and value, human resources, infrastructure capacity and volumes of waste treated, among others.
Templates and supporting material help facilitate the data collection. An example of this material can be found in
o
Annex 11B – Template for Regular Investee Monitoring.
When appropriate and deemed necessary, external consultants may support the data collection and measurement
o
process.
• Performance assessment and corrective actions: Based on the predefined output and outcome targets and metrics,
corrective actions may be defined by engaging with the investee.
• Reporting: Output and outcome indicators are published annually. The report is made publicly available.
The performance monitoring system will be gradually developed keeping in mind the activities under each strategic pillar. During
the initial years of implementation period, the focus will be on implementation of the monitoring plan to track progress towards
outputs and outcomes, and evaluate the causal relationships among these levels to understand overall effectiveness of
monitoring system. Periodic site visits by the Global GFCR team will further help assess intended outputs and outcomes in the
real economy.
Regarding the financial reporting, typically Pegasus provides financial information to its fund limited partners on a quarterly basis
along with a quarterly report that summarizes material developments at each
portfolio company owned by the fund. Pegasus has established valuation processes and procedures in
accordance with US GAAP and fair values for the underlying portfolio investments are done in accordance
with Accounting Standards Codification (ACS) 820-10 on a semi-annual basis at June 30th and December
31st. Pegasus expects to engage a third-party valuation firm (which may also be the AIFM) to conduct the year-end valuation.

--- Table 1 on Page 54 ---
E7.2: Negotiate sales
transactions |  | Negotiate and execute
purchase and sale
agreement and other
related documents | Engage investment banking and
legal services on an as-needed
basis | Negotiated exit transactions | 
E7.3: Execute Exit and
Distribute Proceeds |  | N/A | Satisfy closing conditions | Consummated exit
transactions and distribution
of proceeds | 
E7.4: Liquidate the GFCR
Fund after all Portfolio
Companies have been fully
disposed. |  | With assistance of legal
counsel as necessary | Make liquidating distribution. | Dissolution of the GFCR Fund | 
 | E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  | 
 | Besides the arrangements (e.g. annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please give a summary of the project/programme |  |  |  | 
 | specific arrangements for monitoring and evaluation. Please provide the types of interim and final evaluations. Describe |  |  |  | 
 | Accredited Entity (AE) project reporting relationships, including to the NDA/Focal Point and between AE and Executing Entity (EE) |  |  |  | 
 | as relevant, identifying reporting obligations from the EE to the AE. This should relate to the frequency of reporting on project |  |  |  | 
 | indicators, implementation challenges and financial status. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Non-financial outputs of the fund are continuously monitored. The process is supervised by the ESMS Manager and includes the |  |  |  | 
 | following activities: |  |  |  | 
 | • Data collection and performance measurement: |  |  |  | 
 | By working closely with each investee, the data required to aggregate the non-financial fund metrics are obtained
o |  |  |  | 
 | directly from the investees. This will include data to support the development of country or region-specific baselines |  |  |  | 
 | aggregated investee business plans pertaining to market share, sales, and economic activity in the sector/country. |  |  |  | 
 | Additional data will be periodically and systematically aggregated during implementation relating to production, |  |  |  | 
 | sales volumes and value, human resources, infrastructure capacity and volumes of waste treated, among others. |  |  |  | 
 | Templates and supporting material help facilitate the data collection. An example of this material can be found in
o |  |  |  | 
 | Annex 11B – Template for Regular Investee Monitoring. |  |  |  | 
 | When appropriate and deemed necessary, external consultants may support the data collection and measurement
o |  |  |  | 
 | process. |  |  |  | 
 | • Performance assessment and corrective actions: Based on the predefined output and outcome targets and metrics, |  |  |  | 
 | corrective actions may be defined by engaging with the investee. |  |  |  | 
 | • Reporting: Output and outcome indicators are published annually. The report is made publicly available. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | The performance monitoring system will be gradually developed keeping in mind the activities under each strategic pillar. During |  |  |  | 
 | the initial years of implementation period, the focus will be on implementation of the monitoring plan to track progress towards |  |  |  | 
 | outputs and outcomes, and evaluate the causal relationships among these levels to understand overall effectiveness of |  |  |  | 
 | monitoring system. Periodic site visits by the Global GFCR team will further help assess intended outputs and outcomes in the |  |  |  | 
 | real economy. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Regarding the financial reporting, typically Pegasus provides financial information to its fund limited partners on a quarterly basis |  |  |  | 
 | along with a quarterly report that summarizes material developments at each |  |  |  | 
 | portfolio company owned by the fund. Pegasus has established valuation processes and procedures in |  |  |  | 
 | accordance with US GAAP and fair values for the underlying portfolio investments are done in accordance |  |  |  | 
 | with Accounting Standards Codification (ACS) 820-10 on a semi-annual basis at June 30th and December |  |  |  | 
 | 31st. Pegasus expects to engage a third-party valuation firm (which may also be the AIFM) to conduct the year-end valuation. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 59
F
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF),
sanctions, prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also
describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices
Selected Risk Factor 1 Investee companies may fail to deliver on projected financial or impact results
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Pegasus seeks to conduct comprehensive due diligence on each potential investment, including the selection of local partners
and others involved in the day-to-day management of the investee company. Nevertheless, there are any number of reasons
(some within Pegasus’ or management’s control and some not) why an investment may not perform as expected.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
Issues identified during due diligence may prompt Pegasus to alter transaction terms or impose conditions on the investment.
Pegasus has also historically sought to stage its investments in many of its companies, which typically allows it to commit less
capital to an investment upfront when the risk is potentially the greatest. Pegasus also remains closely involved with its
investee companies, often by majority control of the board of directors and/or regular formal and informal communication with
management. Accordingly, when issues do arise at an investee company, Pegasus is apprised in real-time and often directly
assists with identification and remediation of issues, including (in some instances) by dispatching Pegasus employees and/or
operating/strategic advisors to the investee company.
Selected Risk Factor 2 Private investors may not consider the GFCR Fund as sufficiently attractive for investment
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Pegasus believes, adaptation impact funds are less well understood by investors. There could be a perception that a fund
focused on coral reefs is more philanthropic than commercial.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
GCF’s concessional commitment provides significant downside protection for private investors. Pegasus has had early stage
conversations with certain investors to test the GFCR concept at a high level, and early indications are promising. Pegasus is
exploring other investment support mechanisms (e.g., third-party guarantees) to bolster the credit profile of the GFCR Fund.

--- Table 1 on Page 55 ---
 | RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF),
sanctions, prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also
describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 1 Investee companies may fail to deliver on projected financial or impact results |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  |  | Medium |  |  | Medium |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Pegasus seeks to conduct comprehensive due diligence on each potential investment, including the selection of local partners
and others involved in the day-to-day management of the investee company. Nevertheless, there are any number of reasons
(some within Pegasus’ or management’s control and some not) why an investment may not perform as expected. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
Issues identified during due diligence may prompt Pegasus to alter transaction terms or impose conditions on the investment.
Pegasus has also historically sought to stage its investments in many of its companies, which typically allows it to commit less
capital to an investment upfront when the risk is potentially the greatest. Pegasus also remains closely involved with its
investee companies, often by majority control of the board of directors and/or regular formal and informal communication with
management. Accordingly, when issues do arise at an investee company, Pegasus is apprised in real-time and often directly
assists with identification and remediation of issues, including (in some instances) by dispatching Pegasus employees and/or
operating/strategic advisors to the investee company. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2 Private investors may not consider the GFCR Fund as sufficiently attractive for investment |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  |  | Low |  |  | Medium |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Pegasus believes, adaptation impact funds are less well understood by investors. There could be a perception that a fund
focused on coral reefs is more philanthropic than commercial. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
GCF’s concessional commitment provides significant downside protection for private investors. Pegasus has had early stage
conversations with certain investors to test the GFCR concept at a high level, and early indications are promising. Pegasus is
exploring other investment support mechanisms (e.g., third-party guarantees) to bolster the credit profile of the GFCR Fund. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 59
F
Selected Risk Factor 3 ML/TF and Other Prohibited Practices
Category Probability Impact
ML/FT Low Medium
Description
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Potential investees could engage in activities that violate GCF’s Policy on Prohibited Practices.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
Pre-investment due diligence will include, among other things, extensive due diligence on operational matters of investee
companies and the identity/background of key personnel (i.e., KYC). This due diligence will be supplemented by KYC
requirements imposed on the Fund’s Depositary under Luxembourg law.

--- Table 1 on Page 56 ---
Selected Risk Factor 3 ML/TF and Other Prohibited Practices |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
ML/FT |  |  | Low |  |  | Medium |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.
Potential investees could engage in activities that violate GCF’s Policy on Prohibited Practices. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
Pre-investment due diligence will include, among other things, extensive due diligence on operational matters of investee
companies and the identity/background of key personnel (i.e., KYC). This due diligence will be supplemented by KYC
requirements imposed on the Fund’s Depositary under Luxembourg law. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 59
G
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale for
assigning such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments developed for the
proposal (for example, ESIA, ESMP, ESMF, ESMS, environmental and social audits, etc.). Provide a summary of the main
outcomes of these instruments. Present the key environmental and social risks and impacts and the measures on how the
project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. preparation, implementation and
operation), in accordance with GCF’s ESS standards. If the proposed project or programme involves investments through
financial intermediations, describe the due diligence and management plans by the Executing Entities (EEs) and the oversight
and supervision arrangements. Describe the capacity of the EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for
compliance monitoring, supervision and reporting. Include a description of the project/programme-level grievance redress
mechanism, a summary of the extent of multi-stakeholder consultations undertaken for the project/programme, the plan of the
Accredited Entity (AE) and EEs to continue to engage the stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and
timing of disclosure of the applicable safeguards reports following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy
and Environmental and Social Policy.
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the development of
an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and informed consent, pursuant to
the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy.
Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on the environmental
and social risk category as annex 6.
As part of its commitment to sound E&S risk management, responsible operations and sustainable development, the GFCR Fund
will operate an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) in conformity with the requirements and standards of
Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and in particular those of the Green Climate Fund and IFC Performance Standards. The
GFCR Fund will aim to be certified compatible with the SDGs and reporting performance against project-specific impact criteria.
The GFCR Fund will thus contribute to several Sustainable Development Goals (“SDGs”), in particular [SDG 14 ‘Life Below Water’,
SDG 13, (Climate Action), SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation), SDG 8 (job creation), SDG 11 (sustainable communities) and SDG 3
(good health and well-being).]68
The GFCR Fund is committed to maintaining, implementing, and continuously improving its ESMS to ensure implementation of
this policy throughout the value chain (project identification, development, investment, monitoring and reporting). The ESMS
includes an E&S categorization system that is consistent with the equivalent practices of the GCG, the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), the European Investment Bank (EIB) and other Development Finance Institutions (DFIs).
The framework of the ESMS includes the following elements:
• E&S Policy
• Procedures, which are fully integrated with the fund’s overall investment cycle
Transaction screening (incl. exclusion list)
o
Risk categorization
o
E&S due diligence
o
• Tools
• Guidance materials and reporting protocols
The full set of procedures that will be followed includes a process for screening of potential investments against the Exclusion
List prior to a Go/No Go decision, to ensure that no investment is made in projects or companies that are operating with excluded
activities. The screening process permits the provisional categorization of proposed projects into higher, medium and lower risk
(Category A, B or C respectively) projects and that then determines the level of E&S due diligence required and the actions to be
taken to minimize potential impacts.
68 To be confirmed.

--- Table 1 on Page 57 ---
 | GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS | 
 | G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) | 
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale for
assigning such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments developed for the
proposal (for example, ESIA, ESMP, ESMF, ESMS, environmental and social audits, etc.). Provide a summary of the main
outcomes of these instruments. Present the key environmental and social risks and impacts and the measures on how the
project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. preparation, implementation and
operation), in accordance with GCF’s ESS standards. If the proposed project or programme involves investments through
financial intermediations, describe the due diligence and management plans by the Executing Entities (EEs) and the oversight
and supervision arrangements. Describe the capacity of the EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for
compliance monitoring, supervision and reporting. Include a description of the project/programme-level grievance redress
mechanism, a summary of the extent of multi-stakeholder consultations undertaken for the project/programme, the plan of the
Accredited Entity (AE) and EEs to continue to engage the stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and
timing of disclosure of the applicable safeguards reports following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy
and Environmental and Social Policy.
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the development of
an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and informed consent, pursuant to
the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy.
Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on the environmental
and social risk category as annex 6.
As part of its commitment to sound E&S risk management, responsible operations and sustainable development, the GFCR Fund
will operate an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) in conformity with the requirements and standards of
Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and in particular those of the Green Climate Fund and IFC Performance Standards. The
GFCR Fund will aim to be certified compatible with the SDGs and reporting performance against project-specific impact criteria.
The GFCR Fund will thus contribute to several Sustainable Development Goals (“SDGs”), in particular [SDG 14 ‘Life Below Water’,
SDG 13, (Climate Action), SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation), SDG 8 (job creation), SDG 11 (sustainable communities) and SDG 3
(good health and well-being).]68
The GFCR Fund is committed to maintaining, implementing, and continuously improving its ESMS to ensure implementation of
this policy throughout the value chain (project identification, development, investment, monitoring and reporting). The ESMS
includes an E&S categorization system that is consistent with the equivalent practices of the GCG, the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), the European Investment Bank (EIB) and other Development Finance Institutions (DFIs).
The framework of the ESMS includes the following elements:
• E&S Policy
• Procedures, which are fully integrated with the fund’s overall investment cycle
Transaction screening (incl. exclusion list)
o
Risk categorization
o
E&S due diligence
o
• Tools
• Guidance materials and reporting protocols
The full set of procedures that will be followed includes a process for screening of potential investments against the Exclusion
List prior to a Go/No Go decision, to ensure that no investment is made in projects or companies that are operating with excluded
activities. The screening process permits the provisional categorization of proposed projects into higher, medium and lower risk
(Category A, B or C respectively) projects and that then determines the level of E&S due diligence required and the actions to be
taken to minimize potential impacts. |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 57 ---
The GFCR Fund is committed to maintaining, implementing, and continuously improving its ESMS to ensure implementation of
this policy throughout the value chain (project identification, development, investment, monitoring and reporting). The ESMS
includes an E&S categorization system that is consistent with the equivalent practices of the GCG, the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), the European Investment Bank (EIB) and other Development Finance Institutions (DFIs).
The framework of the ESMS includes the following elements:

--- Table 3 on Page 57 ---
• E&S Policy | 
• Procedures, which are fully integrated with the fund’s overall investment cycle | 
 | Transaction screening (incl. exclusion list)
o
 | Risk categorization
o
 | E&S due diligence
o
• Tools | 
• Guidance materials and reporting protocols | 

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 59
G
The risk categories are aligned with the IFC risk categorization69:
• Category A: Business activities with potential significant adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts that are
diverse, irreversible, or unprecedented.
• Category B: Business activities with potential limited adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts that are few
in number, generally site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation measures.
• Category C: Business activities with minimal or no adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts.
Due to the strict environmental and social safeguards, GFCR will not invest in Category A projects. Category projects are excluded
from the Fund because projects shall not, under any circumstances, result in significant adverse impacts that are multiple,
irreversible, or unprecedented.
All projects financed by the GFCR shall comply with host country regulatory requirements, the relevant IFC Performance
Standards and good industry practice, respectively the EHS Guidelines of the World Bank Group.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme-level gender action plan that is aligned with the
objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy. Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process used to develop
both documents. Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key recommendations (how to
address the vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment. Indicate if stakeholder consultations have taken place and
describe the key inputs integrated into the action plan, including: how addressing the vulnerability will ensure equal
participation and benefits from funds investment; key gender-related results to be expected from the project/programme with
targets; implementation arrangements that the AE has put in place to ensure activities are implemented and expected outcomes
will be achieved, monitored and evaluated.
Provide the full gender assessment and project-level gender action plan as annex 8.
The GFCR Gender Assessment serves to understand how the fund can address gender vulnerabilities and design specific gender
elements in the different project categories. A gender specific sector and peer-projects assessment has been conducted to
identify the drivers of change and the gender dynamics needed to achieve the fund’s impact goals. The Gender Action Plan builds
on the findings of the Gender Assessment and derives target outputs, outcomes and impacts and corresponding activities and
indicators to ensure that GFCR meets its objectives.
GFCR has assessed each project category beginning with gender-related vulnerabilities and capacities for change in in the sectors
and projects. This includes the assessment of access to resources, power and decision-making, knowledge and perception of
women, and participation in the community and society, among others.
Based on the Gender Assessment, several vulnerabilities and capacities were identified in the focus areas of the GFCR and led to
the conclusive impact objective to promote greater resilience and adaptive capacity of women and girls living in coral reef-
dependent communities through the attainment of three main impacts:
• Empowerment of women and girls to promote independence and enable them to become agents of change;
• Better health outcomes and improved physical and emotional safety of women and girls;
• Sustainable livelihoods for women and girls.
Based on the identified impacts, key activities, outcomes and outputs were derived. These include, among others:
• Capacity and confidence building and skills training for women to promote entrepreneurship and business opportunities
• Empower women in decision-making, politically and socially
• Including women in the broader community and civil society organizations
69 https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/sustainability-at-ifc/policies-standards/es-
categorization

--- Table 1 on Page 58 ---
The risk categories are aligned with the IFC risk categorization69:
• Category A: Business activities with potential significant adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts that are
diverse, irreversible, or unprecedented.
• Category B: Business activities with potential limited adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts that are few
in number, generally site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation measures.
• Category C: Business activities with minimal or no adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts.
Due to the strict environmental and social safeguards, GFCR will not invest in Category A projects. Category projects are excluded
from the Fund because projects shall not, under any circumstances, result in significant adverse impacts that are multiple,
irreversible, or unprecedented.
All projects financed by the GFCR shall comply with host country regulatory requirements, the relevant IFC Performance
Standards and good industry practice, respectively the EHS Guidelines of the World Bank Group. |  | 
 | G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme-level gender action plan that is aligned with the
objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy. Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process used to develop
both documents. Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key recommendations (how to
address the vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment. Indicate if stakeholder consultations have taken place and
describe the key inputs integrated into the action plan, including: how addressing the vulnerability will ensure equal
participation and benefits from funds investment; key gender-related results to be expected from the project/programme with
targets; implementation arrangements that the AE has put in place to ensure activities are implemented and expected outcomes
will be achieved, monitored and evaluated.
Provide the full gender assessment and project-level gender action plan as annex 8.
The GFCR Gender Assessment serves to understand how the fund can address gender vulnerabilities and design specific gender
elements in the different project categories. A gender specific sector and peer-projects assessment has been conducted to
identify the drivers of change and the gender dynamics needed to achieve the fund’s impact goals. The Gender Action Plan builds
on the findings of the Gender Assessment and derives target outputs, outcomes and impacts and corresponding activities and
indicators to ensure that GFCR meets its objectives.
GFCR has assessed each project category beginning with gender-related vulnerabilities and capacities for change in in the sectors
and projects. This includes the assessment of access to resources, power and decision-making, knowledge and perception of
women, and participation in the community and society, among others.
Based on the Gender Assessment, several vulnerabilities and capacities were identified in the focus areas of the GFCR and led to
the conclusive impact objective to promote greater resilience and adaptive capacity of women and girls living in coral reef-
dependent communities through the attainment of three main impacts:
• Empowerment of women and girls to promote independence and enable them to become agents of change;
• Better health outcomes and improved physical and emotional safety of women and girls;
• Sustainable livelihoods for women and girls.
Based on the identified impacts, key activities, outcomes and outputs were derived. These include, among others:
• Capacity and confidence building and skills training for women to promote entrepreneurship and business opportunities
• Empower women in decision-making, politically and socially
• Including women in the broader community and civil society organizations |  | 

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 59
G
• Promote decent work incl. equal pay, tackling sexual harassment and recruiting women into high-level employment
• Address women specific needs during project design and development through gender-responsive stakeholder
consultation
• Promote health outcomes and reduce gender violence
Key gender-related indicators were developed for each of the impact objectives to measure the effectiveness of the approach.
These include, among others:70
• Empowerment of women and girls:
Percentage of women’s participation and leadership in community and at project level
o
Percentage of women making decisions on behalf of their families and communities
o
Number women with improved access to financial mechanisms
o
• Better health outcomes and improved physical and emotional safety:
(Water borne) disease prevalence
o
Rates of childhood stunting
o
Measurable reduction in gender-based violence
o
• Sustainable livelihoods for women and girls:
Number of women employed
o
Percentage of gender pay gap
o
Percentage of contractual relationships (temporary vs. permanent and full-time vs. part-time)
o
Indicators were also developed on process and project design level. Furthermore, the implementation of the GFCR Gender Policy
and Gender Action Plan seek to ensure the effectiveness of the GFCR in regard to gender equality.
Additionally, the GFCR has a monitoring framework and processes in place to measure gender equality results against an
established baseline. This occurs at every stage of the project, from initial feasibility, project design, preliminary design review,
implementation and ongoing performance review. Monitoring is led by the ESMS Manager and external consultants if
appropriate.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Describe the project/programme’s financial management including the financial monitoring systems, financial accounting,
auditing, and disbursement structure and methods. Refer to section B.4 on implementation arrangements as necessary.
Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention, e.g. procurement implementation arrangements and the role of
the AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken and how that will be managed by
the AE or the implementing agency. Provide a detailed procurement plan as annex 10.
Pegasus maintains an Accounting Policy designed to ensure financial transactions are properly authorized, documented and
executed. Pegasus’ funds are audited by an independent auditor on an annual basis and Pegasus also undergoes a compliance
audit conducted by a third-party compliance consultant on an annual basis. All disbursements are subject to a three-party
process. One individual from below (other than the Chief Compliance Officer (“CCO”)) can create a wire; then any other
authorized person who did not create the wire can/will approve that wire; finally only the CCO or Controller (under the
direction of the CCO) are authorized to release the wire as long as such individual had not previously approved that same wire.
Each step of the process is logged automatically in the firm’s online banking portal.
• CCO – has the ability to review all activity of the bank accounts and generate reports. He/she also has the ability to
approve and release wire transfers that have been entered into the website with restrictions. He/she cannot release a
wire that they have approved nor can he/she release a wire that they have modified.
• Controller – has the ability to review all activity of the bank accounts and generate reports. He/she also has the ability
to create, approve and release wire transfers that have been entered into the website with restrictions. He/she cannot
approve or release a wire that they have created nor can he/she release a wire that they have modified.
70 Refer to the Gender Action Plan for additional gender indicators. The indicators listed here are exemplars.

--- Table 1 on Page 59 ---
• Promote decent work incl. equal pay, tackling sexual harassment and recruiting women into high-level employment
• Address women specific needs during project design and development through gender-responsive stakeholder
consultation
• Promote health outcomes and reduce gender violence
Key gender-related indicators were developed for each of the impact objectives to measure the effectiveness of the approach.
These include, among others:70
• Empowerment of women and girls:
Percentage of women’s participation and leadership in community and at project level
o
Percentage of women making decisions on behalf of their families and communities
o
Number women with improved access to financial mechanisms
o
• Better health outcomes and improved physical and emotional safety:
(Water borne) disease prevalence
o
Rates of childhood stunting
o
Measurable reduction in gender-based violence
o
• Sustainable livelihoods for women and girls:
Number of women employed
o
Percentage of gender pay gap
o
Percentage of contractual relationships (temporary vs. permanent and full-time vs. part-time)
o
Indicators were also developed on process and project design level. Furthermore, the implementation of the GFCR Gender Policy
and Gender Action Plan seek to ensure the effectiveness of the GFCR in regard to gender equality.
Additionally, the GFCR has a monitoring framework and processes in place to measure gender equality results against an
established baseline. This occurs at every stage of the project, from initial feasibility, project design, preliminary design review,
implementation and ongoing performance review. Monitoring is led by the ESMS Manager and external consultants if
appropriate. |  | 
 | G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | Describe the project/programme’s financial management including the financial monitoring systems, financial accounting, | 
 | auditing, and disbursement structure and methods. Refer to section B.4 on implementation arrangements as necessary. | 
 | Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention, e.g. procurement implementation arrangements and the role of | 
 | the AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken and how that will be managed by | 
 | the AE or the implementing agency. Provide a detailed procurement plan as annex 10. | 
 | Pegasus maintains an Accounting Policy designed to ensure financial transactions are properly authorized, documented and | 
 | executed. Pegasus’ funds are audited by an independent auditor on an annual basis and Pegasus also undergoes a compliance | 
 | audit conducted by a third-party compliance consultant on an annual basis. All disbursements are subject to a three-party | 
 | process. One individual from below (other than the Chief Compliance Officer (“CCO”)) can create a wire; then any other | 
 | authorized person who did not create the wire can/will approve that wire; finally only the CCO or Controller (under the | 
 | direction of the CCO) are authorized to release the wire as long as such individual had not previously approved that same wire. | 
 | Each step of the process is logged automatically in the firm’s online banking portal. | 
 | • CCO – has the ability to review all activity of the bank accounts and generate reports. He/she also has the ability to | 
 | approve and release wire transfers that have been entered into the website with restrictions. He/she cannot release a | 
 | wire that they have approved nor can he/she release a wire that they have modified. | 
 | • Controller – has the ability to review all activity of the bank accounts and generate reports. He/she also has the ability | 
 | to create, approve and release wire transfers that have been entered into the website with restrictions. He/she cannot | 
 | approve or release a wire that they have created nor can he/she release a wire that they have modified. | 

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 59
G
• Senior Accountant - has the ability to review all activity of the bank accounts and generate reports. He/she also has the
ability to create wire and/or modify transfers on the bank’s website. Such an individual shall also have the ability to
approve a wire which he/she did not create. However, this person does not have the ability to release any wires.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure for all
information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and programme funding
proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any
information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of the exceptions, but this
exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the document contains specific, segregable portions that can
be disclosed without prejudice or harm.
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.
No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be
☐
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may not be
☒
disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity is
providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the accredited
entity’s disclosure policy, and
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.

--- Table 1 on Page 60 ---
 | • Senior Accountant - has the ability to review all activity of the bank accounts and generate reports. He/she also has the | 
 | ability to create wire and/or modify transfers on the bank’s website. Such an individual shall also have the ability to | 
 | approve a wire which he/she did not create. However, this person does not have the ability to release any wires. | 
 |  | 
 | G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal | 
 | Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure for all | 
 | information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and programme funding | 
 | proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any | 
 | information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of the exceptions, but this | 
 | exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the document contains specific, segregable portions that can | 
 | be disclosed without prejudice or harm. | 
 |  | 
 | Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. | 
 |  | 
 | No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be | 
 | ☐
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may not be | 
 | ☒
disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity is | 
 | providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 |   full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an | 
 | explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the accredited | 
 | entity’s disclosure policy, and | 
 |   redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information. | 

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 59
H
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☒ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☒
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, Indigenous
☐
People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☒ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
☒
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☒ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☒ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☒ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot project
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed
by the entity
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)
☐ Annex 22 Blended Finance Funds
Annex 23 Potential impact on corals and beneficiaries
Annex 24 Risks and barriers
Annex 25 Sector Theories of Change

--- Table 1 on Page 61 ---
 | ANNEXES |  |  | 
 | H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☒ |  | Annex 3 | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 6 | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, Indigenous
☐
People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) | 
☒ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☒ |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
 | H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☒ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot project | 
☐ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed
by the entity | 
☒ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment | 
☐ |  | Annex 21 | Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) | 
☐ |  | Annex 22 | Blended Finance Funds | 
 |  | Annex 23 | Potential impact on corals and beneficiaries | 
 |  | Annex 24 | Risks and barriers | 
 |  | Annex 25 | Sector Theories of Change | 

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 59
H
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
documents.

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 59
H
N otice to Recipients
This funding proposal (the “Proposal”) is for information purposes only and may not be reproduced or distributed under any
circumstances without our prior written consent. This Proposal does not constitute an offer to sell, or solicitation of an offer to buy,
any securities. Any offering will only be made pursuant to the relevant information within a private placement memorandum, limited
partnership agreement and subscription documents, all of which must be read in their entirety. No offer to make an investment will be
made prior to receipt by a potential investor of these documents and the completion of all the appropriate documents. Nothing in this
Proposal constitutes advice relating to legal, taxation, accounting, regulatory or investment matters and potential investors are advised
to consult their own professional advisors in connection with making an investment decision.
The distribution of this Proposal in certain jurisdictions may be restricted by law. This Proposal is only directed at persons to whom it
may lawfully be distributed and any investment activity to which this Proposal relates will only be available to such persons. It is the
responsibility of any potential investor to satisfy itself as to the full compliance with the applicable laws and regulations of any relevant
jurisdiction, including obtaining any governmental or other consent and observing any other formality prescribed in such jurisdiction.
Certain information contained herein has been obtained from published sources and third parties. While such information is believed
to be reliable for the purpose used herein, none of Pegasus, its affiliates or any of its or their respective directors, officers, employees,
advisors, partners or agents has independently verified or assumes any responsibility for the accuracy of such information. Except
where otherwise indicated herein, the information provided herein is based on matters as they exist as of the date of preparation, and
may not be updated or otherwise revised to reflect information that subsequently becomes available, or circumstances existing or
changes occurring after the date hereof. This Proposal contains forward looking statements which are identifiable by words such as
“anticipate”, “estimate”, “project”, “plan”, “intend”, “expect”, “believe”, “forecast” and similar expressions. The recipient should be
aware that these statements are estimates, reflecting only the judgment of Pegasus or company management, as applicable, and the
recipient should not place any reliance on any forward looking statements. The analyses, forecasts and targets contained in this
Proposal are based on assumptions believed to be reasonable in light of the information presently available. Such assumptions (and
the resulting analyses, forecasts and targets) may require modification as additional information becomes available and as economic
and market developments warrant. Any such modification could be either favorable or adverse. The forecasts and targets have been
prepared and are set out for illustrative purposes only, and no assurances can be made that they will materialize.
Pegasus and its directors, officers, employees, partners, affiliates, advisors and agents do not accept any responsibility whatsoever or
liability for any direct, indirect or consequential loss or damage suffered or incurred by the recipient or any other person or entity,
however incurred (including, but not limited to, negligence) in any way in connection with (i) the materials or any other written or oral
information made available to the recipient or such other person or entity, including, without limitation, the information contained in
this Proposal; (ii) any errors or omissions or the materials or any other written or oral information however caused; (iii) the recipient or
any other person or entity having placed any reliance on the materials or such other information; or (iv) the reasonableness,
authenticity, validity, adequacy, accuracy, completeness or reliability of the materials or such other information. This Proposal does
not constitute and should not be considered as any form of financial opinion or recommendation.
Past or targeted performance should not be viewed as a guide to future performance. Actual results could differ materially from those
discussed or implied herein, as a result of various factors, including future economic, competitive, political, regulatory or market
conditions of future business decisions. The value of an investment in products such as described herein may fall as well as rise and any
investment carries the risk of a total loss of capital. The value of an investment in products such as those described herein may fall as
well as rise and any investment carries the risk of a total loss of capital. An investment in such products is suitable only for
sophisticated investors and requires the financial ability and willingness to accept the high risks and lack of liquidity inherent in such an
investment.
Gross IRR is computed on an annual, compounding basis, and is calculated before any carried interest, management fees and other
partnership expenses, and is calculated using cash flows as they actually occur. Net IRR cannot be calculated for an individual
investment without making arbitrary assumptions about fees, expenses and carried interest.
Nothing in this “Notice to Recipients” is intended to modify Pegasus’ obligations to the Green Climate Fund as set forth in the
Accreditation Master Agreement between Pegasus and the GCF.

=== PAGE 64 ===
Page 60

=== PAGE 65 ===
Page 61

=== PAGE 66 ===
Page 62

=== PAGE 67 ===
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:0)(cid:3)(cid:0)(cid:5) (cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:12)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:15)
Page 63
-./.012345646./7/89
0:;<:=><?>=4@A<4.B=:<B>=?AB>C47@@>?<D4
/>=?AB>C4E:D?FB>=:G47H=IA<?=J4@A<4=I:4K<::B48C?L>=:46HBG
9DMC>B>G>4GAD4-?B?D=N<?ADO4PCA;A4QO4RS4>BG><O4D>C>4RTU
89V4TWWUWXYWZ4X4P<>D[C?>\E64X4]Z^_4‘W‘WXUZaU4X4:XL>?C4>BGbF;@c:;ABAL?>bFAdbe<
444
4
8><=>409.4BS4^YWW\‘W‘^\-9
44
4
-<b43>BB?;f4KC:L><:;
E:MH=J49g:;H=?d:4E?<:;=A<4
K<::B48C?L>=:46HBG4
KX1Ah:<O4‘UXU40ABFGAXGABFO43:ABDHXFH4
.B;I:AB48?=JO42:MHeC?;4A@4QA<:>
4
2:i4jklmnlopqrsqstuvpwsrpxyzp{|jp}~p(cid:127)|(cid:128)przourmnlopxyzpqrsoru(cid:129)p(cid:130){vs}uvpjklmpwsrp|sruvp(cid:131)zzwt(cid:130)
(cid:132)(cid:133)(cid:134)(cid:133)(cid:135)(cid:136)(cid:137)(cid:138)(cid:139)(cid:140)(cid:141)4.@4JAH4>BDh:<4=I?D4C:==:<O4MC:>D:4?BG?;>=:4=I:4V<A;:DD4BbS4^‘^‘Wb^WW‘(cid:142)U\‘W‘^X^W
4
E:><4-<b4KC:L><:;O
4
^b (cid:143):4<:@:<4=A4=I:4M<AF<>LL:4:B=?=C:G4(cid:144){vs}uvpjklmpwsrp|sruvp(cid:131)zzwt(cid:144)4>D4?B;CHG:G4?B4=I:
@HBG?BF4M<AMAD>C4DHeL?==:G4eJ4V874=A4HD4AB4->J4^W=IO4‘W‘^b
‘b 1I:4HBG:<D?FB:G4?D4=I:4GHCJ4>H=IA<?(cid:145):G4<:M<:D:B=>=?d:4A@4=I:40:;<:=><?>=4@A<4.B=:<B>=?AB>C
9;ABAL?;47@@>?<DO4-?B?D=<J4A@49;ABALJO4=I:4/>=?AB>C4E:D?FB>=:G47H=IA<?=J4@A<4P<>(cid:145)?Cb
(cid:142)b VH<DH>B=4=A4K864G:;?D?AB4PbWR\^WO4=I:4;AB=:B=4A@4hI?;I4h:4>;fBAhC:GF:4=A4I>d:4<:d?:h:GO
h:4I:<:eJ4;ALLHB?;>=:4AH<4BAXAe(cid:146):;=?AB4=A4=I:4M<AF<>LL:4>D4?B;CHG:G4?B4=I:4@HBG?BF4M<AMAD>Cb
Ub PJ4;ALLHB?;>=?BF4AH<4BAXAe(cid:146):;=?ABO4?=4?D4?LMC?:G4=I>=i
>_1I:4FAd:<BL:B=4A@4P<>(cid:145)?C4I>D4BAXAe(cid:146):;=?AB4=A4=I:4M<AF<>LL:4>D4?B;CHG:G4?B4=I:4@HBG?BF
M<AMAD>C(cid:147)
e_1I:4M<AF<>LL:4>D4?B;CHG:G4?B4=I:4@HBG?BF4M<AMAD>C4?D4?B4;AB@A<L?=J4h?=I4=I:4B>=?AB>C
M<?A<?=?:DO4D=<>=:F?:D4>BG4MC>BD4A@4P<>(cid:145)?C(cid:147)4>BG
;_.B4>;;A<G>B;:4h?=I4=I:4K86(cid:148)D4:Bd?<ABL:B=>C4>BG4DA;?>C4D>@:FH><GDO4=I:4M<AF<>LL:4>D
?B;CHG:G4?B4=I:4@HBG?BF4M<AMAD>C4?D4?B4;AB@A<L?=J4h?=I4<:C:d>B=4B>=?AB>C4C>hD4>BG4<:FHC>=?ABDb
ab (cid:143):4>CDA4;AB@?<L4=I>=4AH<4B>=?AB>C4M<A;:DD4@A<4>D;:<=>?B?BF4BAXAe(cid:146):;=?AB4=A4=I:4M<AF<>LL:O4>D
?B;CHG:G4?B4=I:4@HBG?BF4M<AMAD>CO4I>D4e::B4GHCJ4@ACCAh:Gb4
Zb (cid:143):4>CDA4;AB@?<L4=I>=4AH<4BAXAe(cid:146):;=?AB4>MMC?:D4=A4>CC4M<A(cid:146):;=D4A<4>;=?d?=?:D4=A4e:4?LMC:L:B=:G
h?=I?B4=I:4D;AM:4A@4=I:4M<AF<>LL:b
Tb (cid:143):4>;fBAhC:GF:4=I>=4=I?D4C:==:<4h?CC4e:4L>G:4MHeC?;CJ4>d>?C>eC:4AB4=I:4K864h:eD?=:b
4
Q?BG4<:F><GDO
4
(cid:18)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:15)(cid:24)(cid:29)(cid:26)(cid:30)(cid:24)(cid:31)(cid:16)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:26)(cid:15)!(cid:26)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:19)"(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:15)(cid:26)#!(cid:26)(cid:25)$(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:26)%(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:16)%&(cid:22)(cid:31)’(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:15)(cid:26)%(cid:26)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:22)(cid:28)#(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:30)(cid:26)(cid:16)(cid:22)%(cid:30)(cid:23)(cid:20)$(cid:15) (cid:23)((cid:15)(cid:16)’(cid:23)!%!(cid:26)(cid:25)$(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:26)#(cid:0)(cid:3))*)))(cid:5)’(cid:23)(cid:27)+(cid:16), (cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:0)

=== PAGE 68 ===
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:0)(cid:3)(cid:0)(cid:5) (cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:12)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:15)
-./01234.56778369.52:24;.38/612342 Page 64
<=>?@A-B5@AC=<-B5DBE<F
F2/;246;G5H.;5>342;3648.36:5</.3.18/5@HH68;7
E83874;G5.H5</.3.1G5.H5I;6J8:
5
KLMNOPQRLSTUUVQTWLSPXPRYLQVMTOPQRPSZLYS[\]^_‘abcd‘e\fabcgbhfijSkfl\fmn\]bo_pcafcdiiqrmbi
[lbrsh]lbictrmf\r_l]br_]ijSPOSuvwxywuxuzjS{USzy|}xjSMLQ~LYOPS(cid:127)LY(cid:128)YVLSL(cid:129)MVTXSWPS(cid:130)YTU(cid:131)XVTjSMLO
~NQWTOPQRLSQLS(cid:132)Sv(cid:133)SWLSTYR(cid:134)S(cid:135)(cid:133)SWLSKPMYPRLSQ(cid:133)Szx(cid:134)}(cid:135)vjSWPSzvSWPSQL(cid:136)PO(cid:137)YLSWPSuxux(cid:134)
(cid:138)STNRPQ(cid:139)MVWTWPSWPURPSWLMNOPQRLSZLWPSUPYSMLQ~PYVWTSQLSUVRP
(cid:127)(cid:140)ZU|wwUPV(cid:134)PMLQLOVT(cid:134)(cid:141)L(cid:136)(cid:134)(cid:137)YwUPVwMLQRYLXTWLY(cid:142)P(cid:143)RPYQL(cid:134)Z(cid:127)Z(cid:144)
TMTL(cid:145)WLMNOPQRL(cid:142)MLQ~PYVY(cid:146)VW(cid:142)LY(cid:141)TL(cid:142)TMPUUL(cid:142)P(cid:143)RPYQL(cid:145)xjSVQ~LYOTQWLSLSM(cid:147)WV(cid:141)LS(cid:136)PYV(cid:129)MTWLYS(cid:148)(cid:149)(cid:150)(cid:149)(cid:151)(cid:151)(cid:152)(cid:153)
PSLSM(cid:147)WV(cid:141)LS(cid:154)(cid:155)(cid:154)S(cid:156)(cid:157)(cid:158)(cid:159)(cid:156)(cid:150)(cid:150)(cid:148)(cid:134)
(cid:160);./277.53¡5¢£¢£⁄¥¢⁄⁄£ƒ§¤£⁄£¢'¢⁄¥ F<>53¡5¢“⁄“««§‹
(cid:18)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:15)(cid:24)(cid:29)(cid:26)(cid:30)(cid:24)(cid:31)(cid:16)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:26) (cid:15)!(cid:26)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:19)"(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:15)(cid:26)#!(cid:26)(cid:25)$(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:26)%(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:16)%&(cid:22)(cid:31)’(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:15)(cid:26)%(cid:26)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:22)(cid:28)#(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:30)(cid:26)(cid:16)(cid:22)%(cid:30)(cid:23)(cid:20)$(cid:15) (cid:23)((cid:15)(cid:16)’(cid:23)!%!(cid:26)(cid:25)$(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:26)#(cid:0)(cid:3))*)))(cid:5)’(cid:23)(cid:27)+(cid:16), (cid:2)

--- Table 1 on Page 68 ---

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:0)(cid:3)(cid:0)(cid:5) (cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:12)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:15)
-./01234.56778369.52:24;.38/612342 Pa
<=>?@A-B5@AC=<-B5DBE<F
F2/;246;G5H.;5>342;3648.36:5</.3.18/5@HH68;7
E83874;G5.H5</.3.1G5.H5I;6J8:
5
KLMNOPQRLSTUUVQTWLSPXPRYLQVMTOPQRPSZLYS[\]^_‘abcd‘e\fabcgbhfijSkfl\fmn\]bo_pcafcdiiqrmbi
[lbrsh]lbictrmf\r_l]br_]ijSPOSuvwxywuxuzjS{USzy|}xjSMLQ~LYOPS(cid:127)LY(cid:128)YVLSL(cid:129)MVTXSWPS(cid:130)YTU(cid:131)XVTjSMLO
~NQWTOPQRLSQLS(cid:132)Sv(cid:133)SWLSTYR(cid:134)S(cid:135)(cid:133)SWLSKPMYPRLSQ(cid:133)Szx(cid:134)}(cid:135)vjSWPSzvSWPSQL(cid:136)PO(cid:137)YLSWPSuxux(cid:134)
(cid:138)STNRPQ(cid:139)MVWTWPSWPURPSWLMNOPQRLSZLWPSUPYSMLQ~PYVWTSQLSUVRP
(cid:127)(cid:140)ZU|wwUPV(cid:134)PMLQLOVT(cid:134)(cid:141)L(cid:136)(cid:134)(cid:137)YwUPVwMLQRYLXTWLY(cid:142)P(cid:143)RPYQL(cid:134)Z(cid:127)Z(cid:144)
TMTL(cid:145)WLMNOPQRL(cid:142)MLQ~PYVY(cid:146)VW(cid:142)LY(cid:141)TL(cid:142)TMPUUL(cid:142)P(cid:143)RPYQL(cid:145)xjSVQ~LYOTQWLSLSM(cid:147)WV(cid:141)LS(cid:136)PYV(cid:129)MTWLYS(cid:148)(cid:149)(cid:150)(cid:149)(cid:151)(cid:151)(cid:152)(cid:153)
PSLSM(cid:147)WV(cid:141)LS(cid:154)(cid:155)(cid:154)S(cid:156)(cid:157)(cid:158)(cid:159)(cid:156)(cid:150)(cid:150)(cid:148)(cid:134)
(cid:160);./277.53¡5¢£¢£⁄¥¢⁄⁄£ƒ§¤£⁄£¢'¢⁄¥ F<>53¡5¢“⁄“««§‹

=== PAGE 69 ===
Page 65
*20214500924981*
Bogotá D.C., viernes, 03 de septiembre de 2021
Al responder cite este Nro.
DADS 20214500924981
The Green Climate Fund-GCF
Att. executive-office@gcfund.org
Subject: Funding proposal for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P. – regarding the
programme The Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR)
Dear Madam, Sir,
We refer to the multi-region programme titled Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment
Window (GFCR) in Colombia as included in the funding proposal submitted by Pegasus
Capital Advisors, L.P. to us on May the 10th 2021.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the National Planning Department
of Colombia.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Colombia has no-objection to the programme as included in the
funding proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
priorities, has the support of the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable
Development (Letter attached), this considering that the programme is aligned with
the National Climate Changes policies, strategies and plans of Colombia;
(c) Given that the allocation for the Government of Colombia is given at the level of a
financing range, it is necessary to work with Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P,
Accredited Entity, in order to identify the specific areas of intervention, initiatives to
be financed, define the main stakeholders, and the governance framework for the
implementation.
(d) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme
as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme
as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.

=== PAGE 70 ===
Page 66
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within the scope of the programme
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Kind regards,
SANTIAGO APARICIO V.
Director of Environment and Sustainable Development
National Planning Department
Colombia
CC cpolycarp@gcfund.org; ccasallas@dnp.gov.co; npreciado@dnp.gov.co; cnuttall@regions20.org;
BFriedman@pcalp.com; sylvain.taboni@bnpparibas.com; pierre.bardoux@undp.org;
Moritz.de.Chaisemartin@systemiq.earth
Prepared: Néstor Darío Preciado
Revised: Carlos Eduardo Casallas, Juan Sebastián Rivera

--- Table 1 on Page 70 ---
CC cpolycarp@gcfund.org; ccasallas@dnp.gov.co; npreciado@dnp.gov.co; cnuttall@regions20.org;
BFriedman@pcalp.com; sylvain.taboni@bnpparibas.com; pierre.bardoux@undp.org;
Moritz.de.Chaisemartin@systemiq.earth


=== PAGE 71 ===
Page 67

=== PAGE 72 ===
Page 68

=== PAGE 73 ===
|
Page 69
Oficio Nro. MAAE-SCC-2021-0257-0
Quito, D.M., 03 de septiembre de 2021
Asunto: Funding Proposal for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors LP regarding the
initiative "Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window"
Señor
Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
GREEN CLIMATE FUND
En su Despacho
The following is in reference to the initiative titled “Global Fund for Coral Reefs
Investment Window” in Ecuador, as included in the funding proposal submitted by
Pegasus Capital Advisors LP to us on July 2021.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment,
Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador, which acts as National Designated
Authority.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our No-Objection to the initiative as included in the
funding proposal.
By communicating our No-Objection, it is implied that:
1. The initiative as included in the funding proposal was shared with the Government
of Ecuador.
As National Designated Authority, we underline that our national process for ascertaining
no-objection to the initiative, as included in the funding proposal, has been followed.
Pegasus Capital Advisors has developed this project as part of their pipeline, thereby we
would like to be part of this program as we can envision opportunities to work with the
Coral Reef Fund. However, the information in regard to proposed interventions must
consider our country’s needs and the involvement of national institutions as part of the
decision-making committee in order to ensure that the Fund would invest in our country’s
climate priorities.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Kind regards,
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec
1/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
| | Page 69
Oficio Nro. MAAE-SCC-2021-0257-0
Quito, D.M., 03 de septiembre de 2021
Asunto: Funding Proposal for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors LP regarding the
initiative "Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window"
Señor
Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
GREEN CLIMATE FUND
En su Despacho
The following is in reference to the initiative titled “Global Fund for Coral Reefs
Investment Window” in Ecuador, as included in the funding proposal submitted by
Pegasus Capital Advisors LP to us on July 2021.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment,
Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador, which acts as National Designated
Authority.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our No-Objection to the initiative as included in the
funding proposal.
By communicating our No-Objection, it is implied that:
1. The initiative as included in the funding proposal was shared with the Government
of Ecuador.
As National Designated Authority, we underline that our national process for ascertaining
no-objection to the initiative, as included in the funding proposal, has been followed.
Pegasus Capital Advisors has developed this project as part of their pipeline, thereby we
would like to be part of this program as we can envision opportunities to work with the
Coral Reef Fund. However, the information in regard to proposed interventions must
consider our country’s needs and the involvement of national institutions as part of the
decision-making committee in order to ensure that the Fund would invest in our country’s
climate priorities.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Kind regards,
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec
1/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux | 

=== PAGE 74 ===
|
Page 70
Oficio Nro. MAAE-SCC-2021-0257-0
Quito, D.M., 03 de septiembre de 2021
Atentamente,
Documento firmado electrónicamente
Mgs. Karina Maribel Barrera Moncayo
SUBSECRETARIA DE CAMBIO CLIMÁTICO
Copia:
Señora Magíster
Inés Patricia Arias Machado
Directora de Adaptación al Cambio Climático
Señora Secretaria
Teresa Del Pilar Pérez Toscano
Secretaria de la Subsecretaria
Señorita Ingeniera
Gabriela Jeanneth Vargas Luna
Especialista de Políticas de Cambio Climático 3
ab/gv
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec
2/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
| | Page 70
Oficio Nro. MAAE-SCC-2021-0257-0
Quito, D.M., 03 de septiembre de 2021
Atentamente,
Documento firmado electrónicamente
Mgs. Karina Maribel Barrera Moncayo
SUBSECRETARIA DE CAMBIO CLIMÁTICO
Copia:
Señora Magíster
Inés Patricia Arias Machado
Directora de Adaptación al Cambio Climático
Señora Secretaria
Teresa Del Pilar Pérez Toscano
Secretaria de la Subsecretaria
Señorita Ingeniera
Gabriela Jeanneth Vargas Luna
Especialista de Políticas de Cambio Climático 3
ab/gv
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec
2/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux | 

=== PAGE 75 ===
Page 71

=== PAGE 76 ===
Page 72

=== PAGE 77 ===
Page 73

=== PAGE 78 ===
Page 74
MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
GEDUNG R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO LANTAI 2, JALAN DR. WAHIDIN NOMOR I, JAKARTA 10710
TELEPON (021) 3441484; FAKSIMILE (021) 3848049; LAMAN FISKAL.KEMENKEU.GO.ID
Ref : S-115/KF/2021 01 October 2021
Sifat : Sangat Segera
Lampiran : satu berkas
Yth. Mr. Yannick Glemarec Executive Director Green Climate Fund Songdo Business District Yeonsu-gu, Incheon
22004 Republic of Korea
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director, Green Climate Fund
Songdo Business District,
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004
Republic of Korea
Subject : Funding Proposals for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the
Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) Investment Window
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
We refer to the Programme of Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) Investment Window as
included in the Funding Proposal submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors to us on 24th June 2021
(the “Programme”).
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance
of Indonesia, the National Designated Authority of Indonesia.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the Programme as included in the Funding Proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Indonesia has no-objection to the Programme as included in the
Funding Proposal;
(b) The Programme as included in the Funding Proposal is in conformity with Indonesia’s
national priorities, strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the Programme as
included in the Funding Proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the Programme as
included in the Funding Proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within
the scope of the Programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Yours faithfully,
Kepala Badan Kebijakan Fiskal
Ditandatangani secara elektronik
Febrio Nathan Kacaribu
Cc:
Director of Center for Climate Finance and Multilateral Policy

--- Table 1 on Page 78 ---
 | MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
 | FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
 | GEDUNG R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO LANTAI 2, JALAN DR. WAHIDIN NOMOR I, JAKARTA 10710
TELEPON (021) 3441484; FAKSIMILE (021) 3848049; LAMAN FISKAL.KEMENKEU.GO.ID
 | 

--- Table 2 on Page 78 ---
Ref |  | : | S-115/KF/2021 | 01 October 2021
Sifat |  | : | Sangat Segera | 
Lampiran |  | : | satu berkas | 
Yth. | Mr. Yannick Glemarec Executive Director Green Climate Fund Songdo Business District Yeonsu-gu, Incheon
22004 Republic of Korea |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 78 ---
Subject | : | Funding Proposals for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the
Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) Investment Window

--- Table 4 on Page 78 ---
 | Yours faithfully,
Kepala Badan Kebijakan Fiskal
 | Ditandatangani secara elektronik
 | Febrio Nathan Kacaribu

--- Table 5 on Page 78 ---
Cc:
Director of Center for Climate Finance and Multilateral Policy

=== PAGE 79 ===
Page 75
A NY REPLY OR SUBSEQUENT MINISTRY OF HOUSING, URBAN RENEWAL, ENVIRONMENT
R EFERENCE SHOULD BE ADDRESSED AND CLIMATE CHANGE
T O THE PERMANENT SECRETARY
25 DOMINICA DRIVE
AND THE FOLLOWING REFERENCE
KINGSTON 5
NUMBER QUOTED:
T el:Number:876-926-1690-3 JAMAICA
9 26-1590-9 FAX 754-0975
August 30, 2021
Mr. Yannic Glemarec
Executive Director
fax 876-754-0975
Green Climate Fund
Korea
Re: Support for the “Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window”
Dear Mr. Glemarec:
We refer to the programme titled “Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window” in
Jamaica as included in the funding proposal submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P. to us on
27 August 2021.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Housing, Urban
Renewal, Environment and Climate Change, the National Designated Authority of Jamaica.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Jamaica has no-objection to the programme as included in the
funding proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
priorities, strategies and plans of Jamaica;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within the scope of the programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Sincerely,
UnaMay Gordon(Ms.)
Principal Director,
Climate Change Division

=== PAGE 80 ===
Page 76

=== PAGE 81 ===
Page 77
Subsecretaría de Hacienda y
Crédito Público
Unidad de Crédito Público
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”)
Mexico City, September 2nd, 2021
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the Global
Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window
Dear Madam, Sir,
We refer to the programme titled Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window as
included in the funding proposal submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors to us on 15 July
2021.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Brenda Pequeño Vargas, the
National Designated Authority of Mexico.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in
the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Mexico has no-objection to the programme as included in the
funding proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the
national priorities, strategies and plans of Mexico;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the
programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant
national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the
programme as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be
implemented within the scope of the programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Kind regards,
Brenda Pequeño Vargas
Director General
National Designated Authority
Mexico
Av. Insurgentes Sur No. 1971, Torre III, Piso 7, Colonia Guadalupe Inn, Alcaldía Álvaro Obregón, Ciudad de México, CP. 01020.
Tel. +52 55 3688 1410 www.gob.mx/shcp

=== PAGE 82 ===
Page 78

=== PAGE 83 ===
Page 79

=== PAGE 84 ===
Page 80
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENVIRONMENT
CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY DEPARTMENT
Office of the Principal Secretary
Botanical Gardens, Mont Fleuri , P.O. Box 445, Victoria, Mahe, Republic of Seychelles
Tel. No. (+248) 4670568 Email: rloustaulalanne@statehouse.gov.sc
Please address all correspondence to the Principal Secretary – Ms Rebecca Loustau-Lalanne
DATE: 15th June, 2021
Yannick Glemarec,
Executive Director
Songdo Business District
175 Art Center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 2200
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisor
regarding “Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window”
Dear Sir,
We refer to the programme titled “Global Fund for Coral Reefs
Investment Window” in Seychelles as included in the funding proposal
submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisor to us on 10th May, 2021
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of National
Designated Authority of Seychelles.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge
to have reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the
programme as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Seychelles has no-objection to the programme
as included in the funding proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in
conformity with the national priorities, strategies and plans of
Seychelles;

=== PAGE 85 ===
Page 81
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social
safeguards, the programme as included in the funding proposal
is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to
the programme as included in the funding proposal has been duly
followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to
be implemented within the scope of the programme
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF
website.
Yours sincerely,
Wills Agricole
Technical Advisor for Climate Change and Energy
National Designated Authority of Seychelles
For: PRINCIPAL SECRETARY/ CLIMATE CHANGE & ENERGY

=== PAGE 86 ===
Page 82

=== PAGE 87 ===
_,..
MINISTERIO DE
REPUBLICA DE PANAMA AMBIENTE
-GOBIERNO NACIONAL -
Panama, 25 de agosto de 2021
DM-1571-2021
Sefior
YA NNICK GLEMAREC
Director Ejecutivo
El Fondo Verde para el Clima (FVC)
En su despacho
Estimado Sefior Glemarec:
Nos referimos al programa denominado Fondo Global para Arrecifes de Coral (GFCR) en la
Republica de Panama, como se incluye en la propuesta de financiamiento que nos present6 Pegasus
Capital el 14 de julio de 2021.
El abajo firmante es el representante debidamente autorizado del Ministerio del Ambiente de Panama,
la Autoridad Nacional Designada / Punto Focal de Panama.
De conformidad con la decision B.08 / 10 de! GCF, cuyo contenido reconocemos haber revisado, por
la presente comunicamos nuestra no objeci6n al programa tal como se incluye en la propuesta de
financiamiento.
Al comunicar nuestra no objeci6n, se da a entender que:
(a) El Gobiemo de Panama no tiene objeciones al programa ta! como se incluye en la propuesta de
financiamiento;
(b) El programa, ta! como se incluye en la propuesta de financiamiento, se ajusta a las prioridades,
estrategias y planes nacionales de Panama;
c) De conformidad con las salvaguardias ambientales y sociales de! FVC, el programa incluido en la
propuesta de financiaci6n se ajusta a las !eyes y reglamentos nacionales pertinentes.
Tambien confirmamos que nuestro proceso nacional para determinar la no objeci6n al programa, ta!
como se incluye en la propuesta de financiamiento, se ha seguido debidamente.
Tambien confirmamos que nuestra no objeci6n se aplica a todos los proyectos o actividades que se
implementaran dentro del alcance del programa.
..
u
Reconocemos que esta carta se pondr is_ p9�ici6n de! publico en el sitio web de! GCF.
�
.'_:�t-_:}_:::·_-_.,.:.:_
At t t
-l.;(,)';. ...l. ,' · .... · '. .. �. ... \ •,
..
�{ . r ...� '
'. • • .. '
MIL C IAD E S C O N P C :re , :: � \ . .. ,_ �, / ,
Page 83
Ministro de Ambiente '?1 '.!�)'. " ·,. . ,·Li·'·' �-�/ · .
Mm . 1 . stro de Med1 . 0 Ambt . ente '\'�.. {" �-�Ct.., r- �-.� .,.,.�> -:·/
�%�;-,3_12:,;�-< .. _,:,..-
Autoridad Nacional Designada / Punt<'.i':P.:oealle-Pi anama.
MC/AGA/LC/GPC/FV/melida.j Albrook, Calle Broberg, Edificio 804
�rp. Republica de Panama
Tel.: (507) 500-0855
www.miambiente.gob.pa

=== PAGE 88 ===
Page 84

=== PAGE 89 ===
Page 85
Republic of the Philippines
VEl' AKTIVIENT U~ ~lNANLE
Roxas Boulevard Comer Pablo Ocampo. Sf. Street
Manila 1004
Mr. YANNICK GLEMAREC
Executive Director
r"rrf1t"ri"t nf th" Crn"n liim'1t" [linn
175Art Center-daero, Yeonsu-gu
Incheon, Republic of Korea
SUBJECT Funding Proposal bythe PegasusCapital Advisors LPregarding Global
Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window
uear cxecuuve uuector l:lLtIVIAKtL:
We refer to the programme titled Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window in the
Philippines as included in the funding proposal submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors LP
(Pegasus).
Thf Ilnnfr~ipnfn i~ rhf nlll\{ nllrhnri7fn rfnrf~fnrnri\{f nf rhf nfnnrrmfnr nf Finnnrf rhf
National Designated Authority of the Philippines.
Pursuant to GCFdecision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal.
a. The Government of the Republic of the Philippines has no-objection to the
programme as included in the funding proposal;
b. The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the
national priorities, strategies and plans of the Philippines;
c. In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the programme
with relev~nt mHionallaw5 ann
as included in the fundino proposal is in conformity
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within thn rrnnn nf thn nrnar'1mm"
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCFwebsite.
Very truly yours,

=== PAGE 90 ===
Page 86
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Project or programme title
Existence of subproject(s) to
be identified after GCF Board Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window
approval
Sector (public or private) Yes
Accredited entity
Environmental and social Private
safeguards (ESS) category Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA)
,
Category I-2
*
Africa: Comoros, Kenya*, Madagascar Mozambique,
Seychelles, and Tanzania*;
Location – specific
location(s) of project or Asia-Pacific: Cambodia*, Fiji*, Indonesia*, Malaysia*,
target country or location(s) Maldives*, Philippines, Solomon Islands*, Sri Lanka*, Timor
of programme Leste*, and Vietnam*;
Latin America and the Caribbean: Bahamas, Belize, Brazil,
Colombia*, Costa Rica*, Dominican Republic*, Ecuador*,
Guatemala, Honduras*, Jamaica, Mexico, and Panama;
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Middle East: Egypt* and Saudi Arabia*.
Date of disclosure on
N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
Other link(s) N/A
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
Remarks N/A
Date of disclosure on
N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
Other link(s) N/A
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)
Remarks N/A
Date of disclosure on
Friday, September 3, 2021
accredited entity’s website
English, Arabic, Bahasa Indonesia, French, Khmer, Malay,
Language(s) of disclosure Portuguese, Sinhala, Spanish and Vietnamese.
*
Denotes country for which an NOL has not yet been received, some of which may be removed from the
Funding Proposal before the submission deadline.

--- Table 1 on Page 90 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  | 
 | Project or programme title |  |  | 
 | Existence of subproject(s) to |  | Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window | 
 | be identified after GCF Board |  |  | 
 | approval |  |  | 
 | Sector (public or private) |  | Yes | 
 | Accredited entity |  |  | 
 | Environmental and social |  | Private
Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA) | 
 | safeguards (ESS) category |  |  | 
Location – specific
location(s) of project or
target country or location(s)
of programme |  |  | ,
Category I-2
*
Africa: Comoros, Kenya*, Madagascar Mozambique,
Seychelles, and Tanzania*;
Asia-Pacific: Cambodia*, Fiji*, Indonesia*, Malaysia*,
Maldives*, Philippines, Solomon Islands*, Sri Lanka*, Timor
Leste*, and Vietnam*;
Latin America and the Caribbean: Bahamas, Belize, Brazil,
Colombia*, Costa Rica*, Dominican Republic*, Ecuador*,
Guatemala, Honduras*, Jamaica, Mexico, and Panama; | 
 | Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Middle East: Egypt* and Saudi Arabia*. | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Other link(s) N/A
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
Other link(s) N/A
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) | Other link(s) N/A
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
 |  |  |  | 
Date of disclosure on
accredited entity’s website |  |  | Friday, September 3, 2021
English, Arabic, Bahasa Indonesia, French, Khmer, Malay, | 

--- Table 2 on Page 90 ---
Location – specific
location(s) of project or
target country or location(s)
of programme

=== PAGE 91 ===
Page 87
These are the official languages in each of the target
Explanation on language countries, except for the Maldives where English is spoken
by most of the population
English:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-English.pdf
Arabic:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Arabic.pdf
French:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-French.pdf
Indonesian:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Indonesian.pdf
Khmer:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Khmer.pdf
Link to disclosure
Malay:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Malay.pdf
Portuguese:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Portuguese.pdf
Sinhala:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Sinhala.pdf
Spanish:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Spanish.pdf
Vietnamese:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Vietnamese.pdf
Other link(s) www.pcalp.com/impact
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
RAenmy aortkhse r relevant ESS reports, 2e. gp.r Rogersaemttlmeme iesn cto nAtcatiinoend P inla tnh e(R ‘EAnPv)ir, Ronemseettnlteaml aenndt Social
Policy Framework (RPF), IndigeMnoaunsa gPeemopenlets S Pyslatenm (I (PEPSM), SIP)’P. Framework (if applicable)
Description of
report/disclosure on N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A

--- Table 1 on Page 91 ---
 |  |  | These are the official languages in each of the target | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | countries, except for the Maldives where English is spoken
by most of the population
English:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-English.pdf
Arabic:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Arabic.pdf
French:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-French.pdf
Indonesian:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Indonesian.pdf
Khmer:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Khmer.pdf
Malay:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Malay.pdf
Portuguese:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Portuguese.pdf
Sinhala:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Sinhala.pdf
Spanish:
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR-ESS-Spanish.pdf
Vietnamese: | 
 |  |  | https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202 | 
Other link(s) |  |  | 1/09/GFCR-ESS-Vietnamese.pdf
www.pcalp.com/impact
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I- | 
 | RAenmy aortkhse r relevant ESS reports, 2e. gp.r Rogersaemttlmeme iesn cto nAtcatiinoend P inla tnh e(R ‘EAnPv)ir, Ronemseettnlteaml aenndt Social |  |  | 
 | Policy Framework (RPF), IndigeMnoaunsa gPeemopenlets S Pyslatenm (I (PEPSM), SIP)’P. Framework (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Description of |  |  | 
 | report/disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 

=== PAGE 92 ===
Page 88
Link to disclosure N/A
Other link(s) N/A
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
Remarks N/A
Date September 3, 2021
All National Designated Authorities were provided the link
to the ESMS documents (www.pcalp.com/impact), which
Place are also accessible from NDA offices (see con tact
information here:
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
https://www.greenclimate.fund/countries).
Date of accredited entity’s
TBD
Board meeting
NDoatete: T ohf iGsC fFo’rsm Bo waards mpreeeptainrge d by Mthoen adcacyr, eOdcittoebde er n4t, i2ty0 2st1a ted above.
________

--- Table 1 on Page 92 ---
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Other link(s) N/A
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
Date
Place |  |  | September 3, 2021
All National Designated Authorities were provided the link
to the ESMS documents (www.pcalp.com/impact), which
are also accessible from NDA offices (see con tact | 
 | information here:
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered |  |  | 
 |  |  | https://www.greenclimate.fund/countries). | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of accredited entity’s |  | TBD | 

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 89
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP180
Proposal name: Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window
Accredited entity: Pegasus Capital Advisors LP (Pegasus or PCA)
Project/programme size: Large
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
Scale:High
1 .1 Impact potential
1.
Coral reefs provide an important ecosystem for underwater life, protect coastal areas by
reducing wave energy, erosion and storm damage, and provide food security and livelihoods to
more than 1 billion people worldwide through the ecosystem services, coastal protection and
ec onomic activities they generate.
2.
However, climate change is warming the oceans with devastating consequences to coral
reefs, which are experiencing increasingly frequent mass coral bleaching events that can
eventually lead to coral death, while ocean acidification weakens reefs and slows their growth.
According to the proposal, even under the moderate emissions scenario of representative
concentration pathway 4.5, the sea surface temperature in the major coral regions is expected
to rise between 1.18°C and 1.44°C by the end of the century, eliminating most warm-water coral
reefs by 2040–2050. Coral reefs are projected to decline to 10–30 per cent of former cover at
1.5°C warming and to less than 1 per cent at 2°C warming (Intergovernmental Science-Policy
P latform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, 2019).
3.
Corals are not only suffering from climate change but from increasing direct
anthropogenic pressures from different sources. The combination of local anthropogenic
disturbance and ocean warming means that up to 75 per cent of reefs are already considered
1
threatened, weakening their ability to continue providing valuable ecosystem goods and
se rvices to people.
4.
Causes of anthropogenic pressures to corals include overfishing and poor management
of fish resources, poverty and lack of economic opportunities, increasing coastal development,
unsustainable and uncontrolled tourism, poor pollution control and waste management, and
limitations of the human ability to restore coral reefs. According to the project proponents,
although the global outlook for corals is bleak, there is evidence from a range of field studies and
modelling exercises suggesting that efforts to manage local impacts on coral reefs can
ameliorate the impact of rising temperatures and ocean acidification. In other words, from a
reef management and policy perspective, the impacts of climate change increase the need to
2
ab ate other stress factors on reefs.
5.
On the other hand, local drivers of degradation are deteriorating the resilience of coral
reef ecosystems to climate change and jeopardizing vital ecosystem services for which the reef-
Reefs at Risk Revisited.
1
Burke, L, Reytar, K., Spalding, M. D., Perry, A. L. 2011. World Resources Institute, The Nature
Conservancy, WorldFish Center, International Coral Reef Action Network, UNEP World Conservation Monitoring
2
Centre, and Global CoFrraoln Rtieeersf Mino Mnaitroirnien gS cNieentcweork. Washington, DC.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Poloczanska, ES, Skirving, W., Dove, S. 2017. Coral Reef Ecosystems under Climate Change and
Ocean Acidification, , 29 May 2017. Available at:
<Https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00158>

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 90
dependent communities in the targeted countries have few other alternatives that can provide
income, subsistence and coastal protection. In terms of coastal protection, coral reefs play an
important role, together with mangrove swamps and seagrass beds, in dissipating wave energy,
as climate change leads to stronger storm surges combining with sea level rise to cause coastal
er osion, coastal flooding and saline intrusion in many regions.
6.
Although mitigating the global increase in sea surface temperature and ocean
acidification are widely out of the control of local efforts, protecting priority coral reef
ecosystems and addressing local anthropogenic stressors makes reefs more resilient to the
ef fects of climate change and better adapted to rebound from bleaching events.
7.
Therefore, the Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) Investment Window intends to target
the most resilient reefs by identifying those areas most likely to be either more resilient to
climate change or those regions and localities where the impacts of climate change will be less
extreme. These reefs act as climate refugia for other species, continuing to provide a suitable
habitat despite regional climate change, and are likely to be critical in preventing further reef
degradation and considerable loss of biodiversity. These less vulnerable reefs also have
potential to reseed to other regions once the climate has stabilized. This process has been
undertaken with the support of the 50 Reefs Initiative that has identified an optimum global
portfolio of reefs for targeting coral reef conservation that have the potential to survive the
im pacts of accelerating climate change.
8.
In this context, the GFCR aims to enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of coral
reef ecosystems and the communities that are highly dependent upon them to climate change
an d biodiversity loss, through unlocking and de-risking private investment.
9.
The programme seeks to achieve this goal by raising a USD 500 million fund, the GFCR
Investment Window (IW), that will enable the financing of 20 to 30 companies, projects and
pla tforms across three target sectors:
(a)
Sustainable ocean production to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, and
accelerate restoration;
(b)
Ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism and accelerate restoration; and
(c)
Sustainable infrastructure addressing pollution.
10.
The GFCR will be structured as a blended finance vehicle with a junior and senior
tra nche.
11.
The IW will be supported by a grant window (GW), that aims to establish an enabling
environment for the IW, more broadly to financing coral reef resilience initiatives, and
ultimately to de-risk private sector involvement in the sustainable blue economy. Grant funding
from the GW targets technical assistance, capacity development, emergency grants, and
mo nitoring and evaluation, and contributes to pipeline incubation and sourcing for the IW.
12.
The GFCR IW is expected to directly benefit those individuals engaged in reef-first
businesses and livelihoods, and indirectly benefit the coastal communities that depend on the
targeted reef. The number of expected direct beneficiaries are 12,737, people who will have new
jobs created by projects supported through the GFCR. This number was estimated based on the
nu mber of employees in similar expected businesses multiplied by 30 expected investments.
13.
The indirect beneficiaries were estimated based on the number of people in the 28
target countries who live at low elevations that are protected by reefs. These estimations were
3
derived from a study around the global estimates of the number of coral reef fisheries. The
proposal estimates that there w ill be 39,585,636 indirect beneficiaries. However, the
3
Teh, LSL., Teh, LCL., Sumaila, R. 2013. A Global Estimate of the Number of Coral Reef Fishers. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0065397

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 91
independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) considers these are only draft numbers as so far,
4
the GFCR has only 7 no objection letters from the target countries and even if ultimately the
investment applies to 27 countries, not all the coastal inhabitants will benefit from relatively
sm all interventions.
14.
Healthy reefs will, in turn, increase the health and resilience of related ecosystem
services that are important in adapting to climate change (such as maintaining fish nurseries, in
face of declining fish stocks and disaster-risk reduction/buffers to coastal erosion), ultimately
benefiting coastal communities and sectors such as ecotourism, sustainable fishing and
aq uaculture, and coastal development.
15.
To the TAP’s questions around adaptation of who, to what and how to measure
adaptation impacts, the proponents responded that the GFCR offers two pathways to
ad aptation:
(a)
Area 1: Enhancing resilience of vulnerable coral reef-dependent people, communities,
an d regions to climate change in two ways:
(i)
Ecosystem-based adaptation projects to protect coral reefs; and
(ii)
By creating diversified livelihoods and financial resilience; and
(b)
Area 2: Enhancing resilience of coral reef ecosystems to climate change by protecting
the most resilient reefs.
16.
The project presents an estimate in annex XXIII of the potential impact of the GFCR on
people and planet. The methodology involves five steps to determine the area of reefs that may
have resilience improved. The end results, based on a range of outputs, totalled 49,377 ha, but
this was reduced to avoid double counting to a total of 29,040 hectares. This is based on the
pr oportion of reefs considered at risk in the world.
17.
Since the GFCR is a blind pool investment vehicle and, as such, has a specific portfolio of
funded projects in countries that have yet to be identified, it is early to assess the real impact
po tential of the project.
18.
In response to a request from the TAP concerning the eligibility criteria and tools to
screen and monitor projects throughout the due diligence process and lifetime of the projects to
ensure climate impacts specifically on coral reefs and dependent communities, the proponents
submitted additional documents. These included a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (annex 11)
providing information on how impact indicators will be managed, with indicative budget,
data/source, collection tools, frequency, and means of verification. This included a draft
template (annex 11b) for regular monitoring of investees to support data collection for
quantification of adaptation outcomes. However, this template has very few indicators on coral
ree fs.
19.
The proponents also submitted draft eligibility criteria that provide the basis for
determining whether a potential investee is within the project’s scope. The draft criteria are on
the right track and, according to the proponents, will be further developed with the support of
the technical entities involved in the grant window. Furthermore, they provided sector-specific
theories of change (annex 25) outlining key adaptation outputs/outcomes against which
po tential investments will be screened (as described in the draft eligibility criteria).
20.
Moreover, they submitted GFCR investment principles in the aquaculture sector that
clearly set out valuable scientific information for the key performance indicators and best
4
The funding proposal was submitted to iTAP on 21 July 2021, with 5 NOL. In response to iTAP questions on the
number of NOLs, the proponents submitted 2 additional NOLs, and explained that more NOLs are expected before
B30.

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 92
practice aquaculture for coral reefs. The proponents noted that they will develop screening and
mo nitoring investments for each asset category/subsector.
21.
They also elaborated a simple GFCR Investment Screening and Monitoring Approach in a
spreadsheet that guides the screening and monitoring process for (potential) investees. Key
dimensions covered include assessment of a baseline, policy dependencies, additionality and
systemic change, and methodologies for monitoring and quantifying impact. This tool will
constitute a working document that is shared within and between the investment and grant
windows. The spreadsheet will be updated on a weekly basis and discussed during the weekly
cal ls between the investment and grant windows.
22.
In response to the TAP’s request to provide more examples of how the GW will support
the IW, the proponents also provided a sample framework of the GFCR GW programme. This
tool will be used by convening agents under the GW to monitor the progress of programmes in
achieving resilience of coral reef systems and communities that depend on these systems. In
addition, these frameworks will also serve as a key tool to monitor how the programmes
transition through different phases (short, medium and long-term outcomes), with the aim of
tracking and ensuring uptake of reef-positive financial mechanisms/approaches and businesses.
Frameworks such as this will be used to support development of monitoring frameworks for the
IW .
23.
The impact potential depends on the ability of the IW and the GW to coordinate actions
in selected climate refugia areas, combining policy and control actions to protect reefs,
technologies and incentives to restore and protect coral reefs and actions to enhance
su stainable livelihoods.
24.
The TAP considers that the screening, investment and monitoring tools provided by the
project proponents to ensure climate impact are on the right track but need further work to
ensure that the fund will target investments with clear climate change impact potential. The
overall impact potential if high.
Scale:High
11.2.2.1. PInanroavdaitgiomn shift potential
25.
The GFCR is the first fund in the world to unlock critical new sources of funding through
blended finance solutions to remove stresses on coral, restore coral reefs and support
vu lnerable reef-dependent communities, in the face of accelerating climate change.
26.
It is also one of the few funds managed by commercial fund managers such as Pegasus,
that connects to the philanthropic community in a parallel grant fund able to provide technical
assistance and capacity building in the sustainable blue economy. It therefore enables private
and public institutions and investors to work together, de-risking the entrance of private capital
in the protection and conservation of coral reefs.
27.
The fund will invest in a diversified portfolio of options that could potentially involve
new techniques and innovation to restore coral reefs, to avoid water contamination and to
pr omote sustainable fishing, mariculture, and aquaculture, among others.
28.
The fund adopts science-based knowledge and a systems approach to target the most
resilient reefs to support conservation activities. The technical institutions of multiple actors
cu rrently joining actions to save oceans and specifically coral reefs will provide further support.
29.
The theory of change is well developed, although a little ambitious, since the GFCR will
eventually invest in around 30 to 50 projects/companies, in several countries, and diverse
climate refugia areas. A few investments in each of the target areas will not, on their own,
achieve all the expected outcomes.

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 93
30.
The outcomes involve:
(a)
Increased production of food in reef-dependent communities;
(b)
Increased protection and restoration of coral reefs;
(c)
Growth in jobs and the local economy;
(d)
Increased innovation to support resilience in coral reefs and communities reliant on
coral reefs; and
(e)
Increased market share of sustainable businesses in reef-dependant areas.
31.
These outcomes will be achieved by investing in sustainable ocean production,
sustainable tourism and sustainable infrastructure and waste management. The examples of
projects presented with the funding proposal (currently in the pipeline) are very diverse,
including resorts, sea cucumber farms, companies that remove plastics from the ocean, tilapia
aq uaculture, wastewater utility plants, green shipping and offshore clean energy.
32.
There is a need to review the word “sustainability” repeated several times in the
proposal. On one hand prove climate change impacts with specific criteria and on the other
ha nd prove sustainable development co-benefits.
33.
Potentially these investments could help business-as-usual to grow while coral-
damaging practices simply continue in parallel. Therefore, the TAP is recommending that
investment and monitoring tools currently under development are presented to the satisfaction
of the GCF secretariat before the first disbursement and complemented during the lifetime of
t
1
h
.2
e
.2
p
.
rojPecott eton ttriaalc kfo prr kongroewssl eodng teh ae nedn albelairnng ienngv ironment.
34.
The project involves a range of actors that could potentially create a community of
stakeholders willing to share experiences and learn from each other. The integrated dual
window model enables the GFCR to build on the respective strengths and remits of the two
windows, and ultimately to mobilise finance from prospective partners on a global scale to
support countries in improving their progress to achieving adaptation to climate change. The
GW will ensure capacity building actions and could potentially create a platform for knowledge
sh aring.
35.
However, the current proposal does not include much information about the GW.
Therefore, it will be recommended that the IW designs the means and methodologies to ensure
that there is potential for knowledge and learning in collaboration with the actors involved in
each of the countries, with a specific emphasis on strengthening local capacity to protect coral
r 1 e .2 e .3 f . s . Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment and regulatory
framework
36.
Within the market study the project presents a section with detailed country-specific
information such as context, stressors and drivers of degradation, including information on
cu rrent policies regarding coral reefs in the selected countries.
37.
The fund will rely on the GW to support the creation of an enabling environment and
regulatory framework to protect coral reefs. To the TAP question on how to ensure that there
are regulatory and control actions in place in the countries where the GFCR will invest, the
proponents replied that during the proposal development stage, convening agents (The Nature
Conservancy, Wildlife Conservation Society, World Wildlife Fund, Conservation International,
MAR Fund and Blue Finance) are tasked with assessing government policy and working to

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 94
ensure project alignment with government commitments and priorities as these relate to coral
1 re .2 e .4 f . resiSlcieanlaceb.i lity and replicability
38.
The scalability and replicability will depend on the ability of the GFCR to prove validity
of the model and to attract further finance. It will also depend on the opportunity to work
together with the GW and the convening actors to ensure lessons learned and effective
inv estments could be replicated in other coral reef refugia areas.
39.
Overall, the TAP considers that investing in a coordinated manner though the IW and
the GW in activities that will conserve coral reefs presents a high paradigm shift potential.
Scale: High
11.3.3.1. SEnuvsitraoinnmaebnleta dl ceov-beelonpefmitse nt potential
40.
The ecosystem services provided by coral reefs and associated ecosystems are
especially vital for achieving nature-dependent UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
including SDG 14 ‘Life Below Water’. In total, coral reef initiatives contribute directly to 13 SDGs
through entry points that include coral reef tourism, food security and nutrition, shoreline
pr otection, and human health and well-being.
41.
Restoration activities will directly address existing degradation and enhance the
capacity of coral reef ecosystems to withstand local stressors and bleaching events, thereby
lim iting the extent of future degradation.
42.
Reduced pressure on fisheries due to an increase in mariculture and aquaculture
production will result in restored fish stocks, greater biodiversity and healthier marine
eco systems.
43.
The project will support the reduction in ocean contamination from land-based and
ocean-based pollution and will create models to ensure eco-efficient coastal development. Some
of the proposed projects, including agriculture with low-chemical and green shipping, could
ha ve the potential to support both the green and blue economies in selected countries.
44.
Through the GW, the project will support enhanced marine protected areas and no-take
zo nes, that will in turn ensure the protection of vital marine ecosystems.
45.
It is estimated that reefs protect 150,000 km of shoreline in more than 100 countries
and territories, reducing wave energy and heights, erosion and storm damage, thus protecting
over 1 billion people (and their property) living within 100 km of reefs around the world. This
results in an estimated reduction of annual expected damages from storms of over USD 4 billion
g
1.
l
3
o
.2
b
.
allyE. Acos nsoeam liecv ceols- bcoennteinfiutse to rise, this protection becomes vital.
46.
Protecting coral reefs will ensure economic benefits to communities that depend on
them for their fishing activities. Six million reef fishers (many of whom are small-scale,
traditional subsistence fishers) depend on coastal-reef fisheries, with an estimated value of USD
6.8 billion in 2011. Women represent about 50 per cent of the workforce in the seafood sector
an d 80 per cent to 90 per cent in the post-harvest sector.
47.
Protecting coral reefs and supporting sustainable tourism will benefit many
communities and countries that depend on this activity for income generation. Coral reefs
attracted (prior to COVID-19) an estimated 70 million visitors annually with an associated
expenditure of USD 36 billion.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 95
48.
Reduced economic impacts from expected damages from storms are stated in the
e
1.
n
3.
v
3
i
.
ronSmoecniatal lc coo--bbeenneeffiittss above.
49.
Diversified economic opportunities will be created for reef-dependent communities,
often poor and vulnerable and disproportionately affected by climate variabilities. The foremost
be neficiaries are those who would get (green) employment opportunities in the subsectors.
50.
Capacity enhancement of communities to develop sustainable fishing and aquaculture
act ivities will help to support sustainable livelihoods while reducing the pressure on coral reefs.
51.
Awareness of the importance of coral reefs will result in more communities managing
the sustainability of coastal and ocean resources as collectives.
52.
Coastal communities will ensure food security, with increased and healthier proteins
fro m aquatic food industries and better-managed community fisheries.
53.
Improved health and reduced disease prevalence will ensue from sustainable
i
1
n
.3
f
.
r
4
a
.
struGcetnudree rli-mseitninsigt ievxep odseuvreel otop mpoellnutt ion and waste flow into the ocean.
54.
In the current absence of country-specific data, the GFCR has conducted peer-project
assessments to help identify the drivers of change and the gender dynamics needed to achieve
the GFCR project adaptation and mitigation goals. In the absence of concrete projects at this
time, the proponents presented case studies of selected projects around the world, deriving
les sons learned and recommendations for the intended private sector projects of the GFCR.
55.
According to the proponents, ecosystems and ecosystem services are strongly linked to
gender disparities and have significant potential to impact the gender and social relations
within communities. Engaging women in the sustainable production and harvest of marine
resources and in ecosystem conservation efforts can have an exponential effect in
simultaneously addressing ecosystem challenges and gender inequality. Moreover, women’s
contributions in aqua- and mariculture are often overlooked, underestimated and/or
undervalued, often resulting in women’s marginalisation in the management of marine
res ources.
56.
The GFCR presents a gender action plan, including several outcomes. It is expected that
each project will develop its own gender assessment and action plan and detailed guidelines
an d processes will be provided for project proponents.
57.
Several steps should be implemented at project level, including:
(a)
Understand fully the GFCR policy, its scope, and application;
(b)
Apply gender-related safeguarding principles;
(c)
Conduct gender-responsive stakeholder consultation;
(d)
Conduct gender analysis and baseline determination;
(e)
Develop a gender commitment statement;
(f)
Define goals and measure change; and
(g)
ending in establish gender actions.
58.
The proponents present gender safeguards in the GFCR gender policy (annex 2) that are
applicable for all projects. In addition, country- and sector-specific gender issues derived from
gender analysis will be also assessed. These may vary from project to project.

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 96
59.
Overall, the TAP considers the sustainable development potential to be high.
Scale: High
11.4.4.1. NVuelendersa obifl itthy eo fr tehcei pcoieunnttr y a nd vuln erable groups
60.
The GFCR expects to invest in up to 27 countries, most of which are developing
countries. As of August 9, 2021, Pegasus had received 7 no-objection (NOL) letters from:
Ba hamas, Belize, Comoros, Guatemala, Mozambique, Panama and Seychelles.
61.
Almost all of these countries have coastal reef areas with vulnerable communities,
especially those that depend on fisheries for their livelihoods. The scale and intensity of
climatic and biodiversity vulnerabilities vary by countries and drivers of degradation. However,
the main impacts related to the death of corals remain the same: decrease in food supply,
sh oreline vulnerability and decrease in tourism inflows.
62.
In addition to bioclimatic vulnerabilities, the national economic and social environment
can further increase the vulnerabilities of coral-dependent communities. Moreover, the
economies of these countries and coastal areas are highly dependent on tourism, which has
been severely affected due to COVID-19. Coral reef tourism accounts for USD 36 billion a year
across coral reef countries. Of that, USD 19 billion comes from “on-reef’ tourism: diving,
snorkelling, glass-bottom boating, and reef-related wildlife watching. International tourist
arrivals decreased by more than 50 per cent and millions of jobs have been lost, including those
in the informal economy.
63.
The project presents several adaptation barriers that are common to most of the
selected countries, including low awareness of the economic importance of coral reefs that has
led to a lack of public and private funding for initiatives that protect and enhance the health of
coral reefs and associated ecosystems. There are also policy, institutional and regulatory gaps,
with ministries and authorities that fail to balance coastal and marine zone development with
social or environmental imperatives to prevent degradation or even destruction of coral reef
eco systems.
64.
There are weak policies (in some countries, non-existent) to protect coral reefs and
there is a lack of institutional capacity to oversee, monitor and enforce control over reef
resources. The proposal is relying on the GW to tackle these needs, but there should be a clear
strategy to invest in areas where the countries are willing to take action to protect ocean
res ources.
65.
There is also limited private finance for reef adaptation and conservation. Public
investment, which provides an important platform for private sector growth and development,
is also frequently limited. Populations are more vulnerable to extreme events and to the
degradation of reefs, and local governments do not have strategies, capacity or means to
ad dress their needs through large-scale programmes.
66.
Investments in coral reefs are therefore very limited. Increasingly, private investment
capital and innovative finance tools are needed to efficiently scale-up initiatives to save coral
ree fs and build the resiliency of communities that depend on them.
67.
Even though all the countries are in need of additional resources to protect ocean
resources, and specifically coral reefs, it is of crucial importance to ensure that countries
prioritize policy actions and carry out controls to ensure the effectiveness of the fund. More

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 97
importantly, since this blended finance vehicle will involve private entities, it is expected that
the recipients of the resources commit to support the overall aim of the project and not just to
us e its structure for their own goals.
68.
Understanding that the direct recipients are private sector companies willing to invest
in coral reef protection but that ultimately the beneficiaries are vulnerable coastal communities
and the coral reefs on which we all depend, the TAP scores the needs of the recipients as high.
Scale: Medium
11.5.5.1. CAloigunnmtreyn to wwitnhe nrasthioinpa l clim a te stra tegy
69.
The proponents present a market analysis with an analysis of the selected countries in
terms of reef status, policies and investment environment. As explained above, the proponents
ha ve received seven NOLs and are expecting to receive two more, from Fiji and the Philippines.
70.
According to the proponents, in the course of the NOL process, the GFCR has liaised with
governments in order to ensure that they are in alignment with existing policies around coral
reef preservation and other sustainability initiatives, and to ensure that the GFCR both
capitalizes on and promotes political momentum on these issues. This process has included
iterative engagement with, for instance, representatives of target countries to articulate the
compliance and complementarity of GFCR with existing country commitments and strategic
vis ions.
71.
Not all countries have clear policies and strategies to protect coral reefs. However, most
of the countries have climate change strategies. There has been an effort from the project
proponents to engage with national designated authorities (NDAs) to clarify the position of each
country’s nationally determined contribution on marine and coastal measures. These NDA
discussions have enabled direct conversations with relevant government bodies dedicated to
marine protection in general and coral reefs in particular. But there is a lot of room to provide
po licy support.
72.
Convening agents will be tasked to engage with all relevant actors at the national level in
the process of project selection and due diligence to assess government policies and ensure
project alignment with government commitments and priorities as it relates to coral reef
res ilience.
73.
Moreover, the GFCR has been set up by a large alliance composed of the UN
Development Programme (UNDP), UN Environment Programme (UNEP), UN Capital
Development Fund (UNCDF), Paul Allen Foundation and Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation,
which in turn bring together a series of global and regional actors identified below, each of
wh ich is in full liaison with the ministries of the respective national Governments:
(a)
Belize, Guatemala, Honduras and Mexico: Mesoamerican Reef (MAR) Fund;
(b)
The Bahamas: The Nature Conservancy, Bahamas National Trust, Bahamas National
Protected Areas Fund, Coral Vita, Reef Rescue;
(c)
Kenya and Tanzania: Wildlife Conservation Society with Okavango Capital, Blue
Ventures, UNEP;
(d)
Indonesia: Conservation International, Blue Abadi Fund, Bird Head Seascape, Coalition
on Media and Education for Development Africa Forum (CAFOR);
(e)
Philippines: Blue Finance together with, Blue You, Conservation International, Rare,
University of the Philippines;
(f)
Fiji: UNDP;

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 98
(g)
Maldives: full programme still under development; and
(h)
Solomon Islands; project concept notes under development.
74.
However, some of the NOL countries are not in the above list. There is therefore a need
to create a similar coalition of convening agents and actors to work in those countries, for
ex ample, Comoros, Mozambique, Panama and Seychelles.
75.
It is expected that all major stakeholders, including UN agencies, national Governments
and non-governmental organizations, will individually and collectively associate at different
levels, involve the relevant national ministries and agencies, and engage them in supporting the
work around coral reefs. Unless a joint effort takes place, the individual investments will not
make a difference in ensuring the overall purpose of the project protect the last coral reef
refugia areas in the world. In particular, promoting selected sustainable businesses will be
ineffective if it is not accompanied by policies and incentives to scale them up, as well as
e 1. n 5. f 2 o . rcinCga opfa lceigtiys loaft iaocnc orer dreitgeudla etniotnitsi etos panredv eenxte ucuntsiunsgta einnatibtliee sp rtoac dtiecleisv.e r
76.
Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P. (“Pegasus”), a Delaware limited partnership is an
accredited entity (AE) to GCF. Pegasus is a leading global private markets impact investment
manager. As the first United States private equity fund manager with GCF accreditation, the
company is dedicated to fostering sustainable growth while providing attractive returns for
investors. Founded in 1996, with a track record in commercial impacting investing, Pegasus has
inv ested more than USD 2.6 billion.
77.
To deliver the project Pegasus will create the following entities:
(a)
The “GFCR Fund” – a pooled investment vehicle which is expected to be a special limited
partnership under the laws of Luxembourg;
(b)
The “General Partner” – expected to be a société à responsabilité limitée (ARL)under the
laws of Luxembourg law. The General Partner will be managed by employees of the AE
or its controlled affiliates;
(c)
The “Manager” – expected to be a Delaware limited liability company. The Manager will
be controlled by employees of the AE or its controlled affiliates, except to the extent the
Manager is required by law to have one or more employees, managers or directors in its
jurisdiction of formation. The Manager will be owned, directly or indirectly, by either
the AE or the AE’s sole limited partner, Craig Cogut;
(d)
“GCF Reef Holdings” – an entity to be formed by the AE, which is expected to be a
Delaware limited partnership. GCF will be the sole limited partner and sole economic
owner of GCF Reef Holdings. Holdings GP will be the general partner of GCF Reef
Holdings; and
(e)
“Holdings GP” – is expected to be a Delaware limited liability company. Holdings GP will
be controlled by employees of the AE or its controlled affiliates. Holdings GP will be
owned, directly or indirectly, by either the AE or the AE’s sole limited partner, Craig
Cogut.
78.
The investment activities of the GFCR will be overseen by the AE, via the GFCR
Investment Committee. The Investment Committee will be comprised of a majority of members
ap pointed by the AE and will act by majority vote.
79.
The overall strategy of the fund is to work in a dual model through the grant window
(GW) and investment window (IW). Both windows will perform independent but
complementary and coordinated roles to seek to maximise impact of the GFCR.

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 99
80.
Grant funding from the GW targets technical assistance, capacity development,
emergency grants, and monitoring and evaluation, and contributes to pipeline incubation and
sourcing for the IW. The GW delivers its mission with the support of the UN Multi-Partner Trust
Fund Office (UNDP, UNEP, UNCDF), the Governments of France, Germany and the United
Kingdom, and the private foundations, Paul G. Allen Family Foundation and Prince Albert II of
Monaco Foundation. A group of convening agents composed of The Nature Conservancy,
Wildlife Conservation Society, World Wildlife Fund, Conservation International, MAR Fund and
Blue Finance, will work together to maximize the impact of the GFCR. All of these entities have
pr oven capacity to work in support of ocean resources.
81.
The governance around the GW and IW is designed to work in a collaborative and
efficient manner. The GW will act as an observer in the IW Investment Committee, and IW will
als o act as an observer and advisor to the Executive Board of the GW.
82.
Key stakeholders from the GW – the UNEP, UNDP and UNCDF – will be involved in pre-
and post-investment activities, including sourcing, due diligence, monitoring and reporting, and
wi ll be able to provide guidance, knowledge and access to relevant networks as required.
83.
The GFCR Advisory Board will adopt a shared focus on the strategy for and progress of
the two windows and will advise on strategic issues advanced by both the Investment
Committee and the Executive Board. The Advisory Board’s scope includes the development of
guidance to both windows based on the evolution of best practices in the fields of coral reef
conservation, impact investing (including investment standards), blended finance, investment
sta ndards and sustainable business development.
84.
In the view of the TAPs view, the Advisory Board should play a vital role in ensuring the
overall strategy of the GFCR (GW and IW) and should therefore meet more than just once a year.
Moreover, as there will be regular and ad hoc meetings taking place between the IW and the
GW, involving the UN Global Team and Investment Committee to align on project and
investment priorities, there could be an opportunity to involve governments at least once a year
t 1 o .5 . a 3 l . so aElinggna ogne mtheenirt s wtriatthe gciievsil t soo pcrioetteyc ot rcgoaranli zreaetifos nasn da nodce oatnh reers roeulrecveas.n t stakeholders
85.
Pegasus has contacted the NDAs mainly to ask them for their NOLs. The level of
engagement has been around sending the concept note and funding proposal, presentation of
the concept, and exchange of questions and responses. This is a major weakness of the
pr oposal, since the level of engagement with governmental actors has been low.
86.
To mobilise stakeholders in each of the countries, the GFCR is relying on actors involved
in the GW. The GW is mobilising its network of internal resource and external partners on an
ongoing basis. The IW is also mobilising local stakeholders by either leveraging the EA and BNP
Pa ribas internal resources or by involving intermediaries (R20 and Systemiq).
87.
There have also been consultations with the convening agents activating their local
networks to enhance the fund’s access to critical political, social and economic stakeholders in
target countries, including government, other civil society organizations, and the private sector.
They will also contribute to pipeline development through identifying potential projects for
co nsideration by both the IW and GW.
88.
The proponents present a GFCR stakeholder consultation and engagement policy taken
from other similar projects, but not necessarily aligned with questions and objectives around
coral reefs and coastal communities. Moreover, on the project level, the revised environmental
and social management system (ESMS) stakeholders’ concerns are captured and potential risks
are adequately identified; groups and peoples whose lives might be affected by the project are
properly consulted to verify and assess the significance of any impacts; affected groups and

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 100
communities participate in the development of mitigation measures, in decision-making
reg arding their operationalization, and in monitoring their implementation.
89.
However, both in the stakeholder consultation policy and in the ESMS, there needs to be
much more refinement to ensure that the procedures are not only to avoid potential social and
environmental risks and to ensure that people are not affected. There also needs to be a more
participatory approach to really involve communities in designing the projects and to have a
clear focus on indicators to protect coral reefs and livelihoods of coral reef-dependent
co mmunities.
90.
Overall, the TAP considers that countries should have more ownership of the GFCR, even
investing in the proposed investment and grant windows, and proving that they are seriously
prioritizing actions to protect ocean resources considering climate change. Since to date the
project has received only a few NOLs and has little information on the real priorities of the
countries in this crucial endeavour, the overall score for country ownership is medium.
Scale: Medium–High
11.6.6.1. ECoffsitc-eieffnecctyiv aenneds se affnedc etifvfiecineenscys
91.
The requested GCF amount is up to USD 125,000,000 for funding the Funded Activity
(the “GCF Proceeds”) that will expect to leverage an additional USD 375 million for a total of up
to USD 500 million.
92.
The Fund Subscription Agreement will set forth the capital commitment of GCF Reef
Ho ldings to the GFCR, which will be USD 125 million. The proposal further specifies that:
(a)
GCF Reef Holdings will unconditionally commit USD 25 million at the initial closing,
which amount will be increased to USD 50 million if the GFCR procures at least USD 10
million of additional co-investment at the first closing; and
(b)
The remainder of the commitment will become unconditional at subsequent closings in
an amount such that, after giving effect to such closing, GCF Reef Holdings represents no
more than 25 per cent of aggregate commitments to the GFCR.
93.
Furthermore, for each disbursement, the GFCR should ensure that at least 60 per cent of
the funds previously disbursed have either been cumulatively spent or disbursed to the funded
activity or are expected to be spent or disbursed within 30 calendar days after receipt of the
dis bursement.
94.
The GFCR will be structured as a blended finance vehicle with a junior and senior
tranche. The public contribution to the junior tranche will seek to leverage up to three times
that amount in private capital in the senior tranche. GCF participation in the GFCR will be in the
form of a junior limited partnership interest (the “junior interest”) provided that, if after the
final closing of the GFCR, GCF Reef Holdings represents more than 25 per cent of the total
commitments to the GFCR, the portion of GCF Reef Holdings’ commitment in excess of 25 per
cent will automatically be converted into senior limited partnership interests (the “senior
interests”). It is expected that GCF via GCF Reef Holdings will be the sole investor in the junior
interests.

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 101
95.
Further mobilisation is expected at the portfolio company level where the leverage ratio
is just over 1:3 (i.e. every dollar of GFCR capital deployed will mobilise an additional USD 2.4 of
debt or equity). The GFCR aims to adhere to the OECD blended finance principles of
additionality and minimum concessionally to ensure the viability of the GFCR while mobilising
private capital rather than crowding out private investments. The mobilisation rations
ex pected are the following:
96.
Equity-only leveraging effect is 1:0.3 per 90 per cent of the GFCR. At portfolio company
level, the GFCR will largely take control equity positions on the target investments. In many
cases, however, GFCR expects to have additional equity co-investors. In a conservative scenario,
each USD 1 of equity invested in a company is expected to generate on average USD 0.33 of
ad dition
D
a
e
l
b
eq
t
uity.
97.
-only leveraging effect is 1:1.5. Taking a conservative approach, Pegasus believes
that, given its track record, the average investee balance sheet could consist of 60 per cent debt
and 40 per cent equity. The debt is expected to be provided by additional third parties such as
loc al or international banks.
98.
Venture Capital (VC) leveraging effect is 1:3 per ~10 per cent of the GFCR. It is expected
that approximately 10 per cent of the portfolio may be dedicated to VC investments and/or
convertible debt/mezzanine positions. Given the nature of VC investment, the assumption is
that GFCR will hold on average 25 per cent of the portfolio company, granting a control over the
decisions of the investee while giving room for additional equity funding rounds. The
mo bilisation ratio of these types of investments is 1:3.
99.
According to the proponents, dedicating part of the fund to venture capital investments
allows the GFCR to participate in the effective scale up of disruptive technologies which will be
sustainability game changers, especially in the sustainable ocean production industries that the
GFC R intends to invest in.
100.
Aggregating 90 per cent equity (with a 1:0.3 mobilisation ratio), 40 per cent debt (with a
1:1.5 mobilisation ratio), and 10 per cent VC or other instruments (with a 1:3 mobilisation
rati o), the projected leverage downstream in the portfolio companies is around 1:2.4.
101.
1.6.2.
IOnp reerlaattiioonn atol ethxep teenrdmit suhreee ct osostms ea npodi nfetse sshtrouucldtu bree n oted:

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 102
102.
Pegasus will invest (Pegasus commitment) 1 per cent in the GFCR. The actual amount
cou ld range from USD 250.000 to USD 5 million of co-financing, depending on fund raising.
103.
The management fee is in line with accepted commercial benchmarks and in the
circumstance that the fund does not yield any return, the fee will be recovered from the capital,
mo stly given by the GCF.
104.
The GFCR budget estimates management expenses and partnership expenses. The
budget presented to iTAP did not have disaggregated information, and therefore these numbers
are difficult to assess. The TAP recommends that Pegasus provides the GCF secretariat with a
precise list of the team members and what they will be paid, as the largest part of the budget is
sala ries.
105.
Pegasus is already managing the GCF funded project “Global Subnational Climate Fund”
for USD 150 million and USD 18.5 million grant, and during this round, Pegasus is also
presenting the CRAFT project. It is very important that for each of the investment projects,
Pegasus involves the correct team of experts able to respond to the specific project. It is also
important to ensure that the teams managing the GCF funding vehicle are clearly identified to
avo id overlap of responsibilities.
106.
Pegasus will receive AE fees in addition to the management fee at the GFCR level.
107.
The administrative and third-party costs that are excluded from the management fee
and are charged separately to the GFCR, include additional resources for consultants. This
expense on top of the management fees is not substantiated sufficiently in the proposal, and the
e 1. x 6 p .3 l . anaWtioant earrfoaulnl dan thde p neerefod rfmora tnhcees ef eceo nsultants is not presented.
108.
The waterfall structure lays out how funds will be distributed to investors. Under the
existing waterfall structure, senior investors other than GCF get their investment amounts, fee
reimbursement and target return (higher than then the GCF return) first, before GCF (junior
investor) recovers any funds. GCF comes next in the waterfall structure and recovers its
investment and fees and gets a return before Pegasus can earn a performance fee. Pegasus is
n
1.
e
6.
x
4
t
.
in lFinuen tdo rcaoilsleinctg a performance fee calculated at a percentage of the distributable funds.
109.
As explained above GCF will commit USD 25 million initially and USD 25 million once
Pegasus has raised USD 10 million. GCF commitment is linked to future fundraising thereby
mai ntaining a 25 per cent share of the fund until reaching the USD125 limit.
110.
There is a scenario where Pegasus fails to raise much of the money and the fund
becomes a majority GCF funded project. GCF would be absorbing a high percentage of costs and
fees including all external expenses (accounting, custodian, etc.).
111.
In the view of the TAP, the effectiveness and efficiency of the GFCR is undermined by the
overall operational expenditure costs and AE fee, especially if the fund is unable to raise more
capital. There is a need to balance commercial vehicles using concessional resources from GCF
for public goods. Moreover, the TAP believes that the level of concessionally given to the fund
ma nager could be revised in two ways:
(a)
In terms of waterfall structure and performance fee, by considering making the GCF
target return the same as that of senior investors. Although there is some benefit in GCF
having a lower target to senior investors in certain limited scenarios, most of the benefit
accrues to Pegasus. Arguably the senior investors would not be impacted very much by
this since they get their target return first; and

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 103
(b)
In terms of fund raising, by linking the second USD 25 million GCF contribution to an
amount higher than USD 10M. For example, USD 75 million would make more logical
sense and it would be an important indicator to GCF of the AE’s confidence in
fundraising. Another alternative worth exploring is capping the percentage of GCF
capital in the junior share to 30 per cent of the amount of non-GCF funds raised. These
two approaches could avoid a scenario where the fund is GCF majority funded and a
small amount of senior investors (and the manager) are over subsidized by GCF.
112.
It is difficult for the TAP to estimate the efficiency and effectiveness of the fund, since it
depends on the ability to leverage additional resources and, more importantly, to invest in
transactions that prove impact potential to protect the coral reefs of the world. As stated in the
impact potential section, isolated investments in selected coral reef regions will not make an
impact, unless there are effective legislations in place, control and sufficient action in one coral
ree f area to shift the path of coral reef degradation.
113.
Overall, the TAP considers that the efficiency and effectiveness score is medium–high.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
114.
The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve the project subject to the
fol lowing conditions:
(a)
Prior to the execution of the FAA, the Accredited Entity shall deliver, to the satisfaction
of the GCF secretariat, the final versions of the monitoring plan and annexes, eligibility
criteria and investment principles for all the GFCR sectors.
(b)
During the lifetime of the project present annual reports including joint impacts of both
the grant window and investment window in selected coral reefs.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 104
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel assessment
findings (FP180)
Proposal name: Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window
Accredited entity: Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA)
Impact potential
The assessment noted that screening, investment and monitoring tools provided by the AE are on the
right track but need further work to ensure that the fund will target investments with clear climate
change impact potential. The project proponents will further refine these tools as a condition to FAA
execution.
Paradigm shift potential
The iTAP asks that the GFCR review its use of the word ‘sustainability’ in the FP. The GFCR is happy to
review the FP and make changes to wording in order to better distinguish fund impacts delivering
genuine ‘sustainable development’ co-benefits vs. fund impacts that address the effects of climate
change. The assessment notes that the Theory of Change, while well developed is perhaps over-
ambitious, given the limited number of discrete investments that will be made across a wide geographic
area. The GFCR acknowledges that not every outcome noted in the Theory of Change will occur in every
investment location. However, the GFCR does strongly feel that given the fund’s focus on three core
investment themes, its systems-led approach (which will encourage multiple synergistic investments in
a given area), and its interactions with the Grant Window’s activities, it is likely that in the regions that
receive investment, several of the outcomes described in the ToC can be simultaneously achieved, and
ultimately drive overall fund impact through delivering critical adaptation benefits to reef ecosystems
and vulnerable communities.
The assessment comments that the FP does not include much information on the GW, and recommends
that the IW design the means to ensure that there is ongoing knowledge and learning collaboration
between in-country actors for the two windows, in particular in order to help strengthen local capacity.
Annex I below includes an example form The Bahamas on how Convening Agents are key actors to
ensure that local organizations have key roles in GW programme implementation which will also open
the doors for IW investments. The GFCR notes that the framework agreement for the IW and GW is under
development and nearing completion. This agreement provides guidance on how IW and GW actors will
work together and collaborate, and as such addresses this consideration.
Sustainable development potential
Needs of the recipient
The assessment acknowledges that the countries within the programme are characterized by coastal
reef areas with vulnerable, reef-dependent communities for whom the degradation of coral reefs
represents a direct and pressing threat to food supply, shoreline integrity and tourism revenues. It
appreciates that while the recipients of funding are private sector companies investing in coral reef
protection, it is ultimately vulnerable coastal communities who are the beneficiaries.
The assessment recognizes that weak policies and institutional environments are a key current
adaptation barrier in many countries, and appreciates that in the context of the GFCR, the GW will play
a key role in taking steps to strengthen these elements. The assessment also suggests that there should
be a clear strategy to invest in areas where countries are willing to take action to protect ocean resources.

--- Table 1 on Page 108 ---
 | 
Proposal name: | Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window

--- Table 2 on Page 108 ---
Impact potential
The assessment noted that screening, investment and monitoring tools provided by the AE are on the
right track but need further work to ensure that the fund will target investments with clear climate
change impact potential. The project proponents will further refine these tools as a condition to FAA
execution.
Paradigm shift potential
The iTAP asks that the GFCR review its use of the word ‘sustainability’ in the FP. The GFCR is happy to
review the FP and make changes to wording in order to better distinguish fund impacts delivering
genuine ‘sustainable development’ co-benefits vs. fund impacts that address the effects of climate
change. The assessment notes that the Theory of Change, while well developed is perhaps over-
ambitious, given the limited number of discrete investments that will be made across a wide geographic
area. The GFCR acknowledges that not every outcome noted in the Theory of Change will occur in every
investment location. However, the GFCR does strongly feel that given the fund’s focus on three core
investment themes, its systems-led approach (which will encourage multiple synergistic investments in
a given area), and its interactions with the Grant Window’s activities, it is likely that in the regions that
receive investment, several of the outcomes described in the ToC can be simultaneously achieved, and
ultimately drive overall fund impact through delivering critical adaptation benefits to reef ecosystems
and vulnerable communities.
The assessment comments that the FP does not include much information on the GW, and recommends
that the IW design the means to ensure that there is ongoing knowledge and learning collaboration
between in-country actors for the two windows, in particular in order to help strengthen local capacity.
Annex I below includes an example form The Bahamas on how Convening Agents are key actors to
ensure that local organizations have key roles in GW programme implementation which will also open
the doors for IW investments. The GFCR notes that the framework agreement for the IW and GW is under
development and nearing completion. This agreement provides guidance on how IW and GW actors will
work together and collaborate, and as such addresses this consideration.
Sustainable development potential
Needs of the recipient
The assessment acknowledges that the countries within the programme are characterized by coastal
reef areas with vulnerable, reef-dependent communities for whom the degradation of coral reefs
represents a direct and pressing threat to food supply, shoreline integrity and tourism revenues. It
appreciates that while the recipients of funding are private sector companies investing in coral reef
protection, it is ultimately vulnerable coastal communities who are the beneficiaries.
The assessment recognizes that weak policies and institutional environments are a key current
adaptation barrier in many countries, and appreciates that in the context of the GFCR, the GW will play

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 105
While the GFCR agrees that investing in areas where local governments and institutions are amenable
to strengthening their capacities and policies on ocean protection is optimal, it also notes that in some
cases investment may be part of the means through which policy change is enabled and incentivized. For
instance, investment may increase the evidence base that governments require to make policy change.
A strong private sector in the areas of focus will also lobby local governments for such policy changes.
Besides, it will build track record to demonstrate that reef conservation, resilience and effective
ecosystem-based adaptation contributes to economic development, creating stronger incentives for
action to attract investment. In parallel, grant window activities and co-financing from partners are likely
to be directed towards enabling policy support, capacity building and synergistic financing mechanisms.
As such, investment may not exclusively target areas where local institutions have already signaled an
intention to strengthen the policy or enabling environment, as the expectation is that the process of
investment will in some cases be key to building these intentions.
Country ownership
The Accredited Entity is confident that, given the current trajectory for receipt of NOLs, it will obtain
additional NOLs before the Board publication deadline. The number of NOLs has risen from 5 at the point
at which the FP was submitted to iTAP, to 7 by the time of the iTAP call, and has now risen to 15. In the
last two weeks alone, the Accredited Entity received NOLs from Fiji, Mexico, Jamaica, Kenya, Colombia,
Ecuador, Sri Lanka and Philippines.
The assessment notes the role of the GFCR Advisory Board in monitoring the overall strategy of the two
windows. The Accredited Entity agrees that the advisory board should meet more frequently than once
per year. The TORs for the advisory board have not been finalized, but Pegasus will ensure that the TORs
call for quarterly meetings.
The assessment conveys concerns about engagement with governmental actors and other relevant
stakeholders (paras. 82-87). Stakeholder engagement is an important tenet of GFCR and is reflected in
the GFCR’s ESMS. We expect to engage in more robust stakeholder engagement, including relevant
government and civil society organizations, during the evaluation and development stage for individual
investments.
The assessment suggests that there is potential for the fund to provide policy support to countries on
marine protection and coral reefs. It also emphasizes that unless a joint effort across all major
stakeholders takes place in terms of driving policies and incentives to scale up sustainable businesses,
and enforcing legislation or regulation prohibiting unsustainable practices, then individual investments
will not drive the fund’s desired overall impact. As noted above, the GFCR expects that it will drive
favourable policy change through the combined effect of GW activities and actors, the fund’s powerful
demonstration effect, and by providing the right incentives for policy change that will attract further
investment. The Grant Window and Investment Window will also work closely together in countries to
ensure that a coherent and consistent strategy is pursued for creating favourable enabling
environments. The Framework Agreement which is currently being finalized will provide more details
on the ways of working that will enable this collaborative approach.
iTAP also notes that not all NOL countries currently have specific Convening Agents or dedicated
organizations charged with building presence and relationships on the ground. The GW is currently
working to build relationships with coalitions of actors working within those countries, either through
the fund’s existing partners, or where necessary, through relationships with new partners. In this way,
the GFCR will strive to ensure that it has local relays with which it can work in every NOL country. GCF
will have access to the updated list of convening agents through the seat it proposes to have at the
Advisory Board.

--- Table 1 on Page 109 ---
While the GFCR agrees that investing in areas where local governments and institutions are amenable
to strengthening their capacities and policies on ocean protection is optimal, it also notes that in some
cases investment may be part of the means through which policy change is enabled and incentivized. For
instance, investment may increase the evidence base that governments require to make policy change.
A strong private sector in the areas of focus will also lobby local governments for such policy changes.
Besides, it will build track record to demonstrate that reef conservation, resilience and effective
ecosystem-based adaptation contributes to economic development, creating stronger incentives for
action to attract investment. In parallel, grant window activities and co-financing from partners are likely
to be directed towards enabling policy support, capacity building and synergistic financing mechanisms.
As such, investment may not exclusively target areas where local institutions have already signaled an
intention to strengthen the policy or enabling environment, as the expectation is that the process of
investment will in some cases be key to building these intentions.
Country ownership
The Accredited Entity is confident that, given the current trajectory for receipt of NOLs, it will obtain
additional NOLs before the Board publication deadline. The number of NOLs has risen from 5 at the point
at which the FP was submitted to iTAP, to 7 by the time of the iTAP call, and has now risen to 15. In the
last two weeks alone, the Accredited Entity received NOLs from Fiji, Mexico, Jamaica, Kenya, Colombia,
Ecuador, Sri Lanka and Philippines.
The assessment notes the role of the GFCR Advisory Board in monitoring the overall strategy of the two
windows. The Accredited Entity agrees that the advisory board should meet more frequently than once
per year. The TORs for the advisory board have not been finalized, but Pegasus will ensure that the TORs
call for quarterly meetings.
The assessment conveys concerns about engagement with governmental actors and other relevant
stakeholders (paras. 82-87). Stakeholder engagement is an important tenet of GFCR and is reflected in
the GFCR’s ESMS. We expect to engage in more robust stakeholder engagement, including relevant
government and civil society organizations, during the evaluation and development stage for individual
investments.
The assessment suggests that there is potential for the fund to provide policy support to countries on
marine protection and coral reefs. It also emphasizes that unless a joint effort across all major
stakeholders takes place in terms of driving policies and incentives to scale up sustainable businesses,
and enforcing legislation or regulation prohibiting unsustainable practices, then individual investments
will not drive the fund’s desired overall impact. As noted above, the GFCR expects that it will drive
favourable policy change through the combined effect of GW activities and actors, the fund’s powerful
demonstration effect, and by providing the right incentives for policy change that will attract further
investment. The Grant Window and Investment Window will also work closely together in countries to
ensure that a coherent and consistent strategy is pursued for creating favourable enabling
environments. The Framework Agreement which is currently being finalized will provide more details
on the ways of working that will enable this collaborative approach.
iTAP also notes that not all NOL countries currently have specific Convening Agents or dedicated
organizations charged with building presence and relationships on the ground. The GW is currently
working to build relationships with coalitions of actors working within those countries, either through
the fund’s existing partners, or where necessary, through relationships with new partners. In this way,
the GFCR will strive to ensure that it has local relays with which it can work in every NOL country. GCF
will have access to the updated list of convening agents through the seat it proposes to have at the

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 106
Efficiency and effectiveness
In response to iTAP’s specific concerns, it is important to note that the GFCR budget is an estimate based
on a number of assumptions over a period 15 years. In particular, the budget makes a number of
assumptions about the ramp-up of the investment team that will need to be hired to service the fund.
For the sake of clarity, the GFCR budget made a number of simplifying assumptions. These included
assuming no return of capital and assuming that there would be no recycling of capital. In practice, the
fund expects returns, and recycling of capital is an important tool that fund managers use to deploy more
of a fund’s commitments in investments as opposed to fees. Given Pegasus’ track record in this regard
(see chart below), we believe it likely that GFCR will recycle sufficient capital such that a substantial
portion of the commitments will be deployed in investments. The chart below shows a summary of
1
Pegasus’ prior fund commitments and cumulative invested capital:
(All figures in $mm, except percentages) % of
Committed Cumulative Commitments
Capital Invested Capital Invested
F und V
Fund IV 623.7 666.4 106.8%
Fund III 750.0 740.0 98.7%
Fund III 316.3 356.1 112.6%
Fund I 561.0 630.1 112.3%
232.6 236.2 101.5%
Consistent with Pegasus’ prior experience, the Accredited Entity will seek to deploy as much of the
GFCR’s commitments into investments as possible.
The assessment requested additional details on the team that will manage the fund. As the fund is still
in its developmental stages, the dedicated GFCR team will be built-up as the fund is raised and capital is
deployed. As a condition to FAA effectiveness, Pegasus will hire a senior-level person with appropriate
sector and geographic experience to serve as head of investments. That person will work with the
existing Pegasus team to further build out the mid-level and junior employees with appropriate sector
and geographic experience. The employee compensation in the budget is primarily an estimate, based
on Pegasus’ prior hiring experience, of the cost of the team. In addition, existing Pegasus employees,
including Craig Cogut, David Cogut and Brian Friedman, will dedicate a portion of their time to GFCR as
well, in addition to their other responsibilities, including the Global Subnational Climate Fund. The
Pegasus team has ample experience managing multiple products, and we fully expect to devote sufficient
time and attention to GFCR (as well as any other Pegasus initiatives).
The Accredited Entity acknowledges iTAP’s comments concerning the level of concessionality (para. 99).
However, the Accredited Entity believes that the level of concessionality and de-risking provided by the
GCF will be key to mobilizing capital for the fund, given that the GFCR is not only a new fund, but also the
first to be dedicated to SDG-14 and that it is adopting a pioneering dual-window approach
This is especially critical given that fundraising for the senior tranche will focus on unlocking private and
commercial capital, including institutional investors and banks. As the junior loss tranche, GCF financing
will be instrumental in aligning the risk and expected return profile of the fund with the appetites of
1
As of 12/31/2020

--- Table 1 on Page 110 ---
Efficiency and effectiveness
In response to iTAP’s specific concerns, it is important to note that the GFCR budget is an estimate based
on a number of assumptions over a period 15 years. In particular, the budget makes a number of
assumptions about the ramp-up of the investment team that will need to be hired to service the fund.
For the sake of clarity, the GFCR budget made a number of simplifying assumptions. These included
assuming no return of capital and assuming that there would be no recycling of capital. In practice, the
fund expects returns, and recycling of capital is an important tool that fund managers use to deploy more
of a fund’s commitments in investments as opposed to fees. Given Pegasus’ track record in this regard
(see chart below), we believe it likely that GFCR will recycle sufficient capital such that a substantial
portion of the commitments will be deployed in investments. The chart below shows a summary of
1
Pegasus’ prior fund commitments and cumulative invested capital:
(All figures in $mm, except percentages) % of
Committed Cumulative Commitments
Capital Invested Capital Invested
F und V
Fund IV 623.7 666.4 106.8%
Fund III 750.0 740.0 98.7%
Fund III 316.3 356.1 112.6%
Fund I 561.0 630.1 112.3%
232.6 236.2 101.5%
Consistent with Pegasus’ prior experience, the Accredited Entity will seek to deploy as much of the
GFCR’s commitments into investments as possible.
The assessment requested additional details on the team that will manage the fund. As the fund is still
in its developmental stages, the dedicated GFCR team will be built-up as the fund is raised and capital is
deployed. As a condition to FAA effectiveness, Pegasus will hire a senior-level person with appropriate
sector and geographic experience to serve as head of investments. That person will work with the
existing Pegasus team to further build out the mid-level and junior employees with appropriate sector
and geographic experience. The employee compensation in the budget is primarily an estimate, based
on Pegasus’ prior hiring experience, of the cost of the team. In addition, existing Pegasus employees,
including Craig Cogut, David Cogut and Brian Friedman, will dedicate a portion of their time to GFCR as
well, in addition to their other responsibilities, including the Global Subnational Climate Fund. The
Pegasus team has ample experience managing multiple products, and we fully expect to devote sufficient
time and attention to GFCR (as well as any other Pegasus initiatives).
The Accredited Entity acknowledges iTAP’s comments concerning the level of concessionality (para. 99).
However, the Accredited Entity believes that the level of concessionality and de-risking provided by the
GCF will be key to mobilizing capital for the fund, given that the GFCR is not only a new fund, but also the
first to be dedicated to SDG-14 and that it is adopting a pioneering dual-window approach
This is especially critical given that fundraising for the senior tranche will focus on unlocking private and

--- Table 2 on Page 110 ---
$mm, except perce
Committed
Capital | ntages)
Cumulative
Invested Capital | % of
Commitments
Invested
 |  | 
623.7 | 666.4 | 106.8%
750.0 | 740.0 | 98.7%
316.3 | 356.1 | 112.6%
561.0 | 630.1 | 112.3%

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 107
these target investors. Accordingly, the Accredited Entity respectfully conveys its objection to decreasing
GCF’s concessionality as proposed.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
The Accredited Entity accepts the conditions from iTAP.

--- Table 1 on Page 111 ---
these target investors. Accordingly, the Accredited Entity respectfully conveys its objection to decreasing
GCF’s concessionality as proposed.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
The Accredited Entity accepts the conditions from iTAP.

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 108
Annex I
GFCR Grant Window Convening Agent Partnership Example
The Bahama Reefs Programme, whose Convening Agent is The Nature Conservancy (TNC) builds
on the experience of TNC in The Bahamas and on the established network of partners working to
conserve and restore coral reefs in the country. TNC as a global science-based conservation
organisation has been developing knowledge and tested approaches to protect coral reefs in
different regions, including in several Caribbean countries.
As Convening Agent, TNC has assembled a wide array of actors to deliver the expected
pCroo-greracmipmieen rtess ourlgtsa (nsiesea ttaiobnles b elow).
( UN organisation or non-Profit who can be eligible for direct access to the GFCR)
UN Capital Development Fund UNCDF will play a key role to channel grants and concessional
(UNCDF) loans to some of the interventions included in the preliminary
pipeline. UNCDF is part of the GFCR investment continuum
through its Blue Bridge. UNCDF has not supported projects in
Partner organisations The Bahamas yet, but it has the required technical capacity to
work with the projects TNC identified.
(e.g., government, NGO, private business; not receiving GFCR funds, local public of commercial
b ank, financial institution)
Access Accelerator Sustainable SBDC is a Bahamian non-profit founded in 2018 by the
Business Development Center University of the Bahamas, the Bahamas Chamber of Commerce
(SBDC)—NGO and the Ministry of Finance. By the end of the last fiscal year,
SBDC had funded USD 49.9 million to Micro, Small and Medium-
sized Enterprises (MSMEs), with 9,488 clients registered. SBDC
provides the required technical capacity in the financial aspects,
which complements TNC skills that are more focused on the
environmental and social aspects. SBDC will operate a specific
Blue Economy programme under the BahamaReefs in
p artnership with TNC.
Bahamas Protected Areas BPAF is a national conservation trust fund created by the BPAF
Fund (BPAF)—NGO Act in 2014 to help ensure sustainable financing for the
Bahamian marine parks. It is a body corporate governed by a
multi-stakeholder Board of Trustees. One of its responsibilities
determined by the Act is to establish and maintain a Register of
Protected Areas. BPAF will support TNC carrying
out grantmaking for non-profits within the programme,
and convening stakeholders supporting enabling conditions.
Perry Institute for Marine PIMS conducts research throughout The Bahamas and other
Science (PIMS)— NGO parts of the Caribbean. PIMS also conducts a wide range of
conservation, education and citizen science programmes. It is
one of the oldest leading research organisations in The Bahamas
founded more than 50 years ago, in 1970. PIMS and TNC have a
long-standing consolidated partnership, collaborating in specific
projects, such as the Bahamas Coral Reefs Report Card. PIMS will
provide the most accurate information on the current status of

--- Table 1 on Page 112 ---


The Bahama Reefs Programme, whose Convening Agent is The Nature Conservancy (TNC) builds
on the experience of TNC in The Bahamas and on the established network of partners working to
conserve and restore coral reefs in the country. TNC as

--- Table 2 on Page 112 ---
pCroo-greracmipmieen rtess ourlgtsa (nsiesea ttaiobnles b elow). | 
 | 
 | 
 | 
( UN organisation or non-Profit
UN Capital Development Fund
(UNCDF) | who can be eligible for direct access to the GFCR)
UNCDF will play a key role to channel grants and concessional
loans to some of the interventions included in the preliminary
pipeline. UNCDF is part of the GFCR investment continuum
through its Blue Bridge. UNCDF has not supported projects in
Partner organisations The Bahamas yet, but it has the required technical capacity to | 
work with the projects TNC identified. | 
 | 
(e.g., government, NGO, private
b ank, financial institution)
Access Accelerator Sustainable
Business Development Center
(SBDC)—NGO | business; not receiving GFCR funds, local public of commercial
SBDC is a Bahamian non-profit founded in 2018 by the
University of the Bahamas, the Bahamas Chamber of Commerce
and the Ministry of Finance. By the end of the last fiscal year,
SBDC had funded USD 49.9 million to Micro, Small and Medium-
sized Enterprises (MSMEs), with 9,488 clients registered. SBDC
provides the required technical capacity in the financial aspects,
which complements TNC skills that are more focused on the
environmental and social aspects. SBDC will operate a specific
Bahamas Protected Areas
Fund (BPAF)—NGO | Blue Economy programme under the BahamaReefs in
p artnership with TNC.
BPAF is a national conservation trust fund created by the BPAF
Act in 2014 to help ensure sustainable financing for the
Bahamian marine parks. It is a body corporate governed by a
multi-stakeholder Board of Trustees. One of its responsibilities
determined by the Act is to establish and maintain a Register of
Protected Areas. BPAF will support TNC carrying
out grantmaking for non-profits within the programme,
Perry Institute for Marine
Science (PIMS)— NGO | and convening stakeholders supporting enabling conditions.
PIMS conducts research throughout The Bahamas and other
parts of the Caribbean. PIMS also conducts a wide range of
conservation, education and citizen science programmes. It is
one of the oldest leading research organisations in The Bahamas
founded more than 50 years ago, in 1970. PIMS and TNC have a
long-standing consolidated partnership, collaborating in specific
projects, such as the Bahamas Coral Reefs Report Card. PIMS will

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01
Page 109
Bahamian reefs and will be a hub for the programme to work
with a network of small dive shops and other tourism businesses
in restoration efforts.
Elizabeth Harbour EHCP is a community-based Bahamian non-profit organisation
Conservation Partnership conceived during the Exuma GEF-IWCAM Project. Its mission is
(EHCP)—NGO to guide the ecologically sustainable development of the coastal
zone and waters of Elizabeth Harbour with the aim of enhancing
tourism, fisheries, and recreational use, through stakeholder
education and participation, and collaborative management of
harbour facilities. It will implement a community-based business
focused on the operation of pump-out services, environmental
monitoring, and the management of moorings.
Bahamas National Trust BNT is a non-profit, non-government, membership organisation
(BNT)—NGO founded in 1959 by the BNT Act. It is governed by a 29-member
council made up of appointed representatives from some of the
most prestigious conservation and scientific organisations in the
world and from government. BNT currently manages 32 MPAs in
the country. It will implement new structures and revenue
streams in Abaco MPAs with the support of Blue Finance. BNT
has the mandate to potentially replicate the experience in Abaco
to other of its managed areas.
Blue Finance—NGO Blue Finance has a track record of establishing blended finance
solutions for the management and sustainable financing of
MPAs. The NGO implements collaborative management
agreements between non-profit partners and local governments,
providing technical assistance, as well as management and
marketing expertise. It has projects in MPAs in the Dominican
Republic and in Belize, successfully attracting private finance. It
is a direct partner of GFCR.
C oral Vita—private company Coral Vita is a for-profit founded in 2015 with a land-based coral
farm established in Grand Bahama in 2018. Its vision is to create
a global network of high-tech coral farms to support coral
restoration. It has an ambitious business model to provide
different services around coral restoration, including tourism,
education, increased resilience and reef repair. It will implement
the expansion of its business and support the development of
new restoration technologies to scale up restoration.

--- Table 1 on Page 113 ---
 | Bahamian reefs and will be a hub for the programme to work
with a network of small dive shops and other tourism businesses
in restoration efforts.
Elizabeth Harbour
Conservation Partnership
(EHCP)—NGO | EHCP is a community-based Bahamian non-profit organisation
conceived during the Exuma GEF-IWCAM Project. Its mission is
to guide the ecologically sustainable development of the coastal
zone and waters of Elizabeth Harbour with the aim of enhancing
tourism, fisheries, and recreational use, through stakeholder
education and participation, and collaborative management of
harbour facilities. It will implement a community-based business
focused on the operation of pump-out services, environmental
Bahamas National Trust
(BNT)—NGO | monitoring, and the management of moorings.
BNT is a non-profit, non-government, membership organisation
founded in 1959 by the BNT Act. It is governed by a 29-member
council made up of appointed representatives from some of the
most prestigious conservation and scientific organisations in the
world and from government. BNT currently manages 32 MPAs in
the country. It will implement new structures and revenue
streams in Abaco MPAs with the support of Blue Finance. BNT
has the mandate to potentially replicate the experience in Abaco
Blue Finance—NGO | to other of its managed areas.
Blue Finance has a track record of establishing blended finance
solutions for the management and sustainable financing of
MPAs. The NGO implements collaborative management
agreements between non-profit partners and local governments,
providing technical assistance, as well as management and
marketing expertise. It has projects in MPAs in the Dominican
Republic and in Belize, successfully attracting private finance. It
C oral Vita—private company | is a direct partner of GFCR.
Coral Vita is a for-profit founded in 2015 with a land-based coral
farm established in Grand Bahama in 2018. Its vision is to create
a global network of high-tech coral farms to support coral
restoration. It has an ambitious business model to provide
different services around coral restoration, including tourism,
education, increased resilience and reef repair. It will implement

=== PAGE 114 ===
Page 110
GFCR Gender Assessment
Contents
1. Overview .................................................................................................................................................................... 1
1.1 Country Ownership .............................................................................................................................................. 2
1.2 COVID Assessment ............................................................................................................................................... 2
2. Project Category Assessment ......................................................................................................................... 3
2.1 Sustainable ocean production to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques,
enhance food security and restore degraded coral reef ecosystems ....................................................... 4
Specific Project Assessment ................................................................................................................................ 5
2.2 Ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism and create revenue streams to enhance coral
reef protection and restoration .............................................................................................................................. 7
Specific Project Assessment ................................................................................................................................ 8
2.3 Sustainable infrastructure and waste management to address pollution ................................... 10
Specific Project Assessment .............................................................................................................................. 12
2.4 Sustainable Development Goals .................................................................................................................... 13
3. Fund Application ................................................................................................................................................. 16
3.1 Safeguards and Consultation .......................................................................................................................... 17
3.2 Gender-Responsive Project Design ............................................................................................................. 19
3.3 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) ............................................................................................................... 20
4. Sources and Endnotes ....................................................................................................................................... 21
ANNEX 1 GFCR GENDER ACTION PLAN ............................................................................................................. 22
ANNEX 2 GFCR GENDER POLICY ........................................................................................................................... 38
1. Overview
The Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) Gender Assessment serves as the foundation to strengthen
the programme’s responsiveness to the multiple, culturally-derived principles of gender equality
and women’s empowerment, and to address the links between gender equality, climate
adaptation, and environmental sustainability. The Assessment informs the accompanying Gender
Action Plan, both at fund and project level, with indicators and targets to support GFCR
commitments to and engagement with women, men, girls and boys, including those from
marginalized communitiesi, in compliance with GCF and GFCR gender policies. The Assessment
and Action Plan support the GFCR Environmental Social Management System (ESMS).
The Assessment builds upon quantitative data and qualitative evidence derived desk review of
existing literature, case studies, and secondary databases, as noted in the Sources section. Like the
ESMS, the GFCR Gender Assessment and Action Plan are living documents and will be regularly
updated to reflect key developments, including:
1. Portfolio: The GFCR aims to fund projects in up to 28 selected countries. The GFCR is a blind
pool investment vehicle and, as such, specific portfolio of funded projects, and indeed the
countries in which those projects may occur, have yet to be identified. Relevant country-
specific, sex-disaggregated gender data must be assessed as the prospective project pipeline is
developed and host countries become known.

=== PAGE 115 ===
Page 111
2. COVID-19: The full impact in the long term of the global COVID virus is unknown. Findings
have already suggested that it has had differentiated impacts in the lives of men and women.
With respect to reproductive work, women and girls, already disproportionately responsible
for household duties, including water, food and fuel collection; food preparation; and taking
care of children as well as elderly and ill relatives, have experienced heightened levels of
responsibility in the midst of the pandemic and subsequent stay-at-home orders. In addition,
home quarantines, market impacts and food shortages have also been found to increase
household tensions and, as a result, women have been exposed to higher risks of domestic
violence. The Assessment and Action Plan will be updated as virus-related development,
people differentiated impacts and strategies for remediation become more clear.
1.1 Country Ownership
The Fund investment focus is on regions that depend on coral reefs for food, protection, and
income. It seeks to stimulate local government as well as select private sector entities and
philanthropies to implement effective management of land/seascapes that integrate climate
change adaptation and climate resilience planning to enhance the resilience of coral reef
ecosystems in select SIDS and LDCs. However, the GFCR fully adheres to the principle of country
ownership. The Gender-responsive Assessment and Action Plans for every funded project will
seek to align with prevailing international ratified legal frameworks, regional and national gender
policies, or other public policy for gender equality and women’s empowerment. The assessment
and action plan will seek also to align the project with other national development strategies that
promote equal opportunities, poverty reduction and sustainable use of natural resources whether
in the intervention region or the sector. This will include analysis of the gender equality landscape
and data relevant to the host country and in the targeted sector(s), including Nationally
Determined Commitments (NDCs).ii
1.2 COVID Assessment
The GFCR will begin implementation before the impacts of the global COVID-19 virus crisis are
fully known. However, it is clear that the impacts will be felt deeply in the host countries in which
the GFCR plans to invest (see Graphic 1, below). With respect to gender-related impacts, the
Committee for the Coordination of Statistical Activities (UN-CCSA) concludes that COVID-19 will
disproportionately impact the vulnerable and compound existing inequalities. Impacts may
include food shortages, mobility restrictions, decreased access to health care and education, higher
unemployment, and increases in domestic violence.”iii

=== PAGE 116 ===
Page 112
Graphic 1: Confirmed cases of COVID-19, July 2021
The COVID-19 pandemic is threatening fragile gains on gender equality and women’s rights. As
countries respond to the crisis, sex-disaggregated data is critical to examine the differential impact
on women and men towards evidence-based decision-making. Globally, women on average do
three times as much unpaid care and domestic work as men – a workload that intensifies with
school closures and when health systems are overloaded. Additionally, research has begun to
surface indicating that women are more vulnerable to losing their jobs than men in response to
the crisis. Widespread job losses will have long-term impacts for women’s economic independence
and security. With 740 million women globally in informal employment and a majority employed
in services, women are being, and will continue to be, particularly hard hit by the impacts of the
COVID crisis.iv Indigenous communities and specifically women and children are also more
vulnerable due to overcrowded housing, unsafe water, and poor access to healthcare.v
Assessments of social impacts show that the COVID-19 crisis has disproportionately harmed a
number of vulnerable groups, including women employed in temporary jobs, low-skilled workers,
small-scale fishers and businesses, Indigenous community members and younger workers.
Women represent the majority of the workforce in the ocean economy sectors hardest hit by the
crisis—about 50% of workers in the seafood sector, 70% in aquaculture, 80–90% in the post-
harvest sector of small-scale fisheries and 54% in tourism. As businesses lose revenue, many will
reduce their costs by laying off workers, starting with the temporary and casual jobs
disproportionally occupied by women. Women are likely to be most affected by job losses in the
tourism sector (based on the proportion of women employed in low-skilled jobs in the sector).vi
The GFCR Gender-responsive Assessment and Action Plan will be updated on a regular basis to
reflect the impacts of COVID in host countries and related project sectors.
2. Project Category Assessment
As previously noted, the GFCR will be a fund of projects that may operate in up to 28 countries.
GFCR is a blind-pool investment vehicle, meaning the specific portfolio of funded projects, and
indeed the countries in which those projects will occur, will not be identified in advance. At such
time as host countries and prospective pipeline projects are identified, GFCR will seek country-
specific, sex-disaggregated data by project type to inform gender-responsive project design and
implementation. This activity will be supported by framework guidelines on gender assessment,
to ensure that project proposal and implementation mainstream gender.
Coastal communities are heavily reliant on marine resources for their livelihoods and food
security. Engaging these communities in conservation, restoration, and sustainable management
of natural habitats can provide much-needed income in the short-term, while building socio-
economic resilience as countries strive to revitalize their coastal economies.vii
In the current absence of country-specific data, the GFCR has conducted peer-project Assessments
to help identify the drivers of change and the gender dynamics needed to achieve the fund’s project
adaptation and mitigation goals. This will help to understand how the fund can address gender
vulnerabilities and design specific gender elements in the different project categories.
The GFCR will invest in the following project categories (all Category B or C):
1. Sustainable ocean production to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques,
enhance food security and restore degraded coral reef ecosystems

=== PAGE 117 ===
Page 113
2. Ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism and create revenue streams to enhance coral
reef protection and restoration
3. Sustainable infrastructure and waste management to address pollution
GFCR has assessed each project category beginning with the Gender-Related Vulnerabilities and
Capacities for Change in GCF Projects.viii In addition, the following assessment and information is
framed using the Six Domains of Gender Analysis Framework Approachix including:
1. Access - to resources, income, services, employment, information, and benefits, poverty
rate, formal / informal employment, unemployment, division of labour;
2. Knowledge, Beliefs, and Perception - commonly held beliefs, perceptions, and stereotypes,
mobility, vulnerable groups;
3. Practices and participation - adult literacy rate, skills training and gaps, attendance at
meetings and training courses, and accepting or seeking out services;
4. Time and Space - how time is spent and how men and women each contribute to the welfare
of the family, community, and their society;
5. Legal rights and status – legal status of women, access to healthcare, access to and
management of resources (economic, financial, physical, natural, other assets), access to
ownership and recourse;
6. Power and Decision Making– existing gender inequalities that may be exacerbated by
project impacts, anticipated differences in vulnerability and adaptive capacityx, use of
household and individual economic resources, choice of employment.
The peer projects were selected based on their suitability for GFCR. Although some projects were
implemented by NGOs, important lessons and recommendations can be drawn from the cases
nonetheless, which contribute to a private sector and business-oriented approach.
2.1 Sustainable ocean production to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, enhance
food security and restore degraded coral reef ecosystems
Table 4: - GCF Results Area Ecosystem and ecosystem servicesxi
GCF Result Area Vulnerabilities Capacities for Change
Ecosystem and Share and number of Roles of women in the community/
ecosystem women depending on household with reference to natural
services ecosystem and ecosystem resource use
services for livelihoods
Share of women and men in the natural
resources / agricultural labor market and
type of occupation
Policies and institutional framework to
promote gender equality in access to
ecosystem services
Ecosystems and ecosystem services are strongly linked to gender disparities, and have significant
potential to impact the gender and social relations within communities. Engaging women in the
sustainable production and harvest of marine resources and in ecosystem conservation efforts can
have an exponential effect in simultaneously addressing ecosystem challenges and gender
inequality. With ecosystems at an increased risk of destruction as a result of climate change, it is
increasingly evident that women and men should equally be involved and included in efforts to
develop resilient ecosystems.

--- Table 1 on Page 117 ---
 | GCF Result Area |  |  | Vulnerabilities |  |  | Capacities for Change | 
Ecosystem and
ecosystem
services |  |  | Share and number of
women depending on
ecosystem and ecosystem
services for livelihoods |  |  | Roles of women in the community/
household with reference to natural
resource use
Share of women and men in the natural
resources / agricultural labor market and
type of occupation
Policies and institutional framework to
promote gender equality in access to
ecosystem services |  | 

=== PAGE 118 ===
Page 114
Women’s contributions in aqua- and mariculture are often overlooked, underestimated and/or
undervalued, often resulting in women’s marginalisation in the management of marine resources.
Coastal activities are usually highly gendered, both in where and how women participate in value
chains and how their contributions are valued and prioritized. Women mostly involved in pre- and
post-harvest activities. However, gender blindness results from a focus on formal and paid fishing
activities (traditionally male-dominated) in research, management and policies, disregarding
informal and unpaid activities, usually dominated by women. Fisheries agencies are also
commonly focused on the production segment of fish value chains, even though twice as many
people may be employed in related activities, such as processing and marketing, which are often
dominated by women. Such marginalization has often happened despite increasing recognition
that women play a critical role at every link in small-scale fisheries value chains. In addition,
gendered access barriers occur at several points along the fisheries value chain. These can include
indirect barriers, such as gender norms, or more direct barriers including lack of access to fishing
gear, fishing grounds, fishing markets or financial capital, including credit, as well as lack of
education or alternative livelihoods. Policies on matters such as spatial management can also have
a disproportionate impact on women and other marginalised groups that may not have access to
boats or motors that would allow them to reach other fishing zones.xii
Small-scale fisheries support the majority of the world’s fisherfolk (47 million women and men in
developing countries alone). Small-scale fishing communities, particularly indigenous and women
subgroups, often have relatively limited political power compared to large-scale fisheries actors.
In addition, representatives from coastal communities and groups often marginalised (e.g.,
women, indigenous groups, individuals with disabilities and poor people) are frequently not, or
not adequately, included in decisions related to development (e.g., site selection of ports, energy
and oil development, aquaculture) that will impact them. Inequities are apparent also within
small-scale fish producing communities. These are often structured along intersecting social
categories such as wealth, gender, age, religion, migrant status and ethnicity. Inequities in ocean
resource benefits may reinforce existing inequities experienced by particular groups in access to
healthcare, education and rights over land.xiii
Specific Project Assessment
Scaling Community Seaweed Farming in Kenyaxiv
Project description:
Kenya started community seaweed farming in Kwale County on the South Coast in 2013, following
feasibility studies undertaken by the Kenya Marine and Fisheries Research Institute. The initial
funding was from a World Bank– funded project that targeted fishing communities along the
Kenyan coast, but further funding has been provided by the Government of Kenya to build the
farmers’ capacity with the aim of developing the initiative into a robust industry to create jobs and
income. The main objective of supporting the establishment of this new community-led industry
was to offer an alternative livelihood to local fishing communities whose livelihoods had been
challenged by reduced income due to the dwindling catches from artisanal fisheries.
Gender responsive activities of the project:
Before the project implementation, women typically grew crops in one-acre piece of land and the
proceeds weren’t enough to send children to school. The intervention specifically supported the
creation of new jobs and economic opportunities for women—90% of seaweed farmers in Kenya
are women. To date, this support has resulted in the employment of approximately 400 seaweed
farmers in Kwale County, each with his or her own individual farm generating income that flows
directly to the farmer. Initially, seaweed farming supplemented their income but has since become

=== PAGE 119 ===
Page 115
their primary income-generating activity. For the women involved, this has meant financial
independence from their husbands, with many using the income from their seaweed farms to
educate their children up to the university level and constructing permanent house which also
brought development to the village. Hence, women have also been able to bring development to
the village as a result of the activity.
The seaweed farmers welfare group has also been registered as a cooperative to improve
organization and collective bargaining power. The seaweed is also being used in local food
products. Support is also being provided to diversify the farmers’ income base through the
development of soap and other cosmetic products, such as body creams, shampoos and hair
treatment. This further supports women entrepreneurship. To date, community-led seaweed
farming has generated over 300 metric tons of dry seaweed that has generated over US$60,000
for the local village economies.
Getting organized for conservation in the Solomon Islandsxv
Project description:
In the Solomon Islands, the population lives mainly by fishing and harvesting shellfish. Faced with
environmental deterioration and depletion of a number of species, WWF has intended to protect
the shellfish resource (an important source of income for local women) and improving women’s
skills in managing, processing, and marketing the resource across the Solomon Islands.
Gender responsive activities of the project:
Several projects across the island included specific efforts to help women overcome barriers to
their participation in the wider economy. These include improving the ability of women to access
credit, undertake paid employment, and start their own businesses. The projects empowered
women to defend their own interests and take more control over the financial aspects of their
shellfish enterprises. It could be observed that women of Gizo in the Solomon Islands have taken
the lead in raising awareness about destructive activities that are damaging their rich marine
environment. The projects benefitted from wealth of knowledge on fishing areas, fishing seasons,
and the use of resources of women. For example, the initial focus of the Gizo Womens Action Group
(GWAG) has been to raise awareness about the need to protect the marine environment, and not
dumping rubbish into Gizo harbour. The GWAG also undertook clean-ups around the waterfront
and on local islands, and carried out testing of the water quality around Gizo town. Elsewhere in
the Solomon Islands, women from two villages near Roviana Lagoon have helped design shellfish
reserves for the protection of blood cockle and mud clams, and have played a key role in
monitoring the effectiveness of the reserve. A valuable dialogue has been started between outside
scientists and the women on the results of this monitoring.
Drivers of change and specific gender elements to be included in the project activities
From the first assessment above and based on the illustrated case studies, the GFCR intends to
address the following issues:
• Promote women entrepreneurship and business opportunities in sustainable ocean
production: As women are involved in the work of feeding, harvesting and processing of
fish and shellfish, it is important to increase women’s control over ponds and inputs for
aquaculture to expand the entrepreneurship activities and support pre- and post-harvest
activities where women are also represented. For example, it is essential that women and
men equally benefit from any fishing project and from technical and financial inputs, such
as boats, fridges and freezers (incl. shared business centres which are predominantly
managed by women to enable access to fridges and freezers to preserve fish), educational
materials, technical instruments and credits to ensure that women can equally participate
and control business activities.

=== PAGE 120 ===
Page 116
Since fishing is seasonal, it is also essential to support women in diversifying their business
activities as mentioned in the case study above. Diversification is of particular importance
in regions where cyclones, overfishing and rising seas threaten livelihoods. In Madagascar,
for example, WWF piloted the development of beekeeping and ecotourism to generate
alternative revenues to fishing and protect the mangrove by making it the cornerstone of
the new activities.
• Training on skills and awareness about conservation and restoration activities and business
opportunities: In aquaculture, it is necessary to provide women with training and formal
education to improve the efficiency, profitability and sustainability of their business
activities. This will support their enterprises, increase their income potential and reduce
their marginalization. Education should focus on improving their positions in the post-
harvest activities across the value chain since female traders still lack bargaining power.
They must be provided with the know-how and access to education and information on fish
preservation and marketing so they can receive better quality fish and keep it fresh.
• Women empowerment across the ocean production sector: Women can be empowered
politically and socially by acknowledging their wealth of knowledge and including them in
the broader community and civil society organizations. Given women’s important role in
the post-harvest subsector, women must be allowed to participate in decision-making
processes, and be provided with the access to physical and capital resources for developing
their industry and meeting their needs and aspirations. It is also urgent to give women
equal control in the value chain and profit margins. This is particularly relevant as women
often still work in low-status, less-skilled and low-paid jobs, and on informal, casual and
temporary contracts that disqualify them from receiving social benefits. To overcome this,
more efforts are needed to include women in the most profitable markets and enterprises,
and to provide them with more employment opportunities in fish processing factories. In
this way, they may profit from increasing market globalization and become less vulnerable
to decreases in fish catches and poor services.
2.2 Ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism and create revenue streams to enhance coral
reef protection and restoration
Table 1: - GCF Result Area Most vulnerable people and communities xvi
GCF - Result GCF - Vulnerabilities GCF - Capacities for Change
Area
Most vulnerable Share and number of Roles of women in targeted communities
people and women among vulnerable
communities groups of population and Share of women and men in relevant labor
communities markets and type of occupation
Policies and institutional framework to
address vulnerabilities
With women representing 54% of those working in the tourism industry, women make up a much
higher proportion than in other sectors worldwide. However, tourism employment can be
comparatively lower-paid for both men and women than average wages across the broader
economy.xvii

--- Table 1 on Page 120 ---
 | GCF - Result |  | GCF - Vulnerabilities | GCF - Capacities for Change
 | Area |  |  | 
Most vulnerable
people and
communities |  |  | Share and number of
women among vulnerable
groups of population and
communities | Roles of women in targeted communities
Share of women and men in relevant labor
markets and type of occupation
Policies and institutional framework to
address vulnerabilities

=== PAGE 121 ===
Page 117
Similarly, while women are the majority of students in formal tourism education, they largely lack
the high-level and soft skills training needed to ensure their career progression. A lack of education
or formal training jeopardizes women’s active participation in tourism. This is especially true for
impoverished women and in the context of developing countries. Sexual harassment, gender-
based violence and stereotyping pose serious risks for women in tourism as workers and
travellers.xviii
Tourism development can bring other challenges to women living in destinations. Women can be
particularly, affected because they continue to be primarily responsible for unpaid care and
domestic work. Issues that may arise include conflicts over access to and use of water, sanitation
and waste management, sexual harassment and violence in the community, increased cost of living
for basic consumer goods, and increased rental and property prices. This can lead to other issues
around alcohol, mental health and cultural traditions.xix
It is essential that gender equality training is provided for the public and private tourism sector to
ensure that awareness and skills are developed in order to maximize tourism’s contribution to
women’s empowerment. Furthermore, traditional gender roles are often prioritized over roles as
business women. Tourism is often supplementary or an additional form of labor, given the
enduring responsibility for unpaid care and domestic work.
Specific Project Assessment
Entrepreneurship in Costa Ricaxx
Project description:
Between 2010 and 2018, Proyecto Emprende sought to understand the coordination of actions for
women’s empowerment, while developing the first real snapshot of the relation between women,
gender and economic empowerment in Costa Rica. Funded by the European Commission, the
project provided resources to more than 1,500 women entrepreneurs and their 900 businesses,
focussing on rural women, networking between women, and forging a path between women
entrepreneurs and the private and public sectors. Some 15% of the businesses that participated in
the initiative were directly related to tourism, while many others were tangentially related to the
sector – such as businesses engaged in handicraft production or the provision of food. The main
reason why the project afforded particular attention to tourism stems from the sector’s
importance for Costa Rica, both in terms of policy and income generation opportunities.
Gender responsive activities of the project:

=== PAGE 122 ===
Page 118
Proyecto Emprende offers a strong example of how initiatives can support women’s
entrepreneurship by providing resources, information, networking opportunities that offer
women avenues to interact with the private and public sectors. It shed light on the many faces of
women entrepreneurs, their needs, the options open to them and the ways in which they turn
available resources into opportunities for themselves and their families. The kinds of tourism
activities performed by women in the country allow them to remain close to their families. This is
important, as many women are primarily responsible for caring for relatives, such as their parents
or children, often requiring them to remain at home. To meet the needs of these women, Proyecto
Emprende revived an initiative entitled Artesanía con identidad (literally ‘handicrafts with an
identity’). The initiative selected women artisans and honed their handicraft skills in accordance
with Costa Rican culture, principles and materials. Challenges faced were tied to gender norms
that perpetuate a lack of self-esteem among women entrepreneurs. Although tourism authorities
provided women with information on tourism accreditation and certification, this had the effect
of increasing women’s insecurities, rather than facilitating their work in tourism. Women felt that
the criteria and costs involved in attaining certification were beyond their reach. Since many
women could not meet the criteria to turn their informal businesses into formal enterprises, the
prospect of attaining tourism accreditation and certification was too far from women’s immediate
realities and needs. It demonstrates a gap between tourism’s national importance, on the one hand,
and the will to adapt tourism conditions to women’s needs, on the other. While the project sought
to better understand women’s entrepreneurship in Costa Rica, the project brought women
entrepreneurs closer to tourism, rather than bringing tourism closer to women entrepreneurs. As
a result, for instance, women felt incapable of meeting tourism accreditation criteria – a challenge
that could have been solved by adapting criteria to women’s needs and lived realities, while
offering them training and assistance to navigate requirements.
Community-based tourism in Giao Xuan Women Union, Viet Namxxi
Project description:
In collaboration with Oxfam and the Centre for Marine-Life Conservation and Development (MCD),
Viet Nam’s Giao Xuan Women Union worked on a community-based ecotourism project in the
Xuan Thuy National Park Area. The 29-month initiative (January 2012 to December 2014)
focussed on conservation, livelihoods and gender equality goals.
Gender responsive activities of the project:
To achieve its aims, the project supported the community by offering diverse training workshops
such as capacity building (business skills, reception, food service, local environmental knowledge,
among others) and pilot eco-tour workshops (environmental interpretation, services, businesses
planning, marketing, etc.). The workshops allowed women to access high income and education,
to have control/power in decision-making over factors of production such as labor, education and
public services and equal distribution and to work as community eco-based tourism public
spokespersons and media representatives. In addition, it aimed to support women in Viet Nam to
present a stronger voice in political decision-making, challenge oppressive gender norms, gain
greater respect, and foster changes in gender roles. Both men and women in Giao Xuan showed
increased awareness of gender equality issues. The Lao Cai Province Department of Culture, Sport
and Tourism, whose jurisdiction covers the Xuan Thuy National Park, is “determined to ensure
women have the skills to thrive [by] offering training courses in tourism, families are being fined
for pulling their children out of school, and financial rewards have been introduced to encourage
further education.” Many women, however, could not attend the project’s workshops because of
housework and child care. This issue needs to be considered in the future planning of any gender
equality initiatives, particularly in Asia where childcare concessions are not as readily available as
in more developed countries.

=== PAGE 123 ===
Page 119
Drivers of change and specific gender elements to be included in the project activities
From the first assessment above and based on the illustrated case studies, the GFCR intends to
address the following issues:
• Support entrepreneurship: The tourism sector can offer greater opportunities for women’s
entrepreneurship than the broader economy and should be supported as a self-employed
workforce in tourism. Investing in women-led tourism businesses and expanding as well as
diversifying women’s market access and fair trade for their tourism products and services
will support women entrepreneurship in tourism.
Promote decent work for women in tourism: Since women remain concentrated in low-paid
and low-level employment in the tourism sector and can be exposed to sexual
harassment, it is important to promote equal pay, tackling sexual harassment and
recruiting women into high-level employment. In addition, measures shall be introduced
to improve women’s work-life balance in tourism and encourage an equal division of
unpaid care work in tourism communities.
• Skills training for women: Since there is segregation between men and women in their
access to tourism-related education and training, which disadvantages women, training
programmes shall be developed for women in tourism. This shall include training on soft
skills, networking and high-level training for career progression.
• Women empowerment across the tourism sector: Since female leaders are underrepresented
in tourism due to structural barriers, gender equality strategies and policies for the tourism
sector shall increase women’s empowerment. Women should be supported to increase
high-level women’s leadership in decision-making spaces in the private sector, public
sector tourism bodies, agencies, and trade unions.
• Support women’s needs in the community and civil society: Since women play a key role in
supporting their communities, it is important to facilitate women’s voice in community and
household decision-making and implement appropriate policies and measures according
to women’s needs through women’s tourism networks, NGOs and tourism cooperatives.
2.3 Sustainable infrastructure and waste management to address pollution
Table 3: GCF Results Area Infrastructure and the built environmentxxii
GCF Result Area Vulnerabilities Capacities for Change
Infrastructure Share and number of Roles of women in the design and
and the built women lacking access to maintenance of infrastructure and the built
environment adequate infrastructure environment
(water supply,
sanitation, flood protection, Share of women and men in relevant labor
housing, energy access, etc.) markets and type of occupation
Policies and institutional framework to
promote equal access to adequate
infrastructure
Coasts are becoming increasingly urban. This brings with it coastal development (including
demands for fresh water and sewage treatment) and damage to coastal ecosystems.xxiii People who
live in coastal regions may suffer the cumulative burden of environmental stress from the activities
on and overcrowding of the coast and from upstream and inland development. If not properly
managed, development can result in pollution, deforestation, and inadequate management of soil
and water. Chemicals and heavy metals found in pesticide runoff and industrial effluents also
damage human and marine health. Damming rivers can also have negative environmental effects,
such as soil erosion and destruction of ecosystems that support various fish and marine mammals.

--- Table 1 on Page 123 ---
 | GCF Result Area |  |  | Vulnerabilities |  |  | Capacities for Change | 
Infrastructure
and the built
environment |  |  | Share and number of
women lacking access to
adequate infrastructure
(water supply,
sanitation, flood protection,
housing, energy access, etc.) |  |  | Roles of women in the design and
maintenance of infrastructure and the built
environment
Share of women and men in relevant labor
markets and type of occupation
Policies and institutional framework to
promote equal access to adequate
infrastructure |  | 

=== PAGE 124 ===
Page 120
When concentrated in small, confined, and overcrowded areas such as coastal zones, pollution and
other problems pose great threats to human health.
Women and girls have specific needs and priorities for water and sanitation infrastructure,
particularly in relation to menstrual hygiene management, pregnancy and birth. Poor quality and
genderblind water and sanitation infrastructure can have significant and lasting adverse impacts
on the health and educational and economic opportunities for women and girls. Furthermore,
inadequate water and sanitation facilities for menstrual hygiene management can increase the risk
of urinary tract infection among women and contribute to the spread of disease.xxiv
As coastal communities grow, sewage can become a threat to local waterways. Demand often
exceeds available sewage treatment, and much of the sewage is dumped without being treated.xxv
The right to water and sanitation is recognized as fundamental to attaining all other human rights.
Globally, however, 2.1 billion people do not have access to safe drinking water at home, 2.3 billion
do not have basic sanitation and 1 billion practice open defecation. Women and girls are
disproportionately affected by the lack of access to basic water, sanitation and hygiene facilities,
as they play a larger role relative to men in water, sanitation and hygiene activities, including in
agriculture and domestic labor. This situation has implications for gender equality and
empowerment. [World Health Organizationxxvi]
Mainstreaming gender-related actions for water and sanitation infrastructure identifies and
responds to the needs of women and girls and increases education attainment rates and
employment rates for all. Improving access to water and sanitation is critical to alleviate the time
poverty of women and girls. Promoting the role of women in water governance and management,
capacity building with women’s involvement, and increasing women’s participation in local
institutions such as water users’ organizations can also advance women’s leadership and decision-
making opportunities.
Another issue for coastal communities coastal is land-based plastic waste in the oceans due to
lacking solid waste management infrastructure. Coastal waters and shorelines in many regions are
accumulation zones for marine plastic litter, being the receiving body for land-based plastics and
the zone where fisheries, aquaculture, commercial shipping and other maritime activities are
concentrated.
Women often work as recycling collectors either individually or alongside male family members.
Later in the value chain, there are few waste businesses that are women-owned or operated. Much
of female participation is limited to informal work/ unregulated employment. The nature of
participation at processing and recycling factories is also unregulated and women are engaged
primarily as daily wage workers. The formal waste collection process is dominated by men.
The waste sector is a largely unregulated sector facing social stigma and economic deprivation. In
addition to these occupational challenges, women in the waste sector must deal with the
competing demands from domestic and childcare responsibilities. The physical nature of some of
the tasks involved as well as health and safety issues add another layer of concern for women
engaged in waste management.xxvii
Gender mainstreaming in the solid waste management sector can considerably improve women’s
well-being because of the associated impacts on health and time poverty. As in the case of the
water and sanitation sector, solid waste management at the household level is a burden that often
falls on women’s shoulders. Furthermore, as primary caregivers, women are often responsible for
family members who fall ill due to unsanitary. Due to the gendered responsibility of women for
household work, women have been most burdened with the inadequacy of the municipal waste
collection and management services, with the urgency of the problem increasing for those who
live in poor and informal settlements. The rise of diseases linked to poor waste management also

=== PAGE 125 ===
Page 121
further increases the care work of women who look after sick children and family members, giving
them less time to spend in other work that generates income or other benefits for themselves and
the community.xxviii
Specific Project Assessment
Women’s Activism around Plastic Marine Pollution in Coastal Yucatán, Mexicoxxix
Project description:
This case study draws from the experiences of the coastal town of Celestún in Yucatán, Mexico
where increasing immigration from inland areas, unplanned urbanization, overfishing and
unsustainable tourism have degraded and eroded much of the beach and disrupted the coastal
wetlands ecosystems. The crisis has also driven the growth of women-led grassroots organizations
which play an active role in local waste management and plastics recycling.
Gender responsive activities of the project:
These community-based organizations challenge exclusionary gender norms by increasing
women’s participation in sustainable urban development, and their efforts have significantly
raised community awareness on the link between solid waste management, health, empowerment
and wellbeing in the coastal wetlands.
The women’s recycling group, Chen Kole ‘Lob (meaning “only women” in Yucatec Maya) is a group
in Celestún that emerged out of women’s concern for public health, environmental protection, and
urban sanitation. In 2002, a group of 17 women began to organize around waste issues following
a lecture given at a bi-monthly meeting of Oportunidades, a national development program that
gave small stipends to poor women with children who regularly attend school. The talk focused
on the practice of throwing garbage in the wetlands, and the health risks linked to garbage in
coastal environments. Every two weeks, women from the group collect bottles and other
recyclable materials from individual residences, and bring them to the collection centre, where a
truck picks them up and brings the items to a larger recycling facility in another town. The group
gets the going rate for recyclables (about 2 pesos per kilogram), half of which they pay out to the
individual residents. At least two tons of plastic containers are collected every two weeks, as well
as increasing amounts of scrap metals, cardboard, and recyclable paper. This provides additional
income for the families and supports children’s education, more independence for women, and
better health due to less pollution.
Enhancing climate resilience and water security in the Maldivesxxx
Project description:
The Maldives is considered one of the most vulnerable countries to the impact of climate change,
and this is compounded by its dependence on climate-sensitive industries, such as agriculture,
fisheries and tourism. Freshwater sources in the Maldives are increasingly jeopardized by
population growth, erratic rainfall, salinity intrusion and contamination by human waste. To
support the government of Maldives in fulfilling its major priority to provide safe drinking water
and safe sewage disposal systems to its vulnerable communities, UNOPS was tasked with
delivering the design, construction and construction management of a complete water treatment
and distribution system on the island of Hinnavaru in Lhaviyani Atoll.
Gender responsive activities of the project:
The requirements for this system are that it is affordable, efficient, sustainable and compliant with
the principles of integrated water resource management. In order to deliver the system and make
it accessible to everyone, UNOPS carried out an extensive gender analysis, analyzing the rural
context gender dynamics and women’s time use on fresh water collection for drinking, bathing,

=== PAGE 126 ===
Page 122
cooking and other purposes. Moreover, women were involved in both the consultation process
and in the project workforce. This helped to better reflect women’s needs in the project
development and improved outcomes for women that are mostly responsible for fresh water
collection.
Drivers of change and specific gender elements to be included in the project activities
From the first assessment above and based on the illustrated case studies, the GFCR intends to
address the following issues:
• Women entrepreneurship across the sustainable infrastructure sector: Since female workers
are underrepresented in the built infrastructure sector, it is important to empower female
entrepreneurship and business opportunities in the infrastructure and waste management
sector. This can include the promotion of indirect job creation for women through
infrastructure projects. In waste processing activities or waste-to-energy projects, for
example, sorting and recycling can generate business opportunities for women. For the
waste sector, women shall be provided with more formalized work, implying the provision
of the benefits and stability of formal employment but the flexibility of the
entrepreneurship model.
• Support gender-responsive infrastructure design: Address gender inequalities and empower
women and girls by responding to diverse needs in society during the project design phase
of infrastructure projects as women specific needs or the impacts of infrastructure projects
on women are often overlooked. Gender-responsive consultation and engagement can help
identify such needs. Building awareness of social rights (access to education, legal recourse
against crime, access to health care etc.) and a safe means to exercise such rights must be
made available to women.
• Promote gender mainstreaming actions in the sustainable infrastructure sector: Consider
gender aspects within the planning, delivery and management stages of the infrastructure
life cycle to ensure that the infrastructure built is able to guarantee equal quality services.
• Support the participation of women in waste management: While addressing the needs of
the sector as a whole also identify women-specific opportunities to improve the status quo
and improve collection for recycling, promote a more empowered waste sector, with
improved quality of life for the women engaged in waste management. Women can be a key
target demographic for behaviour change especially with regard to household waste
management. Recycling operations can be improved through capacity building, provision
of equipment/ vehicles, training and awareness building, financial assistance and health
insurance
2.4 Sustainable Development Goals
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) make an explicit commitment to gender, both as a
standalone goal on gender equality and women’s empowerment (SDG 5) as well as a crosscutting
theme across the SDGs. Among the 230 unique global SDG indicators, 53 explicitly reference
women, girls, gender, or sex.xxxi SDG 13 on combating climate change aims to promote mechanisms
for raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in least
developed countries, including focusing on women, youth, and local and marginalised
communities. The following qualitative and quantitative gender sensitive indicators will inform
the Action Plan. They are derived from a preliminary Assessment of SDG 5 and SDG 13 targets (to
reflect the Secretariat guidance regarding the GCF SDG 13 focus). In practice SDG 5 is cross cutting
beyond just SDG 13.
SDG Targets, Category 1 - Economic:

=== PAGE 127 ===
Page 123
• Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public
services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared
responsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriate.
• Ensure women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at
all levels of decision making in political, economic and public life.
• Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to
ownership and control over land and other forms of property, financial services,
inheritance and natural resources, in accordance with national laws.
• Enhance the use of enabling technologies including information and communications
technology, to promote the empowerment of women.
• Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.
• By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men,
including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal
value.
• By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all (within a
country), irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or
other status.
SDG Targets, Category 2 - Social:
• Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres,
including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation.
• Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital
mutilation.
• Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights in
accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development and the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome documents of their
review conferences.
• Protect labor rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers,
including migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious
employment.
Table 2: Economic Empowerment Goals and Sample Indicators – SDG Assessment1
Economic Potential Project Action Example of gender-responsive indicators
Empowerment
Goals
1) Income and Closing of gender gaps in • Qualitative increase in earning and income
equal pay earnings and income generation opportunities for both women
generation opportunities and men expressed as income ratio of men
to women
1 Refer to the GFCR Gender Action Plan for applicable indicators

--- Table 1 on Page 127 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Economic |  | Potential Project Action | Example of gender-responsive indicators |  | 
 | Empowerment |  |  |  |  | 
 | Goals |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
1) Income and
equal pay |  |  | Closing of gender gaps in
•
earnings and income
generation opportunities |  | Qualitative increase in earning and income | 
 |  |  |  |  | generation opportunities for both women | 
 |  |  |  |  | and men expressed as income ratio of men | 
 |  |  |  |  | to women | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 127 ---
1) Income and
equal pay

--- Table 3 on Page 127 ---
Closing of gender gaps in
•
earnings and income
generation opportunities

=== PAGE 128 ===
Page 124
2) Economic Closing of gender gaps in • Number/proportion of women with
assets asset access, ownership improved access to financial mechanisms
and control; Absolute (equity investment, affordable loans, etc.)
increase in women’s •
relative control and • Evidence of the type of financial incentives
ownership of an asset used to encourage women’s entry into the
market (e.g., finance packages, tax benefits
and rebates, subsidies, pilot schemes,
partnerships with financial institutions, the
private sector or women’s associations)
3) Quality Closing of gender gaps in • Quantifiable increase in targeted and
employment labor market segregation diversified employment opportunities for
and paid and unpaid women and men (expressed as a ratio)
employment coupled with support for reproductive
responsibilities
Table 3: Social Empowerment Goals and Sample Indicators – SDG Assessment2
Social Empowerment Potential Project Action Example of gender-
responsive indicators
Goals
1) Individual and community Closing of gender gaps in • Quantitative indicators that
empowerment including women and men’s measure targets and quotas
meaningful participation and participations and for women’s participation and
leadership, Increase in leadership and access to leadership in community,
women networks and networks including their access to
social networks
organizations and agency
Closing of gender gaps in
•
leadership positions and
• Quantifiable increase in the
decision making at the
percentage of women making
individual, household,
decisions on behalf of their
community and political
families, communities and
level government
2) Applied skills and training Closing of gender gaps • Qualitative and verifiable
and stereotypes in increase in women’s and
women’s and men’s men’s relative confidence,
access to applied skills skills and know-how, e.g., on
and training appraising investments and
developing projects
•
• Evidence of the type of
incentives designed to recruit
2 Refer to the GFCR Gender Action Plan for applicable indicators

--- Table 1 on Page 128 ---
 |  |  |  | 
2) Economic
assets | Closing of gender gaps in
•
asset access, ownership
and control; Absolute
increase in women’s •
relative control and
•
ownership of an asset |  | Number/proportion of women with | 
 |  |  | improved access to financial mechanisms | 
 |  |  | (equity investment, affordable loans, etc.) | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Evidence of the type of financial incentives | 
 |  |  | used to encourage women’s entry into the | 
 |  |  | market (e.g., finance packages, tax benefits | 
 |  |  | and rebates, subsidies, pilot schemes, | 
 |  |  | partnerships with financial institutions, the | 
 |  |  | private sector or women’s associations) | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
3) Quality
employment | Closing of gender gaps in
•
labor market segregation
and paid and unpaid
employment |  | Quantifiable increase in targeted and | 
 |  |  | diversified employment opportunities for | 
 |  |  | women and men (expressed as a ratio) | 
 |  |  | coupled with support for reproductive | 
 |  |  | responsibilities | 
 |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 128 ---
2) Economic
assets

--- Table 3 on Page 128 ---
Closing of gender gaps in
•
asset access, ownership
and control; Absolute
increase in women’s •
relative control and
•
ownership of an asset

--- Table 4 on Page 128 ---
3) Quality
employment

--- Table 5 on Page 128 ---
Closing of gender gaps in
•
labor market segregation
and paid and unpaid
employment

--- Table 6 on Page 128 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Social Empowerment |  | Potential Project Action |  |  | Example of gender-
responsive indicators |  | 
 | Goals |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
1) Individual and community
empowerment including
meaningful participation and
leadership, Increase in
women networks and
organizations and agency |  |  |  | Closing of gender gaps in
• |  | Quantitative indicators that
measure targets and quotas
for women’s participation and
leadership in community,
including their access to
social networks
Quantifiable increase in the
percentage of women making
decisions on behalf of their
families, communities and
government |  | 
 |  |  |  | women and men’s |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | participations and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | leadership and access to |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | networks |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Closing of gender gaps in
• |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | leadership positions and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | •
decision making at the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | individual, household, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | community and political |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | level |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
2) Applied skills and training |  |  | Closing of gender gaps
•
and stereotypes in
women’s and men’s
access to applied skills
and training
•
• |  |  |  | Qualitative and verifiable | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | increase in women’s and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | men’s relative confidence, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | skills and know-how, e.g., on | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | appraising investments and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | developing projects | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Evidence of the type of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | incentives designed to recruit | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 7 on Page 128 ---
Example of gender-
responsive indicators

--- Table 8 on Page 128 ---
1) Individual and community
empowerment including
meaningful participation and
leadership, Increase in
women networks and
organizations and agency

--- Table 9 on Page 128 ---
Quantitative indicators that
measure targets and quotas
for women’s participation and
leadership in community,
including their access to
social networks

Quantifiable increase in the
percentage of women making
decisions on behalf of their
families, communities and
government

--- Table 10 on Page 128 ---
Closing of gender gaps
•
and stereotypes in
women’s and men’s
access to applied skills
and training

=== PAGE 129 ===
Page 125
women, increase their
capacity and provide career
development in targeted
sector agencies and service
providers
3) Better health and safety Improve health and • Number of beneficiaries, i.e.,
safety outcomes people with improved living
and occupational safety
conditions, including women
and women-headed
households
4) Access to infrastructure Closing of gender gaps in • Quantifiable increase in
services and technologies access to infrastructure women’s control over,
services decisions in, related skills
development and access to
infrastructure services
3. Fund Application
The Assessment provides a frame for the gender-related elements of the GFCR investment
portfolio, as well as for the Fund itself. Specifically, the Assessment has been used to inform the
following areas within the Fund:
• Governance – including roles and responsibilities to achieve GFCR gender equity targets;
• Competencies and capacity development – including ESMS Manager, gender specialist(s),
SDG specialist, and related training;
• Resource allocation, accessibility and budget – at both GFCR and invested project level, the
Gender Action Plan has dedicated budget allocated for its implementation;
• Operational procedures – at both GFCR and invested project level. This includes mandatory
inclusion of a gender assessment as part of ESIA (Environmental & Social Impact
Assessment) for each project, and gender-responsive stakeholder consultation
requirements and safeguards, based on the Gender policy as well as monitoring and
evaluation; and –
• Knowledge generation and communications.
Gender-related outputs at Fund GFCR Fund-level targets Status
level 07-2021
Gender and social inclusion Endorsement of gender and 100%
policies in place at fund level social inclusion policy by fund
management committee
Gender procedures and checklists Comprehensive ESMS with 100%
incorporated in fund’s ESMS updated gender procedures
Recruitment of women in projects Aspire for gender parity in GFCR TBD
project team, at least 40% of
employees will be female
including senior and decision-
making positions

--- Table 1 on Page 129 ---
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | women, increase their | 
 |  |  | capacity and provide career | 
 |  |  | development in targeted | 
 |  |  | sector agencies and service | 
 |  |  | providers | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
3) Better health and safety | Improve health and
•
safety outcomes |  | Number of beneficiaries, i.e., | 
 |  |  | people with improved living | 
 |  |  | and occupational safety | 
 |  |  | conditions, including women | 
 |  |  | and women-headed | 
 |  |  | households | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
4) Access to infrastructure
services and technologies | Closing of gender gaps in
•
access to infrastructure
services |  | Quantifiable increase in | 
 |  |  | women’s control over, | 
 |  |  | decisions in, related skills | 
 |  |  | development and access to | 
 |  |  | infrastructure services | 
 |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 129 ---
Improve health and
•
safety outcomes

--- Table 3 on Page 129 ---
4) Access to infrastructure
services and technologies

--- Table 4 on Page 129 ---
Closing of gender gaps in
•
access to infrastructure
services

--- Table 5 on Page 129 ---
 | Gender-related outputs at Fund |  | GFCR Fund-level targets |  | Status | 
 | level |  |  |  | 07-2021 | 
Gender and social inclusion
policies in place at fund level |  |  | Endorsement of gender and
social inclusion policy by fund
management committee | 100% |  | 
Gender procedures and checklists
incorporated in fund’s ESMS |  |  | Comprehensive ESMS with
updated gender procedures | 100% |  | 
Recruitment of women in projects |  |  | Aspire for gender parity in GFCR
project team, at least 40% of
employees will be female
including senior and decision-
making positions | TBD |  | 

=== PAGE 130 ===
Page 126
Recruitment of women in fund Aspire for gender parity, at least TBD
capacity-building, field and 25% of project field / monitoring
monitoring teams team members will be female
Ensure GFCR internal annual 100% annual compliance with TBD
reporting includes requirements, gender reporting at fund level
targets and reportable progress
Dedicate necessary finances and ESMS Manager, gender specialist
human resources to implement and SDG Specialists on GFCR
the Gender Policy and Gender team
Strategy
Dedicate resources required to Line item in budget for gender-
build and strengthen staff capacity related capacity building within
related to knowledge GFCR team
management, learning
Appoint gender Gender specialist available to
specialist/consultants as needed GFCR team as needed, additional
project consultants hired as
needed
Audit and verification teams have Gender training programme for
the expertise to review and assess audit and verification teams
project gender responsiveness
and impact
Table 1: GFCR Fund-level Assessment
3.1 Safeguards and Consultation
All projects considered by GFCR must have mandatory gender-sensitive and gender-responsive
procedures and strategies that adhere to the Gender policy which is aligned with internationally
acknowledges standards and best practices. These guidelines, aligned with the GFCR ESMS,
require project developers to complete gender-sensitive safeguards assessment and stakeholder
consultations as part of initial project design and feasibility. This is a mandatory foundational
requirement that applies to all GFCR projects, which includes:
Social Safeguarding Principles
3.1 Principle 1 – Human Rights
3.2 Principle 2 – Gender Equality and Women’s Rights
3.3 Principle 3 – Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions
3.4 Principle 4 – Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement (not
applicable, Cat B)
3.4.1 Sites of Cultural and Historical Heritage
3.4.2 Forced Eviction and Displacement
3.4.3 Land Tenure and Other Rights
3.4.4 Indigenous Peoples
3.5 Principle 5 – Corruption

--- Table 1 on Page 130 ---
 |  | 
Recruitment of women in fund
capacity-building, field and
monitoring teams | Aspire for gender parity, at least
25% of project field / monitoring
team members will be female | TBD
Ensure GFCR internal annual
reporting includes requirements,
targets and reportable progress | 100% annual compliance with
gender reporting at fund level | TBD
Dedicate necessary finances and
human resources to implement
the Gender Policy and Gender
Strategy | ESMS Manager, gender specialist
and SDG Specialists on GFCR
team | 
Dedicate resources required to
build and strengthen staff capacity
related to knowledge
management, learning | Line item in budget for gender-
related capacity building within
GFCR team | 
Appoint gender
specialist/consultants as needed | Gender specialist available to
GFCR team as needed, additional
project consultants hired as
needed | 
Audit and verification teams have
the expertise to review and assess
project gender responsiveness
and impact | Gender training programme for
audit and verification teams | 

=== PAGE 131 ===
Page 127
Economic Safeguarding Principles
3.6 Principle 6 – Economic Impacts
3.6.1 Labor Rights
3.6.2 Negative Economic Consequences
The gender safeguards can be found in the GFCR Gender Policy (Annex 2) and are applicable for
all projects. In addition, country and sector specific gender issues derived from gender analysis
will be also assessed. These may vary from project to project.
The gender safeguards also addresses gender-based violence against women. Hence, as part of
the safeguards assessment, risks of sexual harassment and/or any forms of violence against
women will be assessed.
To prevent gender-based violence, the developer shall implement policies, measures, a grievance
mechanism, and incident reporting. Incidents shall be monitored and reported on a regular basis.
Remedial actions have to be taken immediately. To grant equitable and effective access to
grievance redress mechanisms, the GFCR has multiple grievance mechanisms in place. The GFCR
grievance mechanisms can be found in Annex 11 and 12 of the ESMS.
3.2 Gender-Responsive Stakeholder Engagement and Consultation
Stakeholder Consultation provides a critical opportunity for a project developer to engage with
stakeholders in a gender sensitive manner and to share and promote understanding about and a
sense of ownership of the project. This may include exchanging views on risks (and mitigation),
impacts, benefits and opportunities. It provides a valuable entry point to improve the project
design and outcomes and help the project developer to identify and control external risks.
Stakeholder engagement and consultation shall consider different gender relationships and roles.
Women and men typically fulfill different roles and responsibilities depending on the context and
the country. Virtually no role is always exclusively performed by just women or men. Because
women often are assigned lower societal status relative to men, women tend to have lower
confidence, less influence and less involvement in the design, decisions and engagement with
projects. In developing a project, “taking gender issues into account would require that local
stakeholder consultation processes reach a wide range of community representatives in ways that
ensure equal and effective participation of women and men in consultation, and that gender issues
are fully factored into comprehensive social and environmental impact assessments.”xxxii
Engagement
Gender-responsive stakeholder engagement should take place before and throughout project
implementation so it can inform the design of the project to ensure that women can participate in
the design phase. In addition, engagement should be promoted throughout the implementation of
the project to address gender needs on a continuous basis. Gender-responsive stakeholder
engagement shall include the following activities:
1. Understand the gender context to identify engagement approaches:
• Engage with the community, in particular women, to determine the best way to
communicate with them.
• Engage with women in focus group settings facilitated by a female to capture views and
information.
• Use participatory techniques to capture gender specific information e.g. gender

=== PAGE 132 ===
Page 128
matrices, seasonal calendars, ranking, community mapping/transect walks.
• Identify and engage with women’s cooperatives/groups. Where they do not exist,
support the establishment of such groups.
2. Undertake stakeholder mapping/analysis and determine gender context:
• Includes identifying the key stakeholders and mapping and prioritizing them based on
level of impact, influence and interest.
• Data gathering through community leaders, government representatives and high-level
online research to understand the gender context (e.g. gender indicators/data on
education, labor force participation, health, agency/decision making and traditional and
cultural practices).
3. Develop engagement methods for stakeholder groups:
• Establish culturally appropriate engagement methods (including on the grievance
mechanism if relevant) for each stakeholder group with consideration for culture and
gender, based on the gender context.
• Engage with stakeholder groups on approaches determined to gather feedback and
suggestions.
4. Document approach in a Stakeholder Engagement Plan
I. Develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan that includes stakeholder mapping/analysis,
gender context and engagement methods.
Consultation
The following considerations should be made that relate to gender equality in Stakeholder
Consultation planning:
- What measures and actions need to be put in place to ensure equal gender participation in
Stakeholder Consultations. How should inputs and insights from women and men be sought
out, listened to, considered, addressed and documented?
- Is it necessary to make any specific arrangements to ensure that all constituencies are engaged
in the consultation arrangements to not only foster inclusive participation of women but also
avoid potentially negative consequences? (for example, speak to women and men separately;
have focus groups for women and focus groups for men before gathering them together to
ensure their meaningful participation; adapt timing schedule to men’s and women’s working
schedules)
Examples of gender-sensitive consultation approaches are:
- FAO: SEAGA (Socio-economic and Gender Analysis): An approach based on an analysis of socio-
economic patterns and participatory identification of women’s and men’s priorities. The
objective of the SEAGA approach is to close the gaps between what people need and what
development delivers.
- CARE Canada: Stakeholder and institution mapping.
- USAID: When to use a Gender stakeholder analysis. Integrating Gender into climate change
projects ENERGIA: Elizabeth Cecelski; Soma Dutta (2011); Mainstreaming Gender in Energy
Projects: A Practical Handbook
3.3 Gender-Responsive Project Design
It is impossible to integrate gender equality into projects or activities without clearly
understanding gender issues within the targeted population. Gender-responsive design requires
a gender analysis to understand the social, economic and political factors underlying climate
change-exacerbated gender inequality, and the potential contribution of women and men to

=== PAGE 133 ===
Page 129
mitigate and adapt to climate change in the project. The analysis also allows project developers to
identify strategies, action and indicators to better assess how initiatives have engaged with or
impacted different groups.
Building on the safeguards and consultations, GFCR will require prospective projects to establish
and commit to the following mandatory, minimum gender-responsive requirements:xxxiii
• Collect, analyze and apply sex-disaggregated data and using gender indicators to inform
gender-responsive monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning on programmatic
activities;
• Conduct gender analyses and applying key issues and recommendations identified to
inform gender-responsive project design, budgeting, staffing, implementation, monitoring
and evaluation;
• Analyze risks that the project may experience or pose, putting measures in place to ensure
activities do not exacerbate existing gender-related inequalities, including gender-based
violence, and seize opportunities to address gender gaps and support empowerment of
women;
• Structure inclusive and gender-sensitive project teams that demonstrate appropriate
capacities and technical expertise to support gender-responsive action;
• Ensure women and men have equal opportunities in terms of participation, decision-
making and benefits, throughout the identification, design, implementation, monitoring
and evaluation of activities;
• Allocate sufficient resources for specific activities, technical support and/or other actions
to improve gender equality considerations, including the meaningful engagement of
diverse stakeholders and beneficiaries;
GFCR may direct and/or support should an expert stakeholder opinion (with a specific emphasis
on gender and environment expertise) be required to support the gender safeguards assessment
or project design process, depending on project type, scale and context.
3.4 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
The GFCR has a M&E framework and processes in place. All GFCR projects must include mandatory
impact targets, a gender-sensitive framework, mandatory, and minimum gender-responsive
elements. The project’s monitoring framework includes gender-responsive targets and indicators
to monitor gender equality results against the established baseline.
M&E occurs at every stage of the project, from initial feasibility, project design, preliminary
design review, implementation and ongoing performance review. Monitoring is led by the ESMS
Manager and external consultants if appropriate.

=== PAGE 134 ===
Page 130
4. Sources and Endnotes
• ACDI/VOCA- Gender Analysis, Assessment, and Audit Manual & Toolkit
• Harvard- Gender Roles Framework or Gender Analysis Framework
• FAO- Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis Field Handbook
• Gender Analysis in Natural Resource Management | Land Portal
• https://www.pacificclimatechange.net/document/gender-analysischecklist-food-security-
and-climate-change-within-programme-or-project
• How to Conduct a Gender Analysis | USAID ASSIST Project
• The World Bank’s PPP website with collated resources across the following sectors:
Agriculture, Education, Energy, Health, Information and Communications Technology (ICT),
Transport, Water and Sanitation. See: http://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-
partnership/ppp-sector/genderimpacts-ppps/sector-specific-materials/sector-specific-
materials
• Asian Development Bank (2013) Tool Kit on Gender Equality Results and Indicators
https://www.adb.org/documents/tool-kit-gender-equality-resultsand-indicators
• The Gender Data Portal for the latest sex-disaggregated data and gender statistics covering
demography, education, health, economic opportunities, public life and decision-making, and
agency, see http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/
• GACC tool see http://cleancookstoves.org/resources/490.html
• UN Women (2020). COVID-19 and gender: What do we know; what do we need to know?
https://data.unwomen.org/features/covid-19-and-gender-what-do-we-know-what-do-we-
need-know
• UN Women COVID-19: Emerging gender data and why it matters
https://data.unwomen.org/resources/covid-19-emerging-gender-data-and-why-it-matters
• WHO 2019, data from National Health Workers Accounts for 91 countries for physician data
and 61 countries for
nursing data. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/311314/WHO-HIS-HWF-
Gender-WP1-2019.1-eng.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
• UN Women (2020). Gender equality: Women’s rights in review 25 years after Beijing.
https://www.unwomen.org/-
• /media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2020/gender-equality-
womens-rights-in-reviewen.pdf?la=en&vs=934
• World bank estimates based on International Labor Organization, ILOSTAT database. Data
retrieved in March 1, 2020.

=== PAGE 135 ===
Page 131
ANNEX 1 GFCR GENDER ACTION PLAN
GFCR Gender Action Plan
Impact Statement: The Global Fund for Coral Reefs – Investment Window (GFCR) seeks to enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of coral
reef ecosystems, communities, productive systems and business that depend on them by investing in (i) sustainable ocean production, (ii)
ecotourism and (iii) sustainable infrastructure, while maintaining a gender-responsive framework throughout project design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation. The model of the fund is intended to lead to greater resilience and adaptive capacity of women and girls living in coral
reef-dependent communities through the attainment of three main impacts:
1. Empowerment of women and girls to promote independence and enable them to become agents of change;
2. Better health outcomes and improved physical and emotional safety of women and girls;
3. Sustainable livelihoods for women and girls.
Outcome Statement: By demonstrating how to de-risk investment (through blended finance, rigorous safeguards, and purposeful gender-
responsive planning and integration) for private capital in additional, high-integrity projects, GFCR seeks to achieve the following gender-responsive
outcomes:
• Empowerment from active inclusion of women in consultation processes and positions of leadership, explicit consideration of gender
disaggregated-needs in project design, capacity building of women and girls to enable greater roles in environmental stewardship, and
greater financial independence.
• Formal employment and improved livelihoods for women and girls through $500 million in blended public/private capital, improved working
conditions and greater gender parity in pay, and additional incomes that increase the diversity of household incomes, thereby reducing
dependence on individual livelihood activities and enhancing financial resilience which is then less susceptible to periodic shocks.
• Improved health and reduced disease prevalence from sustainable infrastructure limiting exposure to pollution and waste and improved
nutrition from enhanced food security and increased protein availability.
• Improved capacity of communities to adapt to and cope with shocks to reduce safety risks to women and girls and gender violence.
• Increased gender equity, through the GFCR Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), mandatory project safeguards, gender-
responsive project consultation framework (including expert consultation on including gender-based violence safeguards throughout
projects, particularly those engaging in high-risk communities), and mandatory gender-responsive project design (SDG 5).
• Strengthened institutional and regulatory frameworks on regional and national level through alignment of GFCR projects with national NDCs
and prevailing gender policies.

--- Table 1 on Page 135 ---
 | GFCR Gender Action Plan | 
Impact Statement: The Global Fund for Coral Reefs – Investment Window (GFCR) seeks to enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of coral
reef ecosystems, communities, productive systems and business that depend on them by investing in (i) sustainable ocean production, (ii)
ecotourism and (iii) sustainable infrastructure, while maintaining a gender-responsive framework throughout project design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation. The model of the fund is intended to lead to greater resilience and adaptive capacity of women and girls living in coral
reef-dependent communities through the attainment of three main impacts:
1. Empowerment of women and girls to promote independence and enable them to become agents of change;
2. Better health outcomes and improved physical and emotional safety of women and girls;
3. Sustainable livelihoods for women and girls.
Outcome Statement: By demonstrating how to de-risk investment (through blended finance, rigorous safeguards, and purposeful gender-
responsive planning and integration) for private capital in additional, high-integrity projects, GFCR seeks to achieve the following gender-responsive
outcomes:
• Empowerment from active inclusion of women in consultation processes and positions of leadership, explicit consideration of gender
disaggregated-needs in project design, capacity building of women and girls to enable greater roles in environmental stewardship, and
greater financial independence.
• Formal employment and improved livelihoods for women and girls through $500 million in blended public/private capital, improved working
conditions and greater gender parity in pay, and additional incomes that increase the diversity of household incomes, thereby reducing
dependence on individual livelihood activities and enhancing financial resilience which is then less susceptible to periodic shocks.
• Improved health and reduced disease prevalence from sustainable infrastructure limiting exposure to pollution and waste and improved
nutrition from enhanced food security and increased protein availability.
• Improved capacity of communities to adapt to and cope with shocks to reduce safety risks to women and girls and gender violence.
• Increased gender equity, through the GFCR Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), mandatory project safeguards, gender-
responsive project consultation framework (including expert consultation on including gender-based violence safeguards throughout
projects, particularly those engaging in high-risk communities), and mandatory gender-responsive project design (SDG 5).
• Strengthened institutional and regulatory frameworks on regional and national level through alignment of GFCR projects with national NDCs
and prevailing gender policies. |  | 

=== PAGE 136 ===
Page 132
Activities Indicators and Targets3 Timeline Responsibilities and
Costs
Output(s) Statement: M&E analysis confirms gender-responsive program design and projects improve empowerment of women and girls
to promote independence and enable them to become agents of change. (NOTE: project-level assessments, and hence specific indicators and
targets, can only be established once the GFCR host countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets have been identified where
known, or if not, are exemplars.)
Promote women entrepreneurship through capacity building Quantifiable participation of Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
women in all capacity duration of with support from
This may be directly related to: building activities, at least the EEs
• Enhance livelihoods connected to coral reefs (e.g. technology for cold 40% investment
storage in coral reef fisheries, shared business centers, etc.) cycle of Costs included as part
• Support coral reef communities that seek to shift livelihoods to be Quantifiable participation of projects), plus of project budgets
less dependent on coral reefs (e.g. alternative livelihood projects) women in capacity building any follow-on
• Build adaptive capacity through enhancing assets (e.g. savings activities related to coral investment
groups or microcredit) and agency, networks, learning, and address reef environments, at least period
broader interrelated vulnerabilities (e.g. health), or connect to 60% permitted
strategies to cope with or adapt to risks and threats related to coral under the
reefs (e.g. strategies to cope with salt water intrusion) Quantifiable participation of fund’s LPA
• Provide capacity building for women-led tourism businesses and women in capacity building
expansion activities (e.g. support diversification of women’s market activities related to
access and fair trade for tourism products and services) entrepreneurship, at least
60%
• Promote a more empowered waste sector, with improved quality of
life for the women engaged in waste management through capacity
building, provision of equipment/ vehicles, training and awareness
building, financial assistance and health insurance
Expand business opportunities for women across different sectors Quantifiable increase in Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
targeted and diversified duration of with support from
This may be directly related to: business opportunities for the EEs
3 Targets will be rationalized by baseline data collected prior to implementation of projects.

--- Table 1 on Page 136 ---
Activities |  |  | Indicators and Targets3 |  |  | Timeline |  |  |  | Responsibilities and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Costs | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output(s) Statement: M&E analysis confirms gender-responsive program design and projects improve empowerment of women and girls |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | to promote independence and enable them to become agents of change. (NOTE: project-level assessments, and hence specific indicators and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | targets, can only be established once the GFCR host countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets have been identified where |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | known, or if not, are exemplars.) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Promote women entrepreneurship through capacity building |  | Quantifiable participation of
women in all capacity
building activities, at least
40%
Quantifiable participation of
women in capacity building
activities related to coral
reef environments, at least
60%
Quantifiable participation of
women in capacity building
activities related to
entrepreneurship, at least
60% |  |  | Years 1-6 (the
duration of
the
investment
cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA |  |  | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets | Project Developers | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | with support from | 
 | This may be directly related to: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | EEs | 
 | • Enhance livelihoods connected to coral reefs (e.g. technology for cold |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | storage in coral reef fisheries, shared business centers, etc.) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Costs included as part | 
 | • Support coral reef communities that seek to shift livelihoods to be |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | of project budgets | 
 | less dependent on coral reefs (e.g. alternative livelihood projects) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Build adaptive capacity through enhancing assets (e.g. savings |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | groups or microcredit) and agency, networks, learning, and address |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | broader interrelated vulnerabilities (e.g. health), or connect to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | strategies to cope with or adapt to risks and threats related to coral |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | reefs (e.g. strategies to cope with salt water intrusion) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Provide capacity building for women-led tourism businesses and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | expansion activities (e.g. support diversification of women’s market |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | access and fair trade for tourism products and services) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Promote a more empowered waste sector, with improved quality of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | life for the women engaged in waste management through capacity |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | building, provision of equipment/ vehicles, training and awareness |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | building, financial assistance and health insurance |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Expand business opportunities for women across different sectors |  |  | Quantifiable increase in |  |  | Years 1-6 (the |  |  | Project Developers | 
 |  |  |  | targeted and diversified |  |  | duration of |  |  | with support from | 
 | This may be directly related to: |  |  | business opportunities for |  |  | the |  |  | EEs | 

--- Table 2 on Page 136 ---
Quantifiable participation of
women in all capacity
building activities, at least
40%

Quantifiable participation of
women in capacity building
activities related to coral
reef environments, at least
60%

Quantifiable participation of
women in capacity building
activities related to
entrepreneurship, at least
60%





--- Table 3 on Page 136 ---
Years 1-6 (the
duration of
the
investment
cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA

=== PAGE 137 ===
Page 133
• Support women in diversifying their business activities (of particular women and men, at least an investment
importance in regions where cyclones, overfishing and rising seas annual increase of 10% cycle of Costs included as part
threaten livelihoods) and/ or expand business activities vertically projects), plus of project budgets
across the supply chain (e.g. from pre-harvest, harvest, to post- any follow-on
harvest in fishing) to generate alternative revenues to fishing investment
• Support women-led tourism businesses and expansion activities (e.g. period
support diversification of women’s market access and fair trade for permitted
tourism products and services) under the
• Promote expansion of business opportunities for women through fund’s LPA
infrastructure projects (e.g. agricultural activities around the built
infrastructure to generate additional income)
Create employment opportunities for women across different sectors Percentage of women in Years 1-6 (the Costs included as part
direct and indirect jobs duration of of project budgets
This may be directly related to: created, 50% the
• Create job opportunities for women in the sustainable fishing investment
industry cycle of
• Create direct and indirect job opportunities for women in ecotourism projects), plus
(e.g. ecotourism or hospitality activities and services such as diving any follow-on
schools, restaurants, eco lodges, etc.) investment
• Create direct and indirect opportunities for women through period
infrastructure projects (e.g. sorting and recycling as part of the waste permitted
processing activities or waste-to-energy projects) under the
fund’s LPA
Provide training on skills and awareness entrepreneurship, self- Qualitative and verifiable Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
confidence and business opportunities increase in women’s and duration of with support from
men’s relative confidence, the EEs
This may include interventions that seek to: skills and know-how, e.g., on investment
• Conserve coral reef resources that may directly impact livelihood appraising investments and cycle of Costs included as part
options for women and men (e.g., Marine Protected Areas) developing projects, at least projects), plus of project budgets
• Enhance sustainable management of marine and land activities (e.g., an annual increase of 10% any follow-on
fishing, farming) to ensure the sustainability of livelihoods and of investment
resources period
permitted

--- Table 1 on Page 137 ---
 | • Support women in diversifying their business activities (of particular |  | women and men, at least an
annual increase of 10% | investment
cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA |  |  | Costs included as part
of project budgets
 | importance in regions where cyclones, overfishing and rising seas |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | threaten livelihoods) and/ or expand business activities vertically |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | across the supply chain (e.g. from pre-harvest, harvest, to post- |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | harvest in fishing) to generate alternative revenues to fishing |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Support women-led tourism businesses and expansion activities (e.g. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | support diversification of women’s market access and fair trade for |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | tourism products and services) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Promote expansion of business opportunities for women through |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | infrastructure projects (e.g. agricultural activities around the built |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | infrastructure to generate additional income) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Create employment opportunities for women across different sectors |  | Percentage of women in
direct and indirect jobs
created, 50% |  | Years 1-6 (the |  | Costs included as part
of project budgets
 |  |  |  |  | duration of |  | 
 | This may be directly related to: |  |  |  | the |  | 
 | • Create job opportunities for women in the sustainable fishing |  |  |  | investment |  | 
 | industry |  |  |  | cycle of |  | 
 | • Create direct and indirect job opportunities for women in ecotourism |  |  |  | projects), plus |  | 
 | (e.g. ecotourism or hospitality activities and services such as diving |  |  |  | any follow-on |  | 
 | schools, restaurants, eco lodges, etc.) |  |  |  | investment |  | 
 | • Create direct and indirect opportunities for women through |  |  |  | period |  | 
 | infrastructure projects (e.g. sorting and recycling as part of the waste |  |  |  | permitted |  | 
 | processing activities or waste-to-energy projects) |  |  |  | under the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | fund’s LPA |  | 
Provide training on skills and awareness entrepreneurship, self-
confidence and business opportunities
This may include interventions that seek to:
• Conserve coral reef resources that may directly impact livelihood
options for women and men (e.g., Marine Protected Areas)
• Enhance sustainable management of marine and land activities (e.g.,
fishing, farming) to ensure the sustainability of livelihoods and of
resources | Provide training on skills and awareness entrepreneurship, self- |  | Qualitative and verifiable
increase in women’s and
men’s relative confidence,
skills and know-how, e.g., on
appraising investments and
developing projects, at least
an annual increase of 10% |  | Years 1-6 (the |  | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets
 | confidence and business opportunities |  |  |  | duration of |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | the |  | 
 | This may include interventions that seek to: |  |  |  | investment |  | 
 | • Conserve coral reef resources that may directly impact livelihood |  |  |  | cycle of |  | 
 | options for women and men (e.g., Marine Protected Areas) |  |  |  | projects), plus |  | 
 | • Enhance sustainable management of marine and land activities (e.g., |  |  |  | any follow-on |  | 
 | fishing, farming) to ensure the sustainability of livelihoods and of |  |  |  | investment |  | 
 | resources |  |  |  | period |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | permitted |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 137 ---
women and men, at least an
annual increase of 10%

--- Table 3 on Page 137 ---
investment
cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA

--- Table 4 on Page 137 ---

Costs included as part
of project budgets



--- Table 5 on Page 137 ---
Percentage of women in
direct and indirect jobs
created, 50%

--- Table 6 on Page 137 ---
Costs included as part
of project budgets


--- Table 7 on Page 137 ---
Qualitative and verifiable
increase in women’s and
men’s relative confidence,
skills and know-how, e.g., on
appraising investments and
developing projects, at least
an annual increase of 10%

--- Table 8 on Page 137 ---
Project Developers
with support from
EEs

Costs included as part
of project budgets



=== PAGE 138 ===
Page 134
• Provide women with training and formal education to improve the under the
efficiency, profitability and sustainability of their business activities fund’s LPA
in the fishing sector and to improve their positions in the post-
harvest activities to increase their bargaining power (e.g. education
on fish preservation, marketing, etc.).
• Offer education and training in the tourism sector to promote
women into high-level employment (incl. training on soft skills,
networking and high-level training for career progression)
• Provide training on waste materials for better sorting and recycling
in the waste sector
• Promote women’s participation in investment appraisal and project
design through providing project-specific skills and know-how
Include women in the broader community, civil society organizations, Quantitative indicators that Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
and at project level measure targets and quotas duration of with support from
for women’s participation the EEs
This may include women’s participation in decision-making spaces in the and leadership in investment
private sector, public sector tourism bodies, agencies, and trade unions, for community and at project cycle of Costs included as part
instance, in the fishing or tourism industry. level, at least 20% projects), plus of project budgets
any follow-on
This may include activities that seek to: investment
period
• Strengthen women’s role to participate in decision-making processes
permitted
and increase control in the value chain and profit margins in the
under the
fishing sector
fund’s LPA
• Promote gender equality strategies and policies for the tourism sector
through women’s involvement in the private sector, public sector
tourism bodies, agencies, trade unions, tourism networks and
cooperatives.
Promote decision-making of women and financial independence Quantifiable increase in the Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
percentage of women duration of with support from
This may include activities that seek to: making decisions on behalf the EEs
of their families and investment

--- Table 1 on Page 138 ---
 | • Provide women with training and formal education to improve the |  |  |  |  | under the
fund’s LPA |  |  |  |  | 
 | efficiency, profitability and sustainability of their business activities |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | in the fishing sector and to improve their positions in the post- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | harvest activities to increase their bargaining power (e.g. education |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | on fish preservation, marketing, etc.). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Offer education and training in the tourism sector to promote |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | women into high-level employment (incl. training on soft skills, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | networking and high-level training for career progression) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Provide training on waste materials for better sorting and recycling |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | in the waste sector |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Promote women’s participation in investment appraisal and project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | design through providing project-specific skills and know-how |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Include women in the broader community, civil society organizations, |  | Quantitative indicators that
measure targets and quotas
for women’s participation
and leadership in
community and at project
level, at least 20% |  |  | Years 1-6 (the
duration of
the
investment
cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA |  |  | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets |  | 
 | and at project level |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | This may include women’s participation in decision-making spaces in the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | private sector, public sector tourism bodies, agencies, and trade unions, for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | instance, in the fishing or tourism industry. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | This may include activities that seek to: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Strengthen women’s role to participate in decision-making processes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and increase control in the value chain and profit margins in the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | fishing sector |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Promote gender equality strategies and policies for the tourism sector |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | through women’s involvement in the private sector, public sector |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | tourism bodies, agencies, trade unions, tourism networks and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | cooperatives. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Promote decision-making of women and financial independence
This may include activities that seek to: | Promote decision-making of women and financial independence |  |  | Quantifiable increase in the |  |  | Years 1-6 (the |  |  | Project Developers | 
 |  |  |  | percentage of women |  |  | duration of |  |  | with support from | 
 | This may include activities that seek to: |  |  | making decisions on behalf |  |  | the |  |  | EEs | 
 |  |  |  | of their families and |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 138 ---
under the
fund’s LPA

--- Table 3 on Page 138 ---
Quantitative indicators that
measure targets and quotas
for women’s participation
and leadership in
community and at project
level, at least 20%

--- Table 4 on Page 138 ---
Years 1-6 (the
duration of
the
investment
cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA

--- Table 5 on Page 138 ---
Project Developers
with support from
EEs

Costs included as part
of project budgets



=== PAGE 139 ===
Page 135
• Offer competence training for financial decision-making and educate communities, at least an cycle of Costs included as part
women on their rights annual increase of 10% projects), plus of project budgets
• Build networks and connections between women to provide sources any follow-on
of peer support Qualitative increase in investment
earning and income period
generation opportunities for permitted
both women and men under the
expressed as income ratio of fund’s LPA
men to women, at least an
annual increase of 10%
Provide access to financial services, infrastructure services and Number/proportion of Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
technologies to communities and stakeholders women with improved duration of with support from
access to financial the EEs
This may include activities that seek to: mechanisms (equity investment
investment, affordable cycle of Costs included as part
• Promote gender-responsive consultation and engagement on fund
loans, etc.) , at least 50% projects), plus of project budgets
and project level (incl. promoting GFCR across women networks)
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA
Output(s) Statement: M&E analysis confirms gender-responsive program design improves health outcomes and improved physical and
emotional safety of women and girls. (NOTE: project-level assessments, and hence specific gender indicators and targets, can only be established
once the GFCR host countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets are identified where known, or if not, are exemplars.)
Improved conditions for better health and the reduction of diseases (Water borne) disease Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
prevalence (gender- duration of with support from
disaggregated), at least an the EEs
This may include activities that seek to:
annual decrease of 10% investment
cycle of Costs included as part
• Create awareness and educate on health, safety, and disease
Rates of childhood stunting projects), plus of project budgets
prevention to empower individuals and communities to make
(gender-disaggregated), at any follow-on
changes that reduce the risk of developing chronic diseases and
investment

--- Table 1 on Page 139 ---
• Offer competence training for financial decision-making and educate
women on their rights
• Build networks and connections between women to provide sources
of peer support |  |  | communities, at least an |  | cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA |  |  | Costs included as part
of project budgets |  | 
 |  |  | annual increase of 10% |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Qualitative increase in |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | earning and income |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | generation opportunities for |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | both women and men |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | expressed as income ratio of |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | men to women, at least an |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | annual increase of 10% |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Provide access to financial services, infrastructure services and
technologies to communities and stakeholders
This may include activities that seek to:
• Promote gender-responsive consultation and engagement on fund
and project level (incl. promoting GFCR across women networks) |  | Number/proportion of
women with improved
access to financial
mechanisms (equity
investment, affordable
loans, etc.) , at least 50% | Number/proportion of |  |  | Years 1-6 (the |  | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets |  | 
 |  |  | women with improved |  |  | duration of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | access to financial |  |  | the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | mechanisms (equity |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | investment, affordable |  |  | cycle of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | loans, etc.) , at least 50% |  |  | projects), plus |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | any follow-on |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | period |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | permitted |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | under the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | fund’s LPA |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output(s) Statement: M&E analysis confirms gender-responsive program design improves health outcomes and improved physical and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | emotional safety of women and girls. (NOTE: project-level assessments, and hence specific gender indicators and targets, can only be established |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | once the GFCR host countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets are identified where known, or if not, are exemplars.) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Improved conditions for better health and the reduction of diseases
This may include activities that seek to:
• Create awareness and educate on health, safety, and disease
prevention to empower individuals and communities to make
changes that reduce the risk of developing chronic diseases and | Improved conditions for better health and the reduction of diseases | (Water borne) disease
prevalence (gender-
disaggregated), at least an
annual decrease of 10%
Rates of childhood stunting
(gender-disaggregated), at |  |  |  | Years 1-6 (the |  | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets | Project Developers | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | duration of |  |  | with support from | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | the |  |  | EEs | 
 | This may include activities that seek to: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | cycle of |  |  | Costs included as part | 
 | • Create awareness and educate on health, safety, and disease |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | projects), plus |  |  | of project budgets | 
 | prevention to empower individuals and communities to make |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | any follow-on |  |  |  | 
 | changes that reduce the risk of developing chronic diseases and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 139 ---
• Offer competence training for financial decision-making and educate
women on their rights
• Build networks and connections between women to provide sources
of peer support

--- Table 3 on Page 139 ---
cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA

--- Table 4 on Page 139 ---
Costs included as part
of project budgets



--- Table 5 on Page 139 ---
Provide access to financial services, infrastructure services and
technologies to communities and stakeholders

This may include activities that seek to:
• Promote gender-responsive consultation and engagement on fund
and project level (incl. promoting GFCR across women networks)


--- Table 6 on Page 139 ---
Project Developers
with support from
EEs

Costs included as part
of project budgets



--- Table 7 on Page 139 ---
(Water borne) disease
prevalence (gender-
disaggregated), at least an
annual decrease of 10%

Rates of childhood stunting
(gender-disaggregated), at

=== PAGE 140 ===
Page 136
other morbidities (e.g. awareness campaigns that are aimed to least an annual decrease of period
reduce open defecation, promote personal hygiene, support healthy 10% permitted
nutrition for child growth and development, etc.) under the
• Interventions that address women’s vulnerability related to health fund’s LPA
and safety risks in a participatory approach, involving the women
concerned and based on an examination of the local situation to
define gender-responsive solutions
Reduction of gender-based violence among project stakeholders Number of reported gender- Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
based violence incidents duration of with support from
This may include activities that seek to: (gender-disaggregated) (e.g. the EEs
through grievance investment
• Create awareness of sexual harassment and gender-based violence mechanism), below 10% of cycle of Costs included as part
(particularly in the tourism industry) and develop appropriate incidents reported shall be projects), plus of project budgets
instruments to reduce harassment and violence gender-related any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA
Provide healthy and safe (work) environment Number of health and safety Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
incidents (gender- duration of with support from
This may include activities that seek to: disaggregated), at least an the EEs
annual decrease of 10% investment
• Develop gender-responsive measures (e.g. Personal Protective cycle of Costs included as part
Equipment for women) projects), plus of project budgets
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA
Implement stakeholder outreach and engagement activities related to Qualitative assessment of Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
the above supported by proper safeguards and expert input engagement activities duration of with support from
results, at least medium the EEs

--- Table 1 on Page 140 ---
 | other morbidities (e.g. awareness campaigns that are aimed to |  | least an annual decrease of
10% |  |  | period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA |  |  |  |  | 
 | reduce open defecation, promote personal hygiene, support healthy |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | nutrition for child growth and development, etc.) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Interventions that address women’s vulnerability related to health |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and safety risks in a participatory approach, involving the women |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | concerned and based on an examination of the local situation to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | define gender-responsive solutions |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Reduction of gender-based violence among project stakeholders
This may include activities that seek to:
• Create awareness of sexual harassment and gender-based violence
(particularly in the tourism industry) and develop appropriate
instruments to reduce harassment and violence | Reduction of gender-based violence among project stakeholders |  | Number of reported gender-
based violence incidents
(gender-disaggregated) (e.g.
through grievance
mechanism), below 10% of
incidents reported shall be
gender-related |  |  |  | Years 1-6 (the |  | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | duration of |  |  |  | 
 | This may include activities that seek to: |  |  |  |  |  | the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 
 | • Create awareness of sexual harassment and gender-based violence |  |  |  |  |  | cycle of |  |  |  | 
 | (particularly in the tourism industry) and develop appropriate |  |  |  |  |  | projects), plus |  |  |  | 
 | instruments to reduce harassment and violence |  |  |  |  |  | any follow-on |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | period |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | permitted |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | under the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | fund’s LPA |  |  |  | 
Provide healthy and safe (work) environment
This may include activities that seek to:
• Develop gender-responsive measures (e.g. Personal Protective
Equipment for women) |  |  | Number of health and safety
incidents (gender-
disaggregated), at least an
annual decrease of 10% |  |  |  | Years 1-6 (the |  | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | duration of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | cycle of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | projects), plus |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | any follow-on |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | period |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | permitted |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | under the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | fund’s LPA |  |  |  | 
 | Implement stakeholder outreach and engagement activities related to |  |  | Qualitative assessment of |  |  | Years 1-6 (the |  |  | Project Developers | 
 | the above supported by proper safeguards and expert input |  |  | engagement activities |  |  | duration of |  |  | with support from | 
 |  |  |  | results, at least medium |  |  | the |  |  | EEs | 

--- Table 2 on Page 140 ---
least an annual decrease of
10%

--- Table 3 on Page 140 ---
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA

--- Table 4 on Page 140 ---
Number of reported gender-
based violence incidents
(gender-disaggregated) (e.g.
through grievance
mechanism), below 10% of
incidents reported shall be
gender-related

--- Table 5 on Page 140 ---
Project Developers
with support from
EEs

Costs included as part
of project budgets


--- Table 6 on Page 140 ---
Provide healthy and safe (work) environment

This may include activities that seek to:

• Develop gender-responsive measures (e.g. Personal Protective
Equipment for women)


--- Table 7 on Page 140 ---
Number of health and safety
incidents (gender-
disaggregated), at least an
annual decrease of 10%

--- Table 8 on Page 140 ---
Project Developers
with support from
EEs

Costs included as part
of project budgets


=== PAGE 141 ===
Page 137
This may include activities, such as: satisfaction from investment
• Gender-responsive consultation and engagement can help identify stakeholder participants cycle of Costs included as part
project design needs projects), plus of project budgets
any follow-on
• Consider gender aspects within the planning, delivery and
investment
management stages of the infrastructure life cycle to ensure that the
period
infrastructure built is able to guarantee equal quality services
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA
Output(s) Statement: M&E analysis confirms gender-responsive program design and projects to enhance sustainable livelihoods for
women and girls. (NOTE: project-level assessments, and hence specific indicators and targets, can only be established once the GFCR host
countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets have been identified where known, or if not, are exemplars.)
Provide capacity building and applied skills and training for project Number of gender related Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
developers and project stakeholders to include women in the trainings held, at least one duration of with support from
workforce per project per year the EEs
investment
This may include activities that seek to: Percentage of women cycle of Costs included as part
• For the waste sector, women shall be provided with more formalized employed, at least 20% projects), plus of project budgets
work, implying the provision of the benefits and stability of formal any follow-on
employment but the flexibility of the entrepreneurship model. investment
period
• Build awareness of social rights (access to education, legal recourse
permitted
against crime, access to health care etc.) and a safe means to exercise
under the
such rights.
fund’s LPA
• Provide skills training and equipment to increase the female
workforce
Promote training and leadership among women Percentage of women that Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
participated in a training, at duration of with support from
This may be directly related to activities that: least 20% the EEs
• Provide women with training and formal education to improve the investment
efficiency, profitability and sustainability of their business activities cycle of Costs included as part
in the fishing sector and to improve their positions in the post- projects), plus of project budgets

--- Table 1 on Page 141 ---
This may include activities, such as:
• Gender-responsive consultation and engagement can help identify
project design needs
• Consider gender aspects within the planning, delivery and
management stages of the infrastructure life cycle to ensure that the
infrastructure built is able to guarantee equal quality services |  |  | satisfaction from
stakeholder participants |  | investment |  | Costs included as part
of project budgets |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | cycle of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | projects), plus |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | any follow-on |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | period |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | permitted |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | under the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | fund’s LPA |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output(s) Statement: M&E analysis confirms gender-responsive program design and projects to enhance sustainable livelihoods for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | women and girls. (NOTE: project-level assessments, and hence specific indicators and targets, can only be established once the GFCR host |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets have been identified where known, or if not, are exemplars.) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Provide capacity building and applied skills and training for project |  | Number of gender related
trainings held, at least one
per project per year
Percentage of women
employed, at least 20% | Years 1-6 (the
duration of
the
investment
cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA |  |  | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets | Project Developers | 
 | developers and project stakeholders to include women in the |  |  |  |  |  |  | with support from | 
 | workforce |  |  |  |  |  |  | EEs | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | This may include activities that seek to: |  |  |  |  |  |  | Costs included as part | 
 | • For the waste sector, women shall be provided with more formalized |  |  |  |  |  |  | of project budgets | 
 | work, implying the provision of the benefits and stability of formal |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | employment but the flexibility of the entrepreneurship model. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Build awareness of social rights (access to education, legal recourse |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | against crime, access to health care etc.) and a safe means to exercise |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | such rights. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Provide skills training and equipment to increase the female |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | workforce |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Promote training and leadership among women |  | Percentage of women that
participated in a training, at
least 20% |  | Years 1-6 (the |  |  | Project Developers | 
 |  |  |  |  | duration of |  |  | with support from | 
 | This may be directly related to activities that: |  |  |  | the |  |  | EEs | 
 | • Provide women with training and formal education to improve the |  |  |  | investment |  |  |  | 
 | efficiency, profitability and sustainability of their business activities |  |  |  | cycle of |  |  | Costs included as part | 
 | in the fishing sector and to improve their positions in the post- |  |  |  | projects), plus |  |  | of project budgets | 

--- Table 2 on Page 141 ---
This may include activities, such as:
• Gender-responsive consultation and engagement can help identify
project design needs
• Consider gender aspects within the planning, delivery and
management stages of the infrastructure life cycle to ensure that the
infrastructure built is able to guarantee equal quality services


--- Table 3 on Page 141 ---
satisfaction from
stakeholder participants

--- Table 4 on Page 141 ---

Costs included as part
of project budgets


--- Table 5 on Page 141 ---
Number of gender related
trainings held, at least one
per project per year

Percentage of women
employed, at least 20%


--- Table 6 on Page 141 ---
Years 1-6 (the
duration of
the
investment
cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA

--- Table 7 on Page 141 ---
Percentage of women that
participated in a training, at
least 20%


=== PAGE 142 ===
Page 138
harvest activities to increase their bargaining power (e.g. education Percentage of women in any follow-on
on fish preservation, marketing, etc.). leadership positions, at least investment
• Offer education and training in the tourism sector to promote 20% period
women into high-level employment (incl. training on leadership permitted
skills, soft skills, networking and high-level training for career under the
fund’s LPA
progression)
• Provide leadership training on waste materials for better sorting and
recycling in the waste sector
Enable conciliation of family and working life Percentage of contractual Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
relationships (temporary vs. duration of with support from
This may include activities that seek to: permanent and full-time vs. the EEs
• Improve women’s work-life balance in tourism and encourage an part-time), at least 70% of investment
equal division of unpaid care work in tourism communities through female employees shall have cycle of Costs included as part
awareness building a permanent contract that is projects), plus of project budgets
• Identify child care opportunities that can support conciliation of either full or part-time any follow-on
family and working life investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA
Demonstrate through gender-responsive program design and Wages (gender- Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
resulting data that livelihoods can be improved for women disaggregated data), 80% duration of with support from
women shall have a wage the EEs
This may include activities that seek to: above the minimum wage investment
• Create awareness on the gender pay gap and support women cycle of Costs included as part
network to address the issue Percentage of gender pay projects), plus of project budgets
gap, less than 10% any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA

--- Table 1 on Page 142 ---
 | harvest activities to increase their bargaining power (e.g. education |  | Percentage of women in
leadership positions, at least
20% | any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA |  |  |  | 
 | on fish preservation, marketing, etc.). |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Offer education and training in the tourism sector to promote |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | women into high-level employment (incl. training on leadership |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | skills, soft skills, networking and high-level training for career |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | progression) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Provide leadership training on waste materials for better sorting and |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | recycling in the waste sector |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Enable conciliation of family and working life
This may include activities that seek to:
• Improve women’s work-life balance in tourism and encourage an
equal division of unpaid care work in tourism communities through
awareness building
• Identify child care opportunities that can support conciliation of
family and working life | Enable conciliation of family and working life |  | Percentage of contractual
relationships (temporary vs.
permanent and full-time vs.
part-time), at least 70% of
female employees shall have
a permanent contract that is
either full or part-time |  | Years 1-6 (the |  | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets | 
 |  |  |  |  | duration of |  |  | 
 | This may include activities that seek to: |  |  |  | the |  |  | 
 | • Improve women’s work-life balance in tourism and encourage an |  |  |  | investment |  |  | 
 | equal division of unpaid care work in tourism communities through |  |  |  | cycle of |  |  | 
 | awareness building |  |  |  | projects), plus |  |  | 
 | • Identify child care opportunities that can support conciliation of |  |  |  | any follow-on |  |  | 
 | family and working life |  |  |  | investment |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | period |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | permitted |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | under the |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | fund’s LPA |  |  | 
Demonstrate through gender-responsive program design and
resulting data that livelihoods can be improved for women
This may include activities that seek to:
• Create awareness on the gender pay gap and support women
network to address the issue |  |  | Wages (gender-
disaggregated data), 80%
women shall have a wage
above the minimum wage
Percentage of gender pay
gap, less than 10% |  | Years 1-6 (the |  | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets | 
 |  |  |  |  | duration of |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | the |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | investment |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | cycle of |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | projects), plus |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | any follow-on |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | investment |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | period |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | permitted |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | under the |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | fund’s LPA |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 142 ---
Percentage of women in
leadership positions, at least
20%

--- Table 3 on Page 142 ---
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA

--- Table 4 on Page 142 ---



--- Table 5 on Page 142 ---
Percentage of contractual
relationships (temporary vs.
permanent and full-time vs.
part-time), at least 70% of
female employees shall have
a permanent contract that is
either full or part-time

--- Table 6 on Page 142 ---
Project Developers
with support from
EEs

Costs included as part
of project budgets



--- Table 7 on Page 142 ---
Demonstrate through gender-responsive program design and
resulting data that livelihoods can be improved for women

This may include activities that seek to:
• Create awareness on the gender pay gap and support women
network to address the issue


--- Table 8 on Page 142 ---
Wages (gender-
disaggregated data), 80%
women shall have a wage
above the minimum wage

Percentage of gender pay
gap, less than 10%

--- Table 9 on Page 142 ---
Project Developers
with support from
EEs

Costs included as part
of project budgets



=== PAGE 143 ===
Page 139
Output(s) Statement: Establish GFCR fund-level gender equity process and outcomes
Gender and social inclusion policies in place at fund level Endorsement policy by fund Years 1-12 ESMS Manager,
management committee, (the duration Accredited Entity,
including a gender- of the GFCR Executing Agency
responsive results fund)
framework Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget
Recruitment of women in projects; recruitment of women in development Aspire to parity, at least Years 1-12 ESMS Manager,
and implementation of fund capacity-building, field and monitoring teams 40% of fund (including (the duration Accredited Entity,
project planning and design of the GFCR Executing Agency
teams) and 25% of field fund)
employees will be female Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget
Recruitment of women in projects; recruitment of women in development Aspire to parity, at least Years 1-12 ESMS Manager,
and implementation of fund capacity-building, field and monitoring teams 40% of fund (including (the duration Accredited Entity,
project planning and design of the GFCR Executing Agency
teams) and 25% of field fund)
employees will be female Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget
Ensure GFCR internal annual reporting includes indicators with Annual compliance with Years 1-12 ESMS Manager,
corresponding requirements, gender-disaggregated data and targets to gender reporting at fund (the duration Accredited Entity,
ensure reportable progress level of the GFCR Executing Agency
fund)
Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget

--- Table 1 on Page 143 ---
 | Output(s) Statement: Establish GFCR fund-level gender equity process and outcomes |  |  |  | 
Gender and social inclusion policies in place at fund level |  | Endorsement policy by fund
management committee,
including a gender-
responsive results
framework | Years 1-12
(the duration
of the GFCR
fund) | ESMS Manager,
Accredited Entity,
Executing Agency
Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget | 
Recruitment of women in projects; recruitment of women in development
and implementation of fund capacity-building, field and monitoring teams |  | Aspire to parity, at least
40% of fund (including
project planning and design
teams) and 25% of field
employees will be female | Years 1-12
(the duration
of the GFCR
fund) | ESMS Manager,
Accredited Entity,
Executing Agency
Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget | 
Recruitment of women in projects; recruitment of women in development
and implementation of fund capacity-building, field and monitoring teams |  | Aspire to parity, at least
40% of fund (including
project planning and design
teams) and 25% of field
employees will be female | Years 1-12
(the duration
of the GFCR
fund) | ESMS Manager,
Accredited Entity,
Executing Agency
Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget | 
Ensure GFCR internal annual reporting includes indicators with
corresponding requirements, gender-disaggregated data and targets to
ensure reportable progress |  | Annual compliance with
gender reporting at fund
level | Years 1-12
(the duration
of the GFCR
fund) | ESMS Manager,
Accredited Entity,
Executing Agency
Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget | 

=== PAGE 144 ===
Page 140
Hire dedicated human resources to implement the Gender Action Plan, with ESMS Manager, gender and Years 1-12 ESMS Manager,
allocated additional funds provided to ensure flexibility and security as new SDG specialists in GFCR (the duration Accredited Entity,
learning comes up within implementation team of the GFCR Executing Agency
fund)
Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget
Dedicate resources to build and strengthen staff capacity related to Line item in budget for Years 1-12 ESMS Manager,
knowledge management, learning; Appoint gender specialist/consultants as gender-related capacity (the duration Accredited Entity,
needed to respond to new capacity needs. The gender special can support building within GFCR team of the GFCR Executing Agency
GFCR with gender analysis, assessment, engagement, defining measures, fund)
monitoring key indicators against targets, and to engage with stakeholders Costs included in
on gender-related topics. GFCR fund level
budget
If appropriate and deemed necessary, audit and verification teams to review TBD Years 1-12 ESMS Manager,
and assess project gender responsiveness and impact (the duration Accredited Entity,
of the GFCR Executing Agency
fund)
Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget
Output(s) Statement: Implement project-level gender assessments and action plans (NOTE: project-level assessments, and hence specific
gender indicators and targets, can only be established once the GFCR host countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets are
identified where known, or if not, are exemplars.)
Refer to the GFCR Gender Policy to comply with the requirements and 100% of projects in the fund Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
guidelines. The following steps should be implemented on project level: have to comply with the duration of with support from
1. Understand the GFCR Policy, its scope, and application GFCR Gender Policy the EEs
2. Apply gender related safeguarding principles investment
3. Conduct gender-responsive stakeholder consultation cycle of Costs included as part
4. Conduct gender analysis and baseline determination projects), plus of project budgets

--- Table 1 on Page 144 ---
Hire dedicated human resources to implement the Gender Action Plan, with
allocated additional funds provided to ensure flexibility and security as new
learning comes up within implementation |  | ESMS Manager, gender and
SDG specialists in GFCR
team | Years 1-12
(the duration
of the GFCR
fund) | ESMS Manager,
Accredited Entity,
Executing Agency
Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget | 
Dedicate resources to build and strengthen staff capacity related to
knowledge management, learning; Appoint gender specialist/consultants as
needed to respond to new capacity needs. The gender special can support
GFCR with gender analysis, assessment, engagement, defining measures,
monitoring key indicators against targets, and to engage with stakeholders
on gender-related topics. |  | Line item in budget for
gender-related capacity
building within GFCR team | Years 1-12
(the duration
of the GFCR
fund) | ESMS Manager,
Accredited Entity,
Executing Agency
Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget | 
If appropriate and deemed necessary, audit and verification teams to review
and assess project gender responsiveness and impact |  | TBD | Years 1-12
(the duration
of the GFCR
fund) | ESMS Manager,
Accredited Entity,
Executing Agency
Costs included in
GFCR fund level
budget | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output(s) Statement: Implement project-level gender assessments and action plans (NOTE: project-level assessments, and hence specific |  |  |  | 
 | gender indicators and targets, can only be established once the GFCR host countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets are |  |  |  | 
 | identified where known, or if not, are exemplars.) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
Refer to the GFCR Gender Policy to comply with the requirements and
guidelines. The following steps should be implemented on project level:
1. Understand the GFCR Policy, its scope, and application
2. Apply gender related safeguarding principles
3. Conduct gender-responsive stakeholder consultation
4. Conduct gender analysis and baseline determination |  | 100% of projects in the fund
have to comply with the
GFCR Gender Policy | Years 1-6 (the
duration of
the
investment
cycle of
projects), plus | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets | 

=== PAGE 145 ===
Page 141
5. Develop gender commitment statement any follow-on
6. Define goals and measure change investment
7. Establish gender actions period
permitted
In addition: under the
• Reference and align with country NDC and prevailing gender policy fund’s LPA
• Develop the Monitoring and Evaluation mechanism and process
Output(s) Statement: Gender-sensitive safeguarding and stakeholder consultation is implemented, leading to gender-responsive project
design and development.
Gender-responsive considerations (Gender Equality and Women’s Rights) 100% of projects under Years 1-6 (the Project Developers
will be assessed during project design and stakeholder consultation in consideration for duration of with support from
addition to other project safeguarding, including the following categories: investment the EEs
• Human Rights investment
• Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions % women in project design cycle of Costs included as part
• Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement and development projects), plus of project budgets
• Corruption consultations, target 50% any follow-on
investment
• Economic Impacts
period
• Climate and Energy
permitted
• Water
under the
• Environment, ecology and land use
fund’s LPA

--- Table 1 on Page 145 ---
5. Develop gender commitment statement
6. Define goals and measure change
7. Establish gender actions
In addition:
• Reference and align with country NDC and prevailing gender policy
• Develop the Monitoring and Evaluation mechanism and process |  |  | any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output(s) Statement: Gender-sensitive safeguarding and stakeholder consultation is implemented, leading to gender-responsive project |  |  |  | 
 | design and development. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
Gender-responsive considerations (Gender Equality and Women’s Rights)
will be assessed during project design and stakeholder consultation in
addition to other project safeguarding, including the following categories:
• Human Rights
• Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions
• Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement
• Corruption
• Economic Impacts
• Climate and Energy
• Water
• Environment, ecology and land use |  | 100% of projects under
consideration for
investment
% women in project design
and development
consultations, target 50% | Years 1-6 (the
duration of
the
investment
cycle of
projects), plus
any follow-on
investment
period
permitted
under the
fund’s LPA | Project Developers
with support from
EEs
Costs included as part
of project budgets | 

=== PAGE 146 ===
Page 142
Timeline
Gender Action Plan Milestones 2021 Prior to First Close of Fund 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GFCR gender and social inclusion policies in place X Gender training at fund level X X X X X
ESMS Manager and gender framework – including safeguards X ESMS revisions X X
– in place
Revise Gender Action Plan and conduct country/ sector/ X Revise Gender Action Plan and conduct x
project specific gender analysis and action plans for financed country/ sector/ project specific
activities gender analysis and action plans for
financed activities
Project-level gender sensitive and gender-responsive X Refine methodologies as/if needed for X X
methodologies GFCR implementation
Fund-wide implementation of gender safeguarding X Methodology modification, as /if X X X X X
methodologies needed for GFCR implementation
• Human Rights
• Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions
• Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement
• Corruption
• Economic Impacts
• Climate and Energy
• Water
• Environment, ecology and land use
Monitoring, Verification and Reporting (MRV) methodologies X Refine MRV methodology as/if needed X
for GFCR implementation
Gender-related resource development X X
Gender-related training development X X

--- Table 1 on Page 146 ---
Timeline


--- Table 2 on Page 146 ---
 | Gender Action Plan Milestones |  | 2021 | Prior to First Close of Fund | 2022 | 2023 | 2024 | 2025 | 2026
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
GFCR gender and social inclusion policies in place |  |  | X | Gender training at fund level | X | X | X | X | X
ESMS Manager and gender framework – including safeguards
– in place |  |  | X | ESMS revisions | X | X |  |  | 
Revise Gender Action Plan and conduct country/ sector/
project specific gender analysis and action plans for financed
activities |  |  | X | Revise Gender Action Plan and conduct
country/ sector/ project specific
gender analysis and action plans for
financed activities | x |  |  |  | 
Project-level gender sensitive and gender-responsive
methodologies |  |  | X | Refine methodologies as/if needed for
GFCR implementation | X | X |  |  | 
Fund-wide implementation of gender safeguarding
methodologies
• Human Rights
• Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions
• Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement
• Corruption
• Economic Impacts
• Climate and Energy
• Water
• Environment, ecology and land use |  |  | X | Methodology modification, as /if
needed for GFCR implementation | X | X | X | X | X
Monitoring, Verification and Reporting (MRV) methodologies |  |  | X | Refine MRV methodology as/if needed
for GFCR implementation | X |  |  |  | 
Gender-related resource development |  |  |  |  | X | X |  |  | 
Gender-related training development |  |  |  |  | X | X |  |  | 

=== PAGE 147 ===
Page 143
Gender-disaggregated project data, reporting and fund-level X X X
reporting
Process and content for developing gender analysis and action plans
Activities Implementation
Process during Country level gender analysis and action plans will seek to align the project to achieve the gender related objectives of the GFCR
the Action Plan. An analysis of the gender equality landscape and data relevant to the host country and in the targeted sector(s), will be
development conducted and shall include the following activities:
of country • Desk research and review of existing literature: Initial research will help to understand the country context and existing
level gender gender-related issues in the country and sector.
analysis and • Gender-responsive Stakeholder Engagement: Stakeholder engagement shall further help understand the local context and
action plans project specific gender issues that should be addressed. In addition, it can serve to identify measures to achieve the intended
outcomes included in the GFCR Gender Action Plan. Gender-responsive stakeholder engagement shall include the following
activities:
Understand the gender context to identify engagement approaches:
• Engage with the community, in particular women, to determine the best way to communicate with them.
• Engage with women in focus group settings facilitated by a female to capture views and information.
• Use participatory techniques to capture gender specific information e.g. gender matrices, seasonal calendars, ranking,
community mapping/transect walks.
• Identify and engage with women’s cooperatives/groups. Where they do not exist, support the establishment of such
groups.
Undertake stakeholder mapping/analysis and determine gender context:
• Includes identifying the key stakeholders and mapping and prioritizing them based on level of impact, influence and
interest.
• Data gathering through community leaders, government representatives and high-level online research to understand
the gender context (e.g. gender indicators/data on education, labor force participation, health, agency/decision making
and traditional and cultural practices).
Develop engagement methods for stakeholder groups:
• Establish culturally appropriate engagement methods (including on the grievance mechanism if relevant) for each
stakeholder group with consideration for culture and gender, based on the gender context.
• Engage with stakeholder groups on approaches determined to gather feedback, suggestions, and measures to achieve
the outcome objectives of the GFCR Gender Action Plan.

--- Table 1 on Page 147 ---
Gender-disaggregated project data, reporting and fund-level
reporting |  |  |  |  | X | X | X

--- Table 2 on Page 147 ---
Activities | Implementation
Process during
the
development
of country
level gender
analysis and
action plans | Country level gender analysis and action plans will seek to align the project to achieve the gender related objectives of the GFCR
Action Plan. An analysis of the gender equality landscape and data relevant to the host country and in the targeted sector(s), will be
conducted and shall include the following activities:
• Desk research and review of existing literature: Initial research will help to understand the country context and existing
gender-related issues in the country and sector.
• Gender-responsive Stakeholder Engagement: Stakeholder engagement shall further help understand the local context and
project specific gender issues that should be addressed. In addition, it can serve to identify measures to achieve the intended
outcomes included in the GFCR Gender Action Plan. Gender-responsive stakeholder engagement shall include the following
activities:
Understand the gender context to identify engagement approaches:
• Engage with the community, in particular women, to determine the best way to communicate with them.
• Engage with women in focus group settings facilitated by a female to capture views and information.
• Use participatory techniques to capture gender specific information e.g. gender matrices, seasonal calendars, ranking,
community mapping/transect walks.
• Identify and engage with women’s cooperatives/groups. Where they do not exist, support the establishment of such
groups.
Undertake stakeholder mapping/analysis and determine gender context:
• Includes identifying the key stakeholders and mapping and prioritizing them based on level of impact, influence and
interest.
• Data gathering through community leaders, government representatives and high-level online research to understand
the gender context (e.g. gender indicators/data on education, labor force participation, health, agency/decision making
and traditional and cultural practices).
Develop engagement methods for stakeholder groups:
• Establish culturally appropriate engagement methods (including on the grievance mechanism if relevant) for each
stakeholder group with consideration for culture and gender, based on the gender context.
• Engage with stakeholder groups on approaches determined to gather feedback, suggestions, and measures to achieve
the outcome objectives of the GFCR Gender Action Plan.

=== PAGE 148 ===
Page 144
Document approach in a Stakeholder Engagement Plan
• Develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan that includes stakeholder mapping/analysis, gender context and engagement
methods.
• Gender-responsive Project Design and Action Plans: The gender analysis, engagement, and safeguards assessment allows
project developers to identify strategies, action and indicators to better assess how initiatives have engaged with or impacted
different groups to inform the action plan. The following activities shall be part of this process:
• Collect, analyze and apply sex-disaggregated data and using gender indicators to inform gender-responsive monitoring,
evaluation, reporting and learning on programmatic activities;
• Address results derived from the gender analyses and apply key issues and recommendations identified to inform
gender-responsive project design, budgeting, staffing, implementation, monitoring and evaluation;
• Analyze risks that the project may experience or pose, putting measures in place to ensure activities do not exacerbate
existing gender-related inequalities, including gender-based violence, and seize opportunities to address gender gaps
and support empowerment of women;
• Structure inclusive and gender-sensitive project teams that demonstrate appropriate capacities and technical expertise
to support gender-responsive action;
• Ensure women and men have equal opportunities in terms of participation, decision-making and benefits, throughout
the identification, design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of activities;
• Allocate sufficient resources for specific activities, technical support and/or other actions to improve gender equality
considerations, including the meaningful engagement of diverse stakeholders and beneficiaries;
• All project-level gender action plans shall support the drivers of change and specific gender elements derived from the
gender assessment (see Gender Assessment for sector specific elements). This includes on a high-level:
o Support women empowerment and entrepreneurship
o Skills training and capacity building for women
o Promote decent work for women
o Support women’s needs in the community and civil society
• Monitoring and Evaluation: All GFCR projects must include mandatory impact targets, a gender-sensitive framework,
mandatory, and minimum gender-responsive elements. The project’s monitoring framework includes gender-responsive
targets and indicators to monitor gender equality results against the established baseline.
Envisaged Gender-responsive stakeholder engagement should take place before and throughout project implementation so it can inform the
stakeholder design of the project to ensure that women can participate in the design phase. In addition, engagement should be promoted
consultations throughout the implementation of the project to address gender needs on a continuous basis. The following considerations should be
(who will be made that relate to gender equality in Stakeholder Consultation planning:
- What measures and actions need to be put in place to ensure equal gender participation in Stakeholder Consultations. How should

--- Table 1 on Page 148 ---
 | Document approach in a Stakeholder Engagement Plan
• Develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan that includes stakeholder mapping/analysis, gender context and engagement
methods.
• Gender-responsive Project Design and Action Plans: The gender analysis, engagement, and safeguards assessment allows
project developers to identify strategies, action and indicators to better assess how initiatives have engaged with or impacted
different groups to inform the action plan. The following activities shall be part of this process:
• Collect, analyze and apply sex-disaggregated data and using gender indicators to inform gender-responsive monitoring,
evaluation, reporting and learning on programmatic activities;
• Address results derived from the gender analyses and apply key issues and recommendations identified to inform
gender-responsive project design, budgeting, staffing, implementation, monitoring and evaluation;
• Analyze risks that the project may experience or pose, putting measures in place to ensure activities do not exacerbate
existing gender-related inequalities, including gender-based violence, and seize opportunities to address gender gaps
and support empowerment of women;
• Structure inclusive and gender-sensitive project teams that demonstrate appropriate capacities and technical expertise
to support gender-responsive action;
• Ensure women and men have equal opportunities in terms of participation, decision-making and benefits, throughout
the identification, design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of activities;
• Allocate sufficient resources for specific activities, technical support and/or other actions to improve gender equality
considerations, including the meaningful engagement of diverse stakeholders and beneficiaries;
• All project-level gender action plans shall support the drivers of change and specific gender elements derived from the
gender assessment (see Gender Assessment for sector specific elements). This includes on a high-level:
o Support women empowerment and entrepreneurship
o Skills training and capacity building for women
o Promote decent work for women
o Support women’s needs in the community and civil society
• Monitoring and Evaluation: All GFCR projects must include mandatory impact targets, a gender-sensitive framework,
mandatory, and minimum gender-responsive elements. The project’s monitoring framework includes gender-responsive
targets and indicators to monitor gender equality results against the established baseline.
Envisaged
stakeholder
consultations
(who will be | Gender-responsive stakeholder engagement should take place before and throughout project implementation so it can inform the
design of the project to ensure that women can participate in the design phase. In addition, engagement should be promoted
throughout the implementation of the project to address gender needs on a continuous basis. The following considerations should be
made that relate to gender equality in Stakeholder Consultation planning:
- What measures and actions need to be put in place to ensure equal gender participation in Stakeholder Consultations. How should

=== PAGE 149 ===
Page 145
engaged and inputs and insights from women and men be sought out, listened to, considered, addressed and documented?
how) - Is it necessary to make any specific arrangements to ensure that all constituencies are engaged in the consultation arrangements
to not only foster inclusive participation of women but also avoid potentially negative consequences? (for example, speak to women
and men separately; have focus groups for women and focus groups for men before gathering them together to ensure their
meaningful participation; adapt timing schedule to men’s and women’s working schedules)
Potential stakeholders with gender perspective that shall participate during stakeholder consultation:
- Women from local communities directly or indirectly affected by a project
- Ministry of Gender, similar government bodies
- NGOs/CSOs working on gender issues
- Agri- /aquaculture and fishing organizations
- Women’s organization
- Research institutions/universities.
o
Key The gender analysis and engagement allows project developers to collect information on:
information - Information on gender country, sector and project specific context (e.g. gender indicators/data on education, labor force
that is participation, health, agency/decision making and traditional and cultural practices
expected to be - Feedback, suggestions, and measures to achieve the outcome objectives of the GFCR Gender Action Plan and make
collected - Strategies, actions and indicators to achieve the gender related outcomes outlined in the GFCR Action Plan and to make context-
specific amendments to the Action Plan
- Gender indicators to inform gender-responsive monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning on programmatic activities
Culturally appropriate engagement methods (including on the grievance mechanism if relevant) for each stakeholder group with
consideration for culture and gender, based on the gender context.
Key issues that Through the country and sector specific gender analysis, the following issues shall be addressed:
will be - Gender imbalance and misinformation of gender-equality issues
expected to be - Overcome the misconnect between women and other stakeholders including the project developers
addressed - Potential risks to achieving programme goals (which is important for effective risk mitigation strategies)
- Address stakeholders who are blind to, or oppose, gender equality
- Accountability when it comes to gender mainstreaming and equality on project level

--- Table 1 on Page 149 ---
engaged and
how) | inputs and insights from women and men be sought out, listened to, considered, addressed and documented?
- Is it necessary to make any specific arrangements to ensure that all constituencies are engaged in the consultation arrangements
to not only foster inclusive participation of women but also avoid potentially negative consequences? (for example, speak to women
and men separately; have focus groups for women and focus groups for men before gathering them together to ensure their
meaningful participation; adapt timing schedule to men’s and women’s working schedules)
Potential stakeholders with gender perspective that shall participate during stakeholder consultation:
- Women from local communities directly or indirectly affected by a project
- Ministry of Gender, similar government bodies
- NGOs/CSOs working on gender issues
- Agri- /aquaculture and fishing organizations
- Women’s organization
- Research institutions/universities.
o
Key
information
that is
expected to be
collected | The gender analysis and engagement allows project developers to collect information on:
- Information on gender country, sector and project specific context (e.g. gender indicators/data on education, labor force
participation, health, agency/decision making and traditional and cultural practices
- Feedback, suggestions, and measures to achieve the outcome objectives of the GFCR Gender Action Plan and make
- Strategies, actions and indicators to achieve the gender related outcomes outlined in the GFCR Action Plan and to make context-
specific amendments to the Action Plan
- Gender indicators to inform gender-responsive monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning on programmatic activities
Culturally appropriate engagement methods (including on the grievance mechanism if relevant) for each stakeholder group with
consideration for culture and gender, based on the gender context.
Key issues that
will be
expected to be
addressed | Through the country and sector specific gender analysis, the following issues shall be addressed:
- Gender imbalance and misinformation of gender-equality issues
- Overcome the misconnect between women and other stakeholders including the project developers
- Potential risks to achieving programme goals (which is important for effective risk mitigation strategies)
- Address stakeholders who are blind to, or oppose, gender equality
- Accountability when it comes to gender mainstreaming and equality on project level

=== PAGE 150 ===
Page 146
Role of the AE and indicative budget to implement the Gender Action Plan
‘The Accredited Entity will make sure to dedicate enough resources to conduct country and sector specific gender analysis and implement the Gender
Action Plan. All activities are supervised by the ES Manager. If appropriate, external gender specialists are engaged.
The costs are included in the budget provided in the ESMS (line items capacity building services, fund’s E&S team, engaging external experts). The
planned total budget for the implementation of activities outlined in the Gender Action Plan amounts to USD 300’000 (excl. travel and logistics costs or ES
Manager salary) for all projects throughout the entire fund life. The budget will be adjusted with the revision of the Gender Action Plan.
The timing of country- and sector-specific gender analysis will be determined prior to project implementation as part of the broader ESG and impact due
diligence (see ESMS), which will include gender safeguards to ensure that project design and implementation can be aligned.’

=== PAGE 151 ===
Page 147
ANNEX 2 GFCR GENDER POLICY
GFCR Gender Policy
Contents
SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF THE GENDER POLICY ......................................................................... 38
DEFINITIONS ....................................................................................................................................................... 39
REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDELINES ........................................................................................................... 40
STEP 1: BASIC CONTEXT ............................................................................................................................ 40
STEP 2: APPLY SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLES .................................................................................... 40
STEP 3: CONDUCT STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION ...................................................................... 41
STEP 4: PROJECT GENDER ANALYSIS AND BASELINE DETERMINATION............................. 41
Step 4.a Develop an applied gender analysis to gather evidence for the project baseline,
design and development ........................................................................................................................ 42
Step 4.b Align the Project with SDG targets .................................................................................... 43
Step 4.c Raise the bar: gender commitment statement .............................................................. 44
STEP 5: ESTABLISH GOALS AND MEASURE CHANGE .................................................................... 45
Step 5.a Establish Project gender goals (actions):........................................................................ 45
Step 5.b Establish meaningful gender performance indicators for the Project ................ 47
STEP 6: PROJECT CLAIM - GENDER ACTIONS ................................................................................... 50
SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF THE GENDER POLICY*
The main objective of the Gender Policy is to strengthen stakeholders’ responsiveness to the
multiple, culturally-derived principles of gender equality and women’s empowerment and to
address and account for the links between gender equality, natural resources management and
environmental sustainability.
The Gender Policy will apply to all projects in the Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) and supports
the GFCR Gender Action Plan and the Environmental Social Management System (ESMS).
*Please note that the Gender Policy is closely aligned with the Gold Standard Gender Equality
Requirements & Guidelines as this is considered to be best practice and sets rigorous standards.

=== PAGE 152 ===
Page 148
DEFINITIONS
Term Definition*
The capacity to make decisions about one’s own life and act on them to
Agency
achieve a desired outcome, free of violence, retribution, or fear.
The ability and agency of every woman to shape her own destiny, exercise
her rights and make her own choices. Women's empowerment has five
components: women's sense of self-worth; their right to have and to
determine choices; their right to have access to opportunities and
Empowerment
resources; their right to have the power to control their own lives, both
within and outside the home; and their ability to influence the direction of
social change to create a more just social and economic order, nationally
and internationally.
Gender refers to the social, behavioural, and cultural attributes,
Gender
expectations, and norms associated with being male or female.
As enshrined in international and national constitutions and other human
Gender rights agreements, refers to equal rights, power, responsibilities and
equality opportunities for women and men, as well as equal consideration of the
interests, needs and priorities of women and men.
Refers to the process of being fair to women and men. To ensure equity,
measures often need to be taken to compensate (or reduce) disparity for
Gender equity historical and social disadvantages that prevent women and men from
otherwise operating on an equitable basis. Equity leads to equality.(UNDP
2017)
Refers to the consideration of gender norms, roles and relations and to
Gender
addressing inequality generated by unequal norms, roles and relations
responsive
through remedial action beyond creating gender awareness.
Refers to raising awareness and consideration of gender norms, roles and
Gender relations but does not necessarily address inequality generated by unequal
sensitive norms, roles or relations through remedial action beyond creating gender
awareness.
Male human being; a person assigned a male sex at birth, or a person who
Man
defines himself as a man. (European Institute for Gender Equality)
Biological and physiological characteristics that define humans as female
Sex
or male. (European Institute for Gender Equality)
Refers to the process of improving the terms for individuals and groups to
Social
take part in society, and the process of improving the ability, opportunity,
inclusion
and dignity of those disadvantaged on the basis of their identity to take part
in society.(World Bank)
Female human being; a person assigned a female sex at birth, or a person
Woman
who defines herself as a woman. (European Institute for Gender Equality)
* If not otherwise indicated, relevant definitions are drawn and adapted from the GCF gender policy
or the Annex to the GEF Gender Equality Action Plan (GEAP)

=== PAGE 153 ===
Page 149
REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDELINES
STEP 1: BASIC CONTEXT
REQUIREMENTS
The Gender Policy applies to all projects, serves as a technical guidance on gender, and solidifies
the operational requirements for stakeholder involvement and partnership in the design,
implementation, and evaluation of projects.
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:
1. Does the project reflect the key issues and requirements of Gender Sensitive design and
implementation as outlined in this document? Explain how.
2. Does the project align with existing country policies, strategies and best practices? Explain
how.
Suggestions include:
- Ensure that the project aligns with the national gender strategy (if host country has one) or
other public policy for gender equality and women’s empowerment;
- Align the project with other national development strategies that promote equal
opportunities, whether in the intervention region or the sector;
- Refer to lessons learned from comparable development projects or programmes in the
region that provide useful context on gender issues, risks and opportunities;
- Refer to the national report to The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) for data or context relevant to the project.
- Refer to the World Economic Forum Global Gender Gap Report
STEP 2: APPLY SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLES
REQUIREMENTS
Apply the gender-related Safeguarding Principles & Requirements outlined in this policy. Country-
level safeguards shall supersede the Gender Policy’s Requirements if they go beyond these
requirements.
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:
3. Does the project address the questions raised in this document? Explain how.
This may direct/support whether an expert stakeholder opinion (with a specific emphasis on
gender and environment expertise) is required to support the gender safeguards assessment
process depending on project type, scale and context.
The gender-related Safeguarding Principles & Requirements include the following:
- The Project shall not directly or indirectly reinforce gender-based discrimination and shall
not lead to/contribute to adverse impacts on gender equality and/or the situation of
women. Specifically, this shall include (not exhaustive):
a) Sexual harassment and/or any forms of violence against women – address the multiple
risks of gender-based violence, including sexual exploitation or human trafficking.
b) Slavery, imprisonment, physical and mental drudgery, punishment or coercion of
women and girls.
c) Restriction of women’s rights or access to resources (natural or economic).

=== PAGE 154 ===
Page 150
d) Recognize women’s ownership rights regardless of marital status – adopt project
measures where possible to support to women’s access to inherit and own land, homes,
and other assets or natural resources
- Projects shall apply the principles of non-discrimination, equal treatment, and equal pay
for equal work, specifically:
a) Where appropriate for the implementation of a Project, paid, volunteer work or
community contributions will be organised to provide the conditions for equitable
participation of men and women in the identified tasks/activities.
b) Introduce conditions that ensure the participation of women or men in Project activities
and benefits based on pregnancy, maternity/paternity leave, or marital status.
c) Ensure that these conditions do not limit the access of women or men, as the case may
be, to project participation and benefits.
- The project shall refer to the country’s national gender strategy or equivalent national
commitment to aid in assessing gender risks.
- Based on the responses to assessment questions above, it may be required that the project
seek the input of an Expert Stakeholder(s) and to include their recommendations in the
project design.
STEP 3: CONDUCT STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION
REQUIREMENTS
Apply Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Procedure, Requirements & Guidelines in
accordance with the GFCR Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Policy and take note of the
gender guidelines.
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:
4. Does the project apply a Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Procedure, Requirements
& Guidelines in accordance with the GFCR Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Policy?
Explain how.
Steps 2 and 3 together provide the Project Developer with a consolidated assessment of the Project's
purpose, who the Project will engage with and ensures against the project contributing to any further
harm.
STEP 4: PROJECT GENDER ANALYSIS AND BASELINE DETERMINATION
Integrate Steps 1-3 into the gender analysis and establish project baseline. Inputs from Steps 1-3
notably the stakeholder consultations and safeguards assessment will feed into the Gender analysis.
Gender analysis is a systematic way to identify context-specific key issues and factors that
contribute to gender inequalities. It may consist of primary or secondary research, or a
combination of both. It is impossible to integrate gender equality into projects or activities without
clearly understanding gender issues within the targeted population. A gender analysis enables
project developers to understand the implications of gender on climate change mitigation,
adaptation and disaster risk reduction interventions (and vice-versa), and design appropriate
interventions that can benefit all members of a community. It also allows the project developers
to develop indicators to better assess how initiatives have engaged with or impacted different
groups.
Gender analysis explores individual, relational and structural factors, within both public and
private spheres, as individuals are likely to experience gender differently, or hold different roles,

=== PAGE 155 ===
Page 151
within different groups or relationships. Gender analysis attempts to answer at least three key sets
of questions:
- What are the gender-based inequalities, discriminations and rights denials in each context?
How do these issues intersect with other discrimination factors such as age, ethnicity,
disability, class, etc.?
- How will gender relations influence the effectiveness and sustainability of the project
activity or result? How will project processes and activities be designed to reduce
inequalities and increase equality?
- How will the proposed results affect the relative status of women and men? Will they
exacerbate or reduce inequalities?
Step 4.a Develop an applied gender analysis to gather evidence for the project baseline, design and
development
REQUIREMENTS
Gender-responsive projects require a gender analysis to understand the social, economic and
political factors underlying climate change-exacerbated gender inequality, and the potential
contribution of women and men to mitigate and adapt to climate change.
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:
Conduct a gender analysis that should, at minimum, explain the following considerations:
5. How does the project concept and description actively contribute to climate security and
sustainable development in gender-responsive ways? Refer Step 4 (b) below to answer this
question.
6. How does the project gender analysis effectively differentiate how men and women, separately
and together, contribute to and benefit from climate security and sustainable development?
Towards adaptation and mitigation or both?
7. Is there a baseline description which includes both gender equality and women’s economic
empowerment factors? Please provide. This will help in identifying relevant SDG target in step
4(b) below.
Examples of questions to guide Gender Analysis:
- Are there gaps in development outcomes that males and females experience in the areas of
human endowment, formal employment, ownership and control of assets and voice and
agency?
- Are there design and implementation gaps relevant to the project goals and/ or key issues
such as safety, security, employment and entrepreneurship that affect men and women
differently?
- Are there gaps between males and females, especially in light of the relevant country and
sector?
- Are the results of stakeholder consultations with men and women and/or NGOs that work
with these groups included in the gender analysis?
- Does the gender analysis draw on available and current quantitative and qualitative data?
- Does the analysis consider the potential negative/adverse impact of project activities, for
instance on women’s unpaid work, time use, access to income or assets, and risk of gender-
based violence?
- Does the gender analysis consider which specific measures can be or have been identified
to address gaps?

=== PAGE 156 ===
Page 152
- Are men and women equally involved in making decisions and participation processes
about the project actions and goals? Can women and men equally make their voice heard?
- Are women and men / girls and boys taken equally into account in the target group? How
can it be ensured that they derive equitable benefits from the interventions?
- Do measures need to be taken to ensure equitable access to resources and impacts by
disadvantaged groups (women or men)?
- Are the actions explicitly broken down as such (for women versus men)? How are they
distinguished?
RESOURCES:
To help guide your Gender Analysis and development of Gender Indicators – consider the
following:
- ACDI/VOCA- Gender Analysis, Assessment, and Audit Manual & Toolkit
- Harvard- Gender Roles Framework or Gender Analysis Framework
- FAO- Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis Field Handbook
- Gender Analysis in Natural Resource Management | Land Portal
- Gender Analysis for Sustainable Livelihoods and Participatory Governance in Rwanda
- https://www.pacificclimatechange.net/document/gender-analysischecklist-food-
security-and-climate-change-within-programme-or-project
- How to Conduct a Gender Analysis | USAID ASSIST Project
- Resourced dashboard: https://start.me/p/ELEn9p/inclusive-think-tanks
-
Step 4.b Align the Project with SDG targets
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) make an explicit commitment to gender, both as a
standalone goal on gender equality and women’s empowerment (SDG 5) as well as a crosscutting
theme across the SDGs. SDG 13 on combating climate change aims to promote mechanisms for
raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in least developed
countries and small island developing states, including focusing on women, youth, and local and
marginalized communities.
REQUIREMENTS
SDG 5 seeks to achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls. It is expected that SDG
5 will be one of the SDGs that projects align with. Projects can also consider gender related targets
under SDG 8 and SDG 10:
- SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive
employment and decent work for all.
- SDG 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries.
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:
8. Can the project address at least one SDG target each from category 1 and category 2? Explain
how.
SDG Targets, Category 1:
- Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public
services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared
responsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriate.

=== PAGE 157 ===
Page 153
- Ensure women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at
all levels of decision making in political, economic and public life.
- Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to
ownership and control over land and other forms of property, financial services,
inheritance and natural resources, in accordance with national laws.
- Enhance the use of enabling technologies including information and communications
technology, to promote the empowerment of women.
- Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.
- By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men,
including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal
value.
- By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all (within a
country), irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or
other status.
SDG Targets, Category 2:
- Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres,
including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation.
- Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital
mutilation.
- Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights as
agreed in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development and the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome
documents of their review conferences.
- Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers,
including migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious
employment.
Step 4.c Raise the bar: gender commitment statement
The project design, goals and outcomes can now build on available evidence of the gender gaps in
markets (formal and informal), institutions and households and apply the country-driven
approach to close persistent gender gaps. This raises the bar beyond limiting the assessment to
re-stating key gender equality gaps. The project, in understanding and articulating key gender
constraints as well as opportunities, will seek to narrow gaps, lift constraints, support
opportunities and feed into a more active and engaged dialogue with stakeholders on key levers
for sustainable change. The project goals may also go beyond conventional treatment of gender as
pertaining to average women in the country to consider the full diversity of constraints facing
women and men as affected by their age, marital status, income levels, ethnicity, physical abilities,
locations and mobility.
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:
9. Can the project articulate the statement on gender outcomes? This shall be further reflected in
the final project claim detailed in Step 6. The project statement can include the following:
- Define which measures are in the overall project design and development to achieve gender
equality results including the mitigation of negative impacts like reinforcing gender
inequalities of traditional perceptions of what is male and female.

=== PAGE 158 ===
Page 154
- Outline whether and how the project reduces gender inequalities and/or reinforces gender
empowerment, and how this affects the achievement of overall project objectives. Refer to
the chosen SDG target in Step 4 (b) above.
- List gender indicators pertinent to the project scope by which project results will be
measured. Refer to Step 5 (a) below to identify gender indicators.
Examples of indicators are given under Step 5.
STEP 5: ESTABLISH AN ACTION PLAN, GOALS AND MEASURE CHANGE
Step 5.a Establish and Action Plan and Project gender goals (actions):
Based on the gender analysis and actions taken under 4.c, project developers shall develop a
project-level gender action plan, which can address the following:
• Collect, analyze and apply sex-disaggregated data and using gender indicators to inform
gender-responsive monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning on programmatic
activities;
• Address results derived from the gender analyses and apply key issues and
recommendations identified to inform gender-responsive project design, budgeting,
staffing, implementation, monitoring and evaluation;
• Analyze risks that the project may experience or pose, putting measures in place to
ensure activities do not exacerbate existing gender-related inequalities, including gender-
based violence, and seize opportunities to address gender gaps and support
empowerment of women;
• Structure inclusive and gender-sensitive project teams that demonstrate appropriate
capacities and technical expertise to support gender-responsive action;
• Ensure women and men have equal opportunities in terms of participation, decision-
making and benefits, throughout the identification, design, implementation, monitoring
and evaluation of activities;
The project-level action plans shall be formulated in accordance with the GFCR Gender Action
Plan and corresponding impact, outcome and output statements. The same output indicators
shall be measured and reported. A template will be provided to the project developers. The ES
Manager will ensure alignment and report on identified gaps.
It is also possible to select at least one Gender Project Action from tables below to demonstrate
compliance to the Category 1 SDG Targets given in Step 4(B) above.
Refer to the economic Empowerment Goals and Social Empowerment Goals in the Tables below.
The economic empowerment goals and social empowerment goals tables below provide guidance
to project developers on potential gender goals, actions and indicators. Projects will need to
demonstrate close alignment to gender goals and choose relevant gender indicators. The list of
gender responsive indicators given in tables below is not exhaustive and project developers can
propose their own indicators. Realistic project goals need to be set against baselines identified in
Step 4 (a) above.
Economic Empowerment Goals Table:4
ECONOMIC PROJECT ACTION EXAMPLE OF GENDER-RESPONSIVE
EMPOWERMENT INDICATORS
GOALS
4 Refer to the GFCR Gender Action Plan for applicable indicators

--- Table 1 on Page 158 ---
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | ECONOMIC | PROJECT ACTION | PROJECT ACTION | EXAMPLE OF GENDER-RESPONSIVE
INDICATORS | EXAMPLE OF GENDER-RESPONSIVE
 | EMPOWERMENT |  |  |  | INDICATORS
 | GOALS |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 159 ===
Page 155
1) Income and Closing of gender gaps in Qualitative increase in earning and
equal pay earnings and income income generation opportunities for
generation opportunities both women and men expressed as
income ratio of men to women
2) Economic Closing of gender gaps in • Number/proportion of women with
assets asset access, ownership and improved access to financial
control; Absolute increase in mechanisms (equity investment,
affordable loans, etc.)
women’s relative control
and ownership of an asset•
Evidence of the type of financial
incentives used to encourage
women’s entry into the market (e.g.,
finance packages, tax benefits and
rebates, subsidies, pilot schemes,
partnerships with financial
institutions, the private sector or
women’s associations)
3) Quality Closing of gender gaps in Quantifiable increase in targeted and
employment labour market segregation diversified employment
and paid and unpaid opportunities for women and men
employment (expressed as a ratio) coupled with
support for reproductive
responsibilities
Social Empowerment Goals Table:5
SOCIAL PROJECT ACTION EXAMPLE OF GENDER-RESPONSIVE
EMPOWERMENT INDICATORS
GOALS
1) Individual and Closing of gender gaps in • Quantitative indicators that measure
community women and men’s targets and quotas for women’s
empowerment participations and participation and leadership in
leadership and access to community, including their access to
including
networks social networks
meaningful
Closing of gender gaps in
•
participation and
leadership positions and
Quantifiable increase in the percentage
leadership, decision making at the
of women making decisions on
Increase in individual, household,
women networks community and political behalf of their families, communities
level and government
and
organizations
and agency
2) Applied skills Closing of gender gaps and • Qualitative and verifiable increase in
and training stereotypes in women’s and women’s and men’s relative confidence,
5 Refer to the GFCR Gender Action Plan for applicable indicators

--- Table 1 on Page 159 ---
 |  |  |  |  | 
1) Income and
equal pay | 1) Income and | Closing of gender gaps in
earnings and income
generation opportunities | Closing of gender gaps in |  | Qualitative increase in earning and
 | equal pay |  | earnings and income |  | income generation opportunities for
 |  |  | generation opportunities |  | both women and men expressed as
 |  |  |  |  | income ratio of men to women
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
2) Economic
assets | 2) Economic | Closing of gender gaps in
•
asset access, ownership and
control; Absolute increase in
women’s relative control
and ownership of an asset• | Closing of gender gaps in
• |  | Number/proportion of women with
 | assets |  | asset access, ownership and |  | improved access to financial
 |  |  | control; Absolute increase in |  | mechanisms (equity investment,
 |  |  |  |  | affordable loans, etc.)
 |  |  | women’s relative control |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | and ownership of an asset• |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Evidence of the type of financial
 |  |  |  |  | incentives used to encourage
 |  |  |  |  | women’s entry into the market (e.g.,
 |  |  |  |  | finance packages, tax benefits and
 |  |  |  |  | rebates, subsidies, pilot schemes,
 |  |  |  |  | partnerships with financial
 |  |  |  |  | institutions, the private sector or
 |  |  |  |  | women’s associations)
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
3) Quality
employment | 3) Quality | Closing of gender gaps in
labour market segregation
and paid and unpaid
employment | Closing of gender gaps in |  | Quantifiable increase in targeted and
 | employment |  | labour market segregation |  | diversified employment
 |  |  | and paid and unpaid |  | opportunities for women and men
 |  |  | employment |  | (expressed as a ratio) coupled with
 |  |  |  |  | support for reproductive
 |  |  |  |  | responsibilities
 |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 159 ---
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | SOCIAL | PROJECT ACTION | PROJECT ACTION | EXAMPLE OF GENDER-RESPONSIVE
INDICATORS | EXAMPLE OF GENDER-RESPONSIVE
 | EMPOWERMENT |  |  |  | INDICATORS
 | GOALS |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1) Individual and | Closing of gender gaps in
•
women and men’s
participations and
leadership and access to
networks
Closing of gender gaps in
•
leadership positions and
decision making at the
individual, household,
community and political
level | Closing of gender gaps in
• | Quantitative indicators that measure
targets and quotas for women’s
participation and leadership in
community, including their access to
social networks
Quantifiable increase in the percentage
of women making decisions on
behalf of their families, communities
and government | Quantitative indicators that measure
 | community |  | women and men’s |  | targets and quotas for women’s
 | empowerment |  | participations and |  | participation and leadership in
 |  |  | leadership and access to |  | community, including their access to
 | including |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | networks |  | social networks
 | meaningful |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Closing of gender gaps in
• |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | participation and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | leadership positions and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Quantifiable increase in the percentage
 | leadership, |  | decision making at the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | of women making decisions on
 | Increase in |  | individual, household, |  | 
 | women networks |  | community and political |  | behalf of their families, communities
 |  |  | level |  | and government
 | and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | organizations |  |  |  | 
 | and agency |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | 2) Applied skills |  | Closing of gender gaps and
• |  | Qualitative and verifiable increase in
 | and training |  | stereotypes in women’s and |  | women’s and men’s relative confidence,
 |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 160 ===
Page 156
men’s access to applied skills and know-how, e.g., on appraising
skills and training investments and developing projects
•
Evidence of the type of incentives
designed to recruit women, increase
their capacity and provide career
development in targeted sector
agencies and service providers
3) Better health Improve health and safety Number of beneficiaries, i.e., people with
and safety outcomes improved living and occupational safety
conditions, including women and
women-headed households
4) Access to Closing of gender gaps in Quantifiable increase in women’s control
infrastructure access to infrastructure over, decisions in, related skills
services and services development and access to
technologies infrastructure services
1) Individual and Closing of gender gaps in • Quantitative indicators that measure
community women and men’s targets and quotas for women’s
empowerment participations and participation and leadership in
leadership and access to community, including their access to
including
networks social networks
meaningful
Closing of gender gaps in
•
participation and
leadership positions and
Quantifiable increase in the percentage
leadership, decision making at the
of women making decisions on behalf of
Increase in individual, household,
women networks community and political their families, communities and
level government
and
organizations
and agency
Step 5.b Establish meaningful gender performance indicators for the Project
Gender performance indicators and gender-disaggregated targets can now be incorporated into
the project results framework.
Indicators play a crucial role in the gender responsive process throughout the policy cycle.
Quantitative and qualitative indicators must enable ongoing monitoring and evaluation of whether
the project’s gender equality objectives are being met and assessing the gender effect of project
activities. If objectives are not being met, it could be essential to re-assess the project strategy and
make amendments to ensure improvements. Gender indicators usually express how distant a
certain situation is from gender equality and are usually expressed as gaps, ratios and generally as
measures of ‘gender inequalities’. Gender-blind indicators are those that do not allow the
evaluator to uncover gender differences and gender relations in a society because they are not
collected or cannot be collected in a gender-disaggregated way. For example “community
participation“ is a gender-blind indicator but if collected separately for men and for women, can
become a gender indicators.

--- Table 1 on Page 160 ---
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | men’s access to applied
skills and training
• | men’s access to applied |  | skills and know-how, e.g., on appraising
 |  |  | skills and training |  | investments and developing projects
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Evidence of the type of incentives
 |  |  |  |  | designed to recruit women, increase
 |  |  |  |  | their capacity and provide career
 |  |  |  |  | development in targeted sector
 |  |  |  |  | agencies and service providers
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
3) Better health
and safety | 3) Better health | Improve health and safety
outcomes | Improve health and safety |  | Number of beneficiaries, i.e., people with
 | and safety |  | outcomes |  | improved living and occupational safety
 |  |  |  |  | conditions, including women and
 |  |  |  |  | women-headed households
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | 4) Access to | Closing of gender gaps in
access to infrastructure
services | Closing of gender gaps in |  | Quantifiable increase in women’s control
 | infrastructure |  | access to infrastructure |  | over, decisions in, related skills
 | services and |  | services |  | development and access to
 | technologies |  |  |  | infrastructure services
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1) Individual and | Closing of gender gaps in
•
women and men’s
participations and
leadership and access to
networks
Closing of gender gaps in
•
leadership positions and
decision making at the
individual, household,
community and political
level | Closing of gender gaps in
• | Quantitative indicators that measure
targets and quotas for women’s
participation and leadership in
community, including their access to
social networks
Quantifiable increase in the percentage
of women making decisions on behalf of
their families, communities and
government | Quantitative indicators that measure
 | community |  | women and men’s |  | targets and quotas for women’s
 | empowerment |  | participations and |  | participation and leadership in
 |  |  | leadership and access to |  | community, including their access to
 | including |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | networks |  | social networks
 | meaningful |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Closing of gender gaps in
• |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | participation and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | leadership positions and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Quantifiable increase in the percentage
 | leadership, |  | decision making at the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | of women making decisions on behalf of
 | Increase in |  | individual, household, |  | 
 | women networks |  | community and political |  | their families, communities and
 |  |  | level |  | government
 | and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | organizations |  |  |  | 
 | and agency |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 161 ===
Page 157
Economic and social indicators framed by ecological systems need to systematically integrate
gender-disaggregated and gender-sensitive data throughout – from needs assessments and
baseline indicators to program and project outcome targets, process, results and impact
assessments.
- Projects may consider how their gender indicators go beyond economic equity and socio-
political empowerment indicators to include climate-relevant environmental and
ecological factors, including access to public commons.
- Projects should indicate if any indicators were developed at the ground level in close and
continued consultation with communities and women, describing where and how.
As part of project design, determining which indicators to use from social and economic
empowerment goal charts above can have profound implications for project outcomes.
Establishing quantitative criteria alone, for instance, can have the unintended effect of excluding
entire constituencies of project beneficiaries.
The following questions can guide the project developer to focus on selecting appropriate
indicators.
- Will the project positively or negatively engage women and men?
- Will it impose increased time or care burdens on women relative to men?
- Is there a process in place to track and verify gender impacts? (positive and/or negative)
- Is there an improvement in the ratio of women to men engaging in the project decisions
and on-the-ground monitoring?
- Is there an increased sense of confidence and empowerment among the project
beneficiaries?
REQUIREMENTS
Define Monitoring Parameters for each of the above Gender Responsive Indicators chosen in Step
5(a) above.
Project developers will need to identify relevant monitoring parameters to monitor and evaluate
the progress towards equality enabled by the project as reflected in chosen indicator.
RESOURCES: To help guide development of Gender monitoring indicators –consider the following
resources:
- The World Bank’s PPP website with collated resources across the following sectors:
Agriculture, Education, Energy, Health, Information and Communications Technology
(ICT), Transport, Water and Sanitation. See:http://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-
partnership/ppp-sector/genderimpacts-ppps/sector-specific-materials/sector-specific-
materials
- Asian Development Bank (2013) Tool Kit on Gender Equality Results and Indicators
https://www.adb.org/documents/tool-kit-gender-equality-resultsand-indicators
- The Gender Data Portal for the latest gender-disaggregated data and gender statistics
covering demography, education, health, economic opportunities, public life and decision-
making, and agency, see http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/
- GACC tool see http://cleancookstoves.org/resources/490.html
EXAMPLE from ADB (2013) Gender Equality Dimension: Voice and Rights

=== PAGE 162 ===
Page 158
SAMPLE INDICATORS SAMPLE MONITORING PARAMETERS
Women’s participation, leadership, - Number and percentage of women and men
and decision making are supported who attend participatory planning and
in water supply and sanitation consultation meetings
(location, selection of technology, - Number and percentage of women and men
management, operation, and involved in the selection of technology,
maintenance location, operation, and management of
- Targets met for women’s improved water supply and sanitation
participation and decision - Number and percentage of women and men in
making in consultation water user groups
processes, user groups, and - Number and percentage of women in
committees leadership positions in water management
committees and on boards of water utilities
- Number and percentage of women involved in
decision making on revenue and tariff
arrangements (including identification of poor
and vulnerable households for free or
subsidized facilities)
- Number and percentage of women in charge of
operation, maintenance, and repair of facilities
- Number and percentage of male and female
facilitators and field staff working with water
committees and community groups on design,
planning, and consultation processes
- Changes in the location or type of water supply
or sanitation technology due to consultation
with women
- Changes to design, construction, management,
cost recovery, or maintenance practices due to
consultation with women
- Views of women and men on changes in
women’s household or community decision
making due to their involvement in water
supply and sanitation committees or activities
- Number of materials distributed to women or
women’s organizations on entitlements to
water and sanitation facilities, and number of
mass campaigns with information on
entitlements
REQUIREMENTS
Project developers should consider these aspects and establish the project's key gender indicators
There are a few cross-cutting qualitative and quantitative issues that gender indicators can
address:

--- Table 1 on Page 162 ---
 |  |  | 
 | SAMPLE INDICATORS |  | SAMPLE MONITORING PARAMETERS
 |  |  | 
 |  |  | 
Women’s participation, leadership,
and decision making are supported
in water supply and sanitation
(location, selection of technology,
management, operation, and
maintenance
- Targets met for women’s
participation and decision
making in consultation
processes, user groups, and
committees | Women’s participation, leadership, |  | - Number and percentage of women and men
 | and decision making are supported |  | who attend participatory planning and
 | in water supply and sanitation |  | consultation meetings
 | (location, selection of technology, |  | - Number and percentage of women and men
 | management, operation, and |  | involved in the selection of technology,
 | maintenance |  | location, operation, and management of
 | - Targets met for women’s |  | improved water supply and sanitation
 | participation and decision |  | - Number and percentage of women and men in
 | making in consultation |  | water user groups
 | processes, user groups, and |  | - Number and percentage of women in
 | committees |  | leadership positions in water management
 |  |  | committees and on boards of water utilities
 |  |  | - Number and percentage of women involved in
 |  |  | decision making on revenue and tariff
 |  |  | arrangements (including identification of poor
 |  |  | and vulnerable households for free or
 |  |  | subsidized facilities)
 |  |  | - Number and percentage of women in charge of
 |  |  | operation, maintenance, and repair of facilities
 |  |  | - Number and percentage of male and female
 |  |  | facilitators and field staff working with water
 |  |  | committees and community groups on design,
 |  |  | planning, and consultation processes
 |  |  | - Changes in the location or type of water supply
 |  |  | or sanitation technology due to consultation
 |  |  | with women
 |  |  | - Changes to design, construction, management,
 |  |  | cost recovery, or maintenance practices due to
 |  |  | consultation with women
 |  |  | - Views of women and men on changes in
 |  |  | women’s household or community decision
 |  |  | making due to their involvement in water
 |  |  | supply and sanitation committees or activities
 |  |  | - Number of materials distributed to women or
 |  |  | women’s organizations on entitlements to
 |  |  | water and sanitation facilities, and number of
 |  |  | mass campaigns with information on
 |  |  | entitlements
 |  |  | 

=== PAGE 163 ===
Page 159
- At the monetary level: How much money, dollar for dollar, reaches women and girls at the
local levels of consultation and how are decisions made around disbursement, use,
investment and reinvestments?
- At the empowerment level: How many women and how many men are actively involved
and engaged in reaching those decisions (about money disbursement, use, investment, and
reinvestment) and in acting on those decisions? How many women participate in
determining a valid indicator that best captures change for them?
- At the environmental/ecological level: How are access points to natural resources that poor
men and women depend protected? How are men and women involved in the decisions and
actions around stewarding natural resources for future generations?
- At the gender-differentiated level: What kinds of gender-differentiated evidence,
perspectives, narratives and realities are captured, recorded and learned from as a direct
result of their own measurements of progress?
REQUIREMENTS
Track and record changes that the project can support both in terms of gender-equitable processes
and in terms of Gender-Responsive performance.
STEP 6: PROJECT CLAIM - GENDER ACTIONS
REQUIREMENTS
Describe how the project delivers on its commitment statement (end of step 4) and the proposed
project gender goals, actions and commitments (from step 5).
10. What gender outcomes can this project realistically claim? Describe in one or two succinct and
clear paragraphs.
GENDER RESPONSIVE CHECKLIST:
1) The gender analysis of the project examines:
i. The different situations of women and men
ii. The impacts the project will have on different groups
2) The project collects and uses gender-disaggregated data and qualitative information to analyse
and track gender issues
3) Project is designed to meet the different needs and priorities of women and men
4) The project monitoring framework includes gender-responsive targets and indicators to
monitor gender equality results against the established baseline
5) Women/gender focused groups, associations or gender units in partner organisations are fully
engaged and consulted with.

=== PAGE 164 ===
Page 160
i 2019, November 6, GCF: Updated Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan 2020–2023, page 3
ii 2017, August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 24
iii 2020, May, CCSA: How COVID-19 is changing the world: a statistical perspective, page 40
iv 2020, May, UN Women: https://data.unwomen.org/women-count
v Gender and the economy. 2020. Primer on the gendered impacts of COVID-19.
https://www.gendereconomy.org/primer-on-the-gendered-impacts-of-covid-19/
vi 2020, Northrop, E., et al. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID-19 Crisis.’’ Report. Washington, DC:
World Resources Institute: http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery, pages 15-16
vii https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/oceans-fisheries-and-coastal-economies
viii 2017, The Green Climate Fund: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 32
ix 2018, IUCN: Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid
Rangelands
x 2020, GCF: Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan Template
xi 2017 August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, pages 30-31
xii xii 2020, Northrop, E., et al. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID-19 Crisis.’’ Report. Washington,
DC: World Resources Institute: http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery, pages 41-42
xiii 2020, Northrop, E., et al. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID-19 Crisis.’’ Report. Washington, DC:
World Resources Institute: http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery, page 15
xiv 2020, Northrop, E., et al. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID-19 Crisis.’’ Report. Washington, DC:
World Resources Institute: http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery, pages 53-54
xv N.d., WWF: Empowering women in coastal communities,
https://wwfeu.awsassets.panda.org/downloads/wwf_4_empowering.pdf
xvi 2017 August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, pages 30-31
xvii 2019, UNWTO Global Report on Women in Tourism, Second Edition, page 12
xviii 2019, UNWTO Global Report on Women in Tourism, Second Edition, page 70
xix 2019, UNWTO Global Report on Women in Tourism, Second Edition, page 77
xx 2019, UNWTO Global Report on Women in Tourism, Second Edition, page 50
xxi 2012: Tran, L. and Walter, P.: Ecotourism, gender and development in northern Vietnam, Annals of Tourism Research,
volume 44, pp. 116–130 in UNWTO Global Report on Women in Tourism, Second Edition, page 145
xxii 2017 August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, pages 30-31
xxiii 2002, Tibbetts, J.: “Coastal Cities: Living on the Edge,” Environmental Health Perspectives 110, no. 11: 674-81.
xxiv 2020, UNOPS: Infrastructure for gender equality and the empowerment of women,
https://content.unops.org/publications/UNOPS-Infrastructure-for-Gender-Equality-and-the-Empowerment-of-
women.pdf?mtime=20200914194443&focal=none, page 15
xxv 2003, Biliana Cicin-Sain et al., A Guide to Oceans, Coasts and Islands at the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(August 2002), accessed online at www.gpa.unep.org/documents/WSSD/Oceans-Coasts-and-Islands-at-the-WSSD.pdf
xxvi 2018, WHO: Water, sanitation and hygiene: measuring gender equality and empowerment
xxvii 2019, Ocean Conservancy: The Role of Gender in Waste Management
xxviii 2020, UNOPS: Infrastructure for gender equality and the empowerment of women,
https://content.unops.org/publications/UNOPS-Infrastructure-for-Gender-Equality-and-the-Empowerment-of-
women.pdf?mtime=20200914194443&focal=none, page 12
xxix N.d., UNEP: Gender Mainstreaming in the Management of the Marine and Coastal Ecosystems,
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/27633/Gender_MarEco.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y . p. 15
xxx 2020, UNOPS: Infrastructure for gender equality and the empowerment of women,
https://content.unops.org/publications/UNOPS-Infrastructure-for-Gender-Equality-and-the-Empowerment-of-
women.pdf?mtime=20200914194443&focal=none, page 16
xxxi 2017, International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), Achieve Gender Equality to Deliver the SDGs
xxxii Cotula and Blackmore (2014:51).
xxxiii 2017, August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 23
