=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sunny Kim
CreationDate: D:20210913151932+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
ModDate: D:20210913213244+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
4 – 7 October 2021
Virtual meeting
Provisional Agenda Item 15
14 September 2021
Consideration of funding
proposals – Addendum XI
Funding proposal package for FP179
Summary
This addendum contains the following six parts:
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Deployment Programme (TACATDP)” submitted by the CRDB Bank Plc (CRDB) ;
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point(s);
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s
assessment; and
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled “Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation
Technology Deployment Programme (TACATDP)” submitted by the CRDB Bank Plc (CRDB) is being
circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to
ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive information
of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 1
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point(s) 79
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 81
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 83
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 104
assessment
Gender documentation 106

=== PAGE 3 ===
Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Project/Programme title:
Deployment Programme (TACATDP).
Country(ies): Tanzania
Accredited Entity: CRDB Bank Plc
Date of first submission: [2021/03/29]
Date of current submission [2021/09/12]
Version number [V3.4]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 1 OF 78
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-CRDB-TANZANIA-2021/06/13]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 2 OF 78
A
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.1. Project or A.2. Public or private
Programme Private
programme sector
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for
A.3. Request for Proposals, indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate
Proposals (RFP) template for the Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.
Not applicable
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme
targets. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF
budget devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: GCF contribution:
Enter number%
Energy access and power generation:
☐
Enter number%
Low-emission transport:
☐ Enter number%
Enter number%
☐
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:
A.4. Result area(s) Forestry and land use:
☐
65%
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 35%
Enter number%
Most vulnerable people, communities and
☒ Enter number%
regions:
Health and well-being, and food and water
☒
security:
Infrastructure and built environment:
☐
Ecosystem and ecosystem services:
☐
Direct beneficiaries
62,064 per year and
1,241,288 over
programme lifetime
Indirect beneficiaries
245,152.80 per year and
A.5. Expected A.6. Expected
N/A 4,903,056 over
mitigation impact adaptation impact
the programme lifetime
% of population for
Direct beneficiaries
41..267% for Indirect
beneficiaries
A.7. Total financing
200,000,000 USD
(GCF + co-finance)
Medium (Upto USD 250
100,000,000 USD A.9. Project size
million)
A.8. Total GCF funding For multi-country
requested proposals, please fill out
annex 17.
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be
A.10. Financial consistent with A.8.
instrument(s) Grant 20,000,000 Equity Enter number
☒ ☐
requested for the GCF
Loan 70,000,000 Results-based
funding ☒ ☐
Guarantee 10,000,000 payment Enter number
☒
Indicate the maximum
Indicate the number of
number of years over
years and months the
A.11. Implementation which the impacts of the
project/ programme is A.12. Total lifespan
period investment are expected to
expected to be
be effective.
implemented 5 Years.
20 years.

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or
programme |  | Programme | A.2. Public or private
sector | Private |  |  | 
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP) |  | If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for
Proposals, indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate
template for the Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.
Not applicable |  |  |  |  | 
A.4. Result area(s) |  | Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme
targets. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF
budget devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Mitigation: Reduced emissions from:
Energy access and power generation:
☐
Low-emission transport:
☐
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:
☐
Forestry and land use:
☐
Adaptation: Increased resilience of:
Most vulnerable people, communities and
☒
regions:
Health and well-being, and food and water
☒
security:
Infrastructure and built environment:
☐
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: |  |  |  | GCF contribution:
Enter number%
Enter number%
Enter number%
Enter number%
65%
35%
Enter number%
Enter number% | 
A.5. Expected
mitigation impact |  | ☐
N/A | A.6. Expected
adaptation impact | Direct beneficiaries
62,064 per year and
1,241,288 over
programme lifetime
Indirect beneficiaries
245,152.80 per year and
4,903,056 over
the programme lifetime |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | % of population for
Direct beneficiaries
41..267% for Indirect
beneficiaries |  |  | 
A.7. Total financing
(GCF + co-finance) |  | 200,000,000 USD | A.9. Project size | Medium (Upto USD 250
million) |  |  | 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested |  | 100,000,000 USD
For multi-country
proposals, please fill out
annex 17. |  |  |  |  | 
A.10. Financial
instrument(s)
requested for the GCF
funding |  | Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be
consistent with A.8.
Grant 20,000,000 Equity Enter number
☒ ☐
Loan 70,000,000 Results-based
☒ ☐
Guarantee 10,000,000 payment Enter number |  |  |  |  | 
A.11. Implementation
period |  | ☒
Indicate the number of
years and months the
project/ programme is
expected to be
implemented 5 Years. | A.12. Total lifespan |  | Indicate the maximum |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | number of years over |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | which the impacts of the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | investment are expected to |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | be effective. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 20 years. |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 5 ---
A.1. Project or
programme

--- Table 3 on Page 5 ---
A.2. Public or private
sector

--- Table 4 on Page 5 ---
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)

--- Table 5 on Page 5 ---
A.5. Expected
mitigation impact

--- Table 6 on Page 5 ---
A.6. Expected
adaptation impact

--- Table 7 on Page 5 ---
A.7. Total financing
(GCF + co-finance)

--- Table 8 on Page 5 ---
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested

--- Table 9 on Page 5 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s)
requested for the GCF
funding

--- Table 10 on Page 5 ---
Indicate the number of
years and months the
project/ programme is
expected to be
implemented 5 Years.

--- Table 11 on Page 5 ---
A.11. Implementation
period

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 3 OF 78
A
Refer to the AE’s
Expected Nov. 2021 at safeguard policy and GCF
A.13. Expected date of
CRDB Bank’s board A.14. ESS category ESS Standards to assess
AE internal approval
meeting, after B.30 your FP category.
I-2
A.16. Has Readiness
A.15. Has this FP been
or PPF support been
submitted as a CN Yes No Yes No
☒ ☐ used to prepare this ☒ ☐
before?
FP?
A.17. Is this FP A.18. Is this FP
included in the entity Yes No included in the Yes No
☒ ☐ ☒ ☐
work programme? country programme?
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g.,
A.19. Complementarity
GEF, AF, CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
and coherence
Yes No
☐ ☒
A.20. Executing Entity
CRDB Bank Plc
information
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
CRDB Bank Plc, as the Accredited Entity of the GCF, is submitting the Tanzania CRDB:
Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme (TACATDP) to unlock the
climate resilience of smallholder farmers and transform the adaptive capacity of Tanzania's
agriculture sector. TACATDP will support CRDB Bank, Tanzania's largest lender to the agriculture
sector, with the resources and capacity to offer innovative financial products to farmers. As such,
TACATDP serves to provide farmers with affordable access to the adaptation tools, knowledge,
and capacity required to combat current and future climatic contexts and agronomic specificities
in Tanzania.
Agriculture is essential to Tanzania’s economic and social fabric, accounting for 27% of its gross
domestic product (GDP) and 67% of jobs1. However, due to technical, environmental, ecological,
and social factors, the agricultural sector is particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate
change, including with respect to climatic variabilities and the likelihood of extreme events. Erratic
rainfall patterns, drought, shifting weather patterns, and increased disease incidence will continue
to threaten the sector’s productivity. Climate change and changing temperature patterns have
already contributed to a decline in agricultural productivity. Over the past two decades, the sector
has experienced relatively low growth, seeing its GDP share drop from 29% in 2000 to 23% in
2012.2 The World Bank found that agricultural productivity in Tanzania already suffers at least
USD 200 million in annual losses due to weather-related risks.3 Climate and economic modeling
have shown that climate change may have cost 17% of Tanzania’s economic growth potential in
2019, while national food production is projected to decrease by 8-13% by 2050 due to climate-
related factors. The value-loss of agricultural GDP over the coming five decades is estimated at
approximately USD 27 billion. With agriculture playing an integral role in the lives of the country’s
most marginalized and vulnerable populations – 80-90% of agricultural land is held by smallholder
farmers and 98% of economically active rural Tanzanian women are engaged in farming – the
adverse effects of climate change will disproportionately harm those groups and hamper the
country’s sustainable development.4
In response, to transform the country’s agriculture sector and ensure the long-term adaptation
capacity, the TACATDP proposes a multipronged approach through two (2) components. The
first component includes developing and deploying customized financial products to target climate
adaptation and resilience in the agriculture sector and for smallholder farmers in particular. This
includes blending GCF and CRDB financing to establish a dedicated credit line for CRDB Bank’s
1 World Bank (2020). World Development Indicators.
2 The United Republic of Tanzania (2014 ). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
3 World Bank Group (2015). Tanzania: Agricultural Sector Risk Assessment.
4 The United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval |  |  | Expected Nov. 2021 at
CRDB Bank’s board
meeting, after B.30 | A.14. ESS category |  |  | Refer to the AE’s
safeguard policy and GCF
ESS Standards to assess
your FP category.
I-2
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before? |  |  | Yes No
☒ ☐ |  | A.16. Has Readiness |  | Yes No
☒ ☐
 |  |  |  |  | or PPF support been |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | used to prepare this |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | FP? |  | 
 | A.17. Is this FP |  | Yes No
☒ ☐ |  | A.18. Is this FP |  | Yes No
☒ ☐
 | included in the entity |  |  |  | included in the |  | 
 | work programme? |  |  |  | country programme? |  | 
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence |  |  | Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g.,
GEF, AF, CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
Yes No |  |  |  | 
 | A.20. Executing Entity |  | ☐ ☒
CRDB Bank Plc |  |  |  | 
 | information |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
CRDB Bank Plc, as the Accredited Entity of the GCF, is submitting the Tanzania CRDB:
Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme (TACATDP) to unlock the
climate resilience of smallholder farmers and transform the adaptive capacity of Tanzania's
agriculture sector. TACATDP will support CRDB Bank, Tanzania's largest lender to the agriculture
sector, with the resources and capacity to offer innovative financial products to farmers. As such,
TACATDP serves to provide farmers with affordable access to the adaptation tools, knowledge,
and capacity required to combat current and future climatic contexts and agronomic specificities
in Tanzania.
Agriculture is essential to Tanzania’s economic and social fabric, accounting for 27% of its gross
domestic product (GDP) and 67% of jobs1. However, due to technical, environmental, ecological,
and social factors, the agricultural sector is particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate
change, including with respect to climatic variabilities and the likelihood of extreme events. Erratic
rainfall patterns, drought, shifting weather patterns, and increased disease incidence will continue
to threaten the sector’s productivity. Climate change and changing temperature patterns have
already contributed to a decline in agricultural productivity. Over the past two decades, the sector
has experienced relatively low growth, seeing its GDP share drop from 29% in 2000 to 23% in
2012.2 The World Bank found that agricultural productivity in Tanzania already suffers at least
USD 200 million in annual losses due to weather-related risks.3 Climate and economic modeling
have shown that climate change may have cost 17% of Tanzania’s economic growth potential in
2019, while national food production is projected to decrease by 8-13% by 2050 due to climate-
related factors. The value-loss of agricultural GDP over the coming five decades is estimated at
approximately USD 27 billion. With agriculture playing an integral role in the lives of the country’s
most marginalized and vulnerable populations – 80-90% of agricultural land is held by smallholder
farmers and 98% of economically active rural Tanzanian women are engaged in farming – the
adverse effects of climate change will disproportionately harm those groups and hamper the
country’s sustainable development.4
In response, to transform the country’s agriculture sector and ensure the long-term adaptation
capacity, the TACATDP proposes a multipronged approach through two (2) components. The
first component includes developing and deploying customized financial products to target climate
adaptation and resilience in the agriculture sector and for smallholder farmers in particular. This
includes blending GCF and CRDB financing to establish a dedicated credit line for CRDB Bank’s |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 6 ---
Refer to the AE’s
safeguard policy and GCF
ESS Standards to assess
your FP category.
I-2

--- Table 3 on Page 6 ---
Expected Nov. 2021 at
CRDB Bank’s board
meeting, after B.30

--- Table 4 on Page 6 ---
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval

--- Table 5 on Page 6 ---
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before?

--- Table 6 on Page 6 ---
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 78
A
Agriculture Resilience and Adaptation (ARA) lending operations and supporting a guarantee
credit-enhancement facility to ease lending towards smallholder farmers pursuing adaptation
investments. CRDB Bank, in collaboration with other insurance companies will support the
launching of a dedicated ARA insurance scheme focused on smallholder farmers. The results
under this component will help justify and further scale up of innovative technologies and climate
interventions to achieve transformational shifts in the agriculture sector in Tanzania. The
successful implementation of TACATDP will also increase private investments into agriculture
and proliferate the availability of ARA financing products in the country.
Complementing such activity will be a technical assistance (TA) and capacity building component
to ensure the long-term sustainability of climate adaptation financing in the country in years to
come. The comprehensive targeted TA comprises five (5) capacity building sub-activities and five
(5) policy interventions with the potential to reduce the perceived risks of lending to
agribusinesses and climate adaptation activities, with the ultimate goal of supporting large-scale
investment in climate-compatible adaptation solutions. CRDB Bank, the Government of Tanzania,
financial institutions, agriculture end-users, regulators, and other stakeholders will be given the
opportunity to innovate on delivery mechanisms, systems, and financial products essential for
profitable climate-compatible agricultural financing, including agribusiness. Capacity-building
activities will include upgrading the CRDB Bank staff’s skills to perform climate risk assessments
and integrating climate risk management within their agricultural lending portfolio, as well as
working with smallholder farmers on identifying high-return adaptation opportunities. The results
under this component will help build, strengthen, and disseminate the data tools, climate
knowledge, institutional capacity, and policy interventions required to integrate climate risks and
climate adaptation into agricultural development programs in Tanzania.
By transforming the country’s climate financing processes to better address climate adaptation in
the agriculture sector, the TACATDP will help achieve a paradigm shift in the country’s approach
towards financing and building adaptation and resilience to climate change. The TACATDP is
estimated to realize 62,064 direct beneficiaries per year (1,241,288 direct beneficiaries over the
programme’s lifetime) and an additional 245,152.80 indirect beneficiaries per year (4,903,056
indirect beneficiaries over the programme’s lifetime). This is the equivalent of providing impactful
and long-lasting support to 1.2% of Tanzania’s population as direct beneficiaries and 4.67% of
the country’s population indirectly, of which 30% to 50% are women

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 78
B
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Background
Agriculture is the backbone of the United Republic of Tanzania (URT) economy. The sector is
central to achieving higher and more inclusive economic growth. It accounts for 27% of the country’s
gross domestic product (GDP) and 67% of jobs.5 Small-scale farmers still dominate the sector.
Production is mainly divided into cash and food crops. Main priority crops (according to the
Government of Tanzania, priority crops are those that have a primary food sovereignty and security
objective) are cassava, potatoes, banana, pulses, wheat, rice, millet, sorghum, and maize. Strategic
crops – those used mainly for exports – are coffee, cotton, cashew nut, sisal, pyrethrum, tea, cloves,
horticultural crops, oil seeds, spices, sugar, and flowers. On average, crop production contributes
71% to agricultural GDP and grows at 4.6% per annum.6 Food crop production increases at about
2.8% per annum, accounting for approximately 65% of agricultural GDP, while cash crops account
for about 10%. Food and cash crops account for about 70% of rural incomes. Considering these
economic indicators, the sector is expected to continue to play a central role for decades in the
country’s socio-economic development, particularly in rural areas. However, this prospect is
affected by multiple factors, including a high degree of uncertainty due to extreme vulnerability to
climate change. Given the importance of the agricultural sector to the economy and the challenges
faced due to climate change, CRDB Bank proposes establishing a dedicated facility to provide
innovative financial instruments to support adaptation and climate resilient agriculture targeting
these crop systems.
CRDB Bank Plc - Banking, Lending, Cards, Insurance & CRDB Bank Plc is an African bank and a
leading Financial Services Provider in Tanzania with current presence in Tanzania and Burundi, East
Africa. CRDB Bank Plc is a major lender to the agriculture sector, providing 45% of all credit to
agriculture borrowers, and is dedicated to providing innovative financial solutions while delivering a
sustainable contribution to the society. As a systemically significant financial institution and
Tanzania’s sole national GCF Direct access Accredited Entity (DAE), CRDB Bank has a crucial role
to play advancing Tanzania’s sustainable, low-carbon and climate-resilient development. As
Tanzania’s largest commercial bank, it is uniquely positioned to channel international support
efficiently to local project developers and implementers, including Tanzanian smallholder farmers,
microenterprises, and small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), through climate finance vehicles
that blend private capital with GCF resources in the form of loans, guarantees, or equity.
CRDB Bank offers a comprehensive range of corporate, retail, business, treasury, premier,
bancassurance and wholesale microfinance services through a network of 260 branches, 551 ATMs,
18 Depository ATMs, 12 Mobile branches, 1184 Point of Sales (POS) terminals, and has 450
microfinance partner institutions through which pertinent services are rendered to customers.
As CRDB Bank scales up its management of climate-aligned investment and grow its climate-
compatible business lines, CRDB Bank can not only strengthen its own performance, but can also
contribute to climate-alignment and financial viability in the face of a changing climate for its clients,
the communities it services, and the wider business and financial ecosystem in Tanzania.
Evidence of climate change in the URT
While a detailed assessment of the current and future climate characteristics in the URT is supplied
as Annex 22, background information and a brief description of climate change is provided below.
5 World Bank (2020). World Development Indicators.
6 United Republic of Tanzania (2019). Ag ricultural Sector Development Programme Phase II.

--- Table 1 on Page 8 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION | 
 | B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) | 
Background
Agriculture is the backbone of the United Republic of Tanzania (URT) economy. The sector is
central to achieving higher and more inclusive economic growth. It accounts for 27% of the country’s
gross domestic product (GDP) and 67% of jobs.5 Small-scale farmers still dominate the sector.
Production is mainly divided into cash and food crops. Main priority crops (according to the
Government of Tanzania, priority crops are those that have a primary food sovereignty and security
objective) are cassava, potatoes, banana, pulses, wheat, rice, millet, sorghum, and maize. Strategic
crops – those used mainly for exports – are coffee, cotton, cashew nut, sisal, pyrethrum, tea, cloves,
horticultural crops, oil seeds, spices, sugar, and flowers. On average, crop production contributes
71% to agricultural GDP and grows at 4.6% per annum.6 Food crop production increases at about
2.8% per annum, accounting for approximately 65% of agricultural GDP, while cash crops account
for about 10%. Food and cash crops account for about 70% of rural incomes. Considering these
economic indicators, the sector is expected to continue to play a central role for decades in the
country’s socio-economic development, particularly in rural areas. However, this prospect is
affected by multiple factors, including a high degree of uncertainty due to extreme vulnerability to
climate change. Given the importance of the agricultural sector to the economy and the challenges
faced due to climate change, CRDB Bank proposes establishing a dedicated facility to provide
innovative financial instruments to support adaptation and climate resilient agriculture targeting
these crop systems.
CRDB Bank Plc - Banking, Lending, Cards, Insurance & CRDB Bank Plc is an African bank and a
leading Financial Services Provider in Tanzania with current presence in Tanzania and Burundi, East
Africa. CRDB Bank Plc is a major lender to the agriculture sector, providing 45% of all credit to
agriculture borrowers, and is dedicated to providing innovative financial solutions while delivering a
sustainable contribution to the society. As a systemically significant financial institution and
Tanzania’s sole national GCF Direct access Accredited Entity (DAE), CRDB Bank has a crucial role
to play advancing Tanzania’s sustainable, low-carbon and climate-resilient development. As
Tanzania’s largest commercial bank, it is uniquely positioned to channel international support
efficiently to local project developers and implementers, including Tanzanian smallholder farmers,
microenterprises, and small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), through climate finance vehicles
that blend private capital with GCF resources in the form of loans, guarantees, or equity.
CRDB Bank offers a comprehensive range of corporate, retail, business, treasury, premier,
bancassurance and wholesale microfinance services through a network of 260 branches, 551 ATMs,
18 Depository ATMs, 12 Mobile branches, 1184 Point of Sales (POS) terminals, and has 450
microfinance partner institutions through which pertinent services are rendered to customers.
As CRDB Bank scales up its management of climate-aligned investment and grow its climate-
compatible business lines, CRDB Bank can not only strengthen its own performance, but can also
contribute to climate-alignment and financial viability in the face of a changing climate for its clients,
the communities it services, and the wider business and financial ecosystem in Tanzania.
Evidence of climate change in the URT
While a detailed assessment of the current and future climate characteristics in the URT is supplied
as Annex 22, background information and a brief description of climate change is provided below. |  | 

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 78
B
The climate of Tanzania is complex due to the simultaneous impacts of several key factors, ranging
from the large-scale circulation and global modes of variabilities to various mesoscale processes
interacting with the underlying heterogeneous surface features. The large-scale drivers include
Inter-tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), equatorial Pacific Sea surface temperature (ENSO), Indian
Ocean Dipole (IOD), and more. The surface features that modulate the prevailing circulation and
local rainfall are the complex topography surrounding Mount Kilimanjaro, dense forests, the coast,
and the presence of inland water bodies, such as Lake Victoria. Increased greenhouse gas (GHG)
concentration could have a substantial impact on the climate of Tanzania in terms of warming trends
and changing rainfall variability. Several studies have investigated future changes in the climate of
East Africa under different emission scenarios. Most of these studies are either focusing on the
projected changes to the climate mean variables or are using coarse-resolution global models that
have difficulty representing local-scale processes. However, detailed regional and local analysis of
both mean climate variables, as well as sector-specific extreme climate indices are of significant
value. This section presents an assessment of the mean climate and sector-specific extreme indices
over Tanzania for the present-day climate as well as projected changes for three future horizons
based on three regional climate models. The climate assessment considers two emission scenarios
– RCP4.5 (low) and RCP8.5 (high) – for future climates.
Present day climate:
Trend analysis of the historical period (1976-2005) revealed the existence of a drying and warming
trend in Tanzania (see Figure A1.1). Observations show the drying trend to be fastest over the
northeastern regions at a rate of approximately 9mm/month/decade. While the warming trend is
observed throughout the country, the highest warming trend of approximately 0.35˚C/decade is
noted over the western regions. The results also highlight that the daytime warming trend is stronger
than the nighttime warming trend.
Figure A1.1: Spatial pattern of trend in precipitation (left column), tmax (middle column) and tmin (right column) from obse
row) and modelled average (bottom row). Black dots indicate that the slope is statistically significant at 0.05 level.

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 78
B
In terms of sector specific extreme indices, analyses have been carried out by clustering them into
three categories, i.e., water availability/flood risk indicators, e.g., PRCPtot, R95ptot, R99ptot,
RX1day, RX5day, and R20mm for drought stress indicators such as CDD, SPI6 and SPEI6 and
heat stress indicators e.g., WSDI, HWF, HWA, HWM, HWD and HWN. Figure A1.2 shows the
spatial pattern of extreme indices related to water availability/flood risk indicator derived from both
observations and ensemble mean model simulations. It shows that the spatial distribution of the wet
day total precipitation (PRCPtot) and frequency of heavy precipitation days (R20mm) follows the
annual mean precipitation pattern that has higher values over the southern regions. Indices such as
rx1day or R95ptot identified the coastal regions as the hot spot. The ensemble mean model
simulation shows similar spatial characteristics, despite underestimating the intensity.
Figure A1.2: Spatial distribution of climatological values of PRCPtot (first column), rx1day (second column), r99ptot
(third column), r20mm (fourth column) and CDD (fifth column) from observation (top row) and ensemble average
simulations (bottom row).
Trend analysis on extreme indices for the historical base period reveals that drought stress indicators,
such as CDD, SPI6, and SPEI6, show intensification droughts in the recent period. Figure A1.3, for
example, displays the time series of standardized precipitation evaporation index (SPEI6), and
standardized precipitation index (SPI6) for Arusha and Lindi stations, respectively, which confirms
the declining trend during the historical period. Heavy precipitation intensity (PRCPTot) and
frequency (R20mm) also show a decreasing trend in both observation and simulations; however, the
region of significance is generally very small.

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 78
B
Figure A1.3: Observed and modelled trend in SPEI and SPI for Arusha (top) and Lindi (bottom) stations, respectively.
Future climate:
Projected changes to mean temperature and precipitation show an increase in temperature for the
whole country, but the increase in precipitation is limited only to the northeastern region (as seen in
Figure A1.4). For western boundary areas, however, precipitation is projected to decrease. The
projection also reveals that the increase in temperature is approximately 1˚C for the recent future
(2011-2040) for both emission scenarios, but the warming accelerated to approximately 5˚C by the
end of the century in RCP8.5 while warming levelled to approximately 2˚C in RCP4.5, demonstrating
the importance of proactive measures to reduce GHG emissions (as displayed in the second row of
Figure A1.4). The projected increase (decrease) in precipitation could reach around 15mm/month for
the north east (western) boundary regions by the end of the century in RCP8.5. It must be noted that
the precipitation increase (decrease) in the northeast (western) boundary regions are smaller in
magnitude and are not statistically significant in the RCP4.5 scenario.

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 78
B
Figure A1.4: Projected changes in annual mean minimum (first and fourth column), maximum (second and fifth column)
temperature and precipitation (third and six columns) for near future (2011-2040, first row), mid future (2041-2070,
second row) and far future (2071-2100, third row) with respect to the reference period of 1976-2005. These are model
ensemble means for the low (RCP4.5, the first three columns) and high (RCP8.5, the last three columns) emission
scenarios. Black dots indicate that the change is statistically significant at 0.05 level.
While all heat stress indicators are projected to increase in future climates, the highest and most
significant increase is noted for warm spell duration index (WSDI). The duration of warm spells is
projected to increase by more than 175 days for western border areas for the mid-future (2041-2070)
and by approximately 245 days at the end of the century under the RCP8.5 emission scenario (see
Figure A1.5). Drought stress indicators, such as SPEI6 and CDD, indicate an intensification of
droughts throughout the country in the future climate (see Figure A1.5). SPI6, on the other hand,
follows the pattern of mean precipitation, where intensification of drought does not include the central
and northeast region. This is because the SPI6 is derived from precipitation data alone and does not
consider the increase in evapotranspiration. The frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation
events (e.g., RX1day, R20mm, and R95Ptot) are also projected to increase with increased
emissions. The projected increase in short-lived heavy precipitation events followed by a long dry-
spell and intensified widespread droughts will have critical implications for local water resources
management and agricultural production.

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 78
B
Figure A1.5: Spatial pattern of projected changes in heat (WSDI, first two columns) and drought (CDD, last two columns)
stress indicators for mid-future (top row) and far-future (bottom row) for RCP4.5 (columns 1&3) and RCP8.5 (columns 2&4)
emission scenario. Black dots indicate that the change is statistically significant at 0.05 level.
Following is an overview of the projection of other climate indexes relevant for this programme. In
the high-warming scenario, temperatures in the near future period (2026-2055) are projected to
increase by 1.61°C compared to temperatures observed in the reference period. With rising
temperatures, the frequency of warm days and nights is also projected to increase by 116 days and
by 98 nights in the future compared to the reference period. In the future period, precipitation in the
rainy season is projected to increase by 4.2% (multi-model & project area mean) compared to
precipitation in the same season observed in the reference period. This increase in precipitation is,
however, accompanied by an increase in the number of consecutive dry days expected to occur in
the rainy season, which is projected to increase by 1 day on average and up to 5 days in the
southeastern part of the country. Similarly, there is a projected rise in the frequency of extreme wet
events with an average of an additional 2 days across the country and up to 4 days in the country’s
eastern part (all in the future period compared to the reference). The number of high-wind speed
days is also projected to increase from 2.1 days on average in the reference period to approximately
7.7 days in the future period for the most affected districts located in Tanzania’s eastern regions.
Investigation into the intra-annual characteristics of the growing and dry season length suggests that
with increased GHG emissions, the dry season length is projected to expand. The projected
expansion of the dry season length is higher for RCP8.5 and towards the end of the century. The
likelihood of a decline in the growing season length together with the projected intensification
droughts suggest that alternative adaptation measures such as irrigation or switching to better-
adapted alternative crops, worth considering.

--- Table 1 on Page 13 ---
 |  |  | 
 |  |  | 
 |  |  | 

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 78
B
Specific sectorial impacts
Agriculture:
The agriculture sector comprises approximately 27% of Tanzania’s GDP as well as 67% of jobs.7
Most of Tanzania’s rural population is solely dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods. Agriculture
in Tanzania is dominated by smallholder farmers, many of whom are cultivating farms of less than
three hectares and practicing low-technology rain-fed agriculture, with over 60% of Tanzania’s crop
area cultivated by hand hoe.8 Food crop production dominates the agriculture economy. Maize is the
country’s main subsistence crop and is being grown by more than 50% of Tanzanian farmers in all
regions of the country. Most of Tanzania is classified broadly as a “Maize-Mixed” farming system,
with areas of root crop-based farming in the southern and the northwestern regions. Rice is the
second most important staple in Tanzanian agriculture. Rain-fed paddy rice production by
smallholders is primarily centered in the regions of Mbeya, Morogoro, Mwanza, Shinyanga, and
Tabora. Other major food crops include sorghum, millet, wheat, pulses, cassava, potatoes, bananas,
plantains, sugar, groundnuts, sesame, coconuts, and soybeans. Much of Tanzania’s sorghum and
millet are produced in arid and semi-arid agro-ecological zones, and finger millet is predominantly
grown in the country’s southwestern regions.
Dependency on rain-fed agriculture makes Tanzania’s agriculture sector particularly vulnerable to
weather change and climate change. Unreliable rainfall in terms of intensity and distribution is
currently the most frequent and damaging production risk facing the sector, while drought is also a
significant risk. Changing climate has already resulted in a general decline in agricultural productivity,
including changes in agro-diversity. For instance, a significant declining trend in the production of
maize, sorghum and millet is found over central Tanzania which resulted in a decrease of food
security for 30% of the area considered9. This negative trend of yield is attributed to the declining
mean annual rainfall. Another study also found a reduction in coffee (C. arabica) yield over northern
Tanzania as a result of increases in night time temperature10. They estimated that every rise in 1oC
in Tmin will reduce the annual coffee yield by about 140 kg/hc.
Climate variability and change and their associated adverse impacts play a fundamental role in
influencing agricultural production and food security. For instance, El Niño and La Niña explain up to
35% of the global variation on wheat, oil seed, and coarse grain.11 In a modeling study over Tanzania,
a 13% decrease in maize production was found to be associated with a 2˚C increase in seasonal
mean temperature by 2050.12 Irrigated agriculture, in areas in which it is implemented, helps to
stabilize agricultural production, improve food security, increase farm productivity and income, and
produce high-value crops such as vegetables and flowers.
Evidence of the impacts of climate variability on agriculture sector in Tanzania include shifts in agro-
ecological zones, prolonged dry episodes, unpredictability in rainfall, uncertainty in cropping patterns,
increased weed competition with crops for moisture, nutrients, and light, and ecological changes
pertaining to pests and diseases. The shortening and/or change of the growing season, a trend that
has already been observed in Tanzania, is seen as a direct consequence of a warming climate and
changes in rainfall patterns. Between 2015 and 2019, drought was most frequently reported in the
northern regions (Arusha, Tanga, Manyara, Kilimanjaro, and Mara), central regions (Dodoma and
Morogoro), and southeastern regions (Mtwara and Lindi). The increasingly “bimodal” tendencies and
7 World Bank (2020). World Development Indicators.
8 The United Republic of Tanzania (2014 ). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
9 Mkonda, M. Y., & He, X. (2017). Yields of the major food crops: Implications to food security and policy in Tanzania’s semi-arid agro-
ecological zone. Sustainability, 9(8),
10 Craparo, A. C. W., Van Asten, P. J., Läderach, P., Jassogne, L. T., & Grab, S. W. (2015). Coffea arabica yields decline in Tanzania due
to climate change: Global implications. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 207, 1-10.
11 Ferris, J. N. (1999). An analysis of the impact of ENSO (El Nino/Southern Oscillation) on global crop yields.
https://ageconsearch.umn.edu/record/11741/files/sp99-11.pdf
12 Rowhani, P., Lobell, D. B., Linderman, M., & Ramankutty, N. (2011). Climate variability and crop production in Tanzania. Agricultural and
Forest Meteorology, 151(4), 449–460.

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 78
B
rainfall patterns in the north correspond with this pattern.
Overall, national food production is projected to decrease by 8-13% by 2050 due to increased heat
stress, drying, erosion, flood damage, and post-harvest losses. Bean, sorghum, and rice yield
projections follow similar trends, with decreases of 5-9% projected by 2050. Increasing heat stress
and growing prevalence of the coffee berry borer beetle is expected to decrease coffee productivity
from the current 225 kg/ha to less than 100 kg/ha by 2060. Along the coast, cassava and rice crops
are subject to salinization, water logging, and inundation from rising sea levels. The value loss of
agriculture GDP from the impacts of climate change over the coming five decades is estimated at
USD 27 billion (Tanzanian Shillings 43,200 trillion), for an annual average of approximately USD 540
million (Tanzania Shillings 864,000 billion). With an expected increase of disaster incidents, early
warning systems in the agriculture sector need to be strengthened through multifaceted and varying
strategies, including a crop insurance scheme. It has to be noted that other climate drivers such as
deterioration of land resources, deforestation, and land use degradation are also affecting agricultural
productivity significantly. For instance, declined fertilizer consumption accounts for 59% of the
variability in the total annual production of rize and maize over Usangu plain in Tanzania13. For
comparison, increased variability in rainfall resulted in reduction of yield variability by 39%.
From both policy and investment perspectives, the adaptation of the agricultural sector as it relates
to crop production should consider the synergies with other closely related sectors, including pest
management, irrigation as well as water and soil management. Investments for better soil and water
management can improve the resilience of rural incomes. Due to the removal of biomass, e.g.,
deforestation, erosion from lack of investment in soil and water management, and inadequate
maintenance of soil fertility, more than 60 % of the land used to produce crops, livestock, and forest
products and services are degraded. The soil thus has a severely diminished capacity to retain water
and soil nutrients, grow crops, provide forest products, assure water availability and quality, and
provide other essential ecosystem services. This results in significant losses to national natural
capital. Moreover, most rural poor live on degraded land, which will make it especially hard to break
the cycle of poverty. It is important to highlight that agriculture in Tanzania accounts for an estimated
89 % of national freshwater withdrawals — higher than the global average of about 70 % and the
African average of about 80 %.
Considering the importance of this sector for the national economy and social development,
Tanzania must thus better manage climate risk and environmental degradation to ensure the long-
term productivity of its agricultural sector. The transformation of Tanzanian agriculture requires a
shift to adaptive practices, including water allocation through modernizing irrigation and improving
water and land management. An efficient agriculture adaptation strategy should also monitor any
adverse effect that could result from maladaptation, including adaptation practices that will increase
the associated greenhouse gas emissions as the current model of transformation of agriculture is
driven by factors such as increased purchased inputs per unit of land, mechanization and cultivating
more land.
Water resources:
Increasing rainfall variability and prolonged droughts cause significant pressures on the country’s
available water resources. Severe and recurrent droughts in the past decade triggered a decrease
in water flows in rivers, leading to shrinking lakes and declining water levels in satellite lakes and
hydropower dams. Furthermore, some of Tanzania’s perennial rivers have changed to seasonal
rivers and some wetlands have dried up. The increased pressure placed on Tanzania’s water
resources by increasing climate change and variability is further exacerbated by degradation caused
by pollution, over-abstraction, and encroachment of water catchments for various land uses (e.g.,
agriculture, urbanization, and industrial development). Water scarcity and vulnerability in Tanzania
13 Malley, Z. J. U., Taeb, M., & Matsumoto, T. (2009). Agricultural productivity and environmental insecurity in the Usangu plain, Tanzania:
policy implications for sustainability of ag riculture. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 11(1), 175-195.

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 78
B
have negative impacts on the country’s critical watersheds, recharge areas, and wetlands. Wetlands
are facing increasingly frequent droughts, among other challenges brought about by climate change.
Increasing evapotranspiration due to rising temperatures and changed rainfall patterns will change
wetland water, causing adverse consequences for wetlands’ biodiversity.
For example, increased pH levels in Lake Natron have already been observed as affecting
flamingoes’ breeding sites. The hydrological monitoring network has improved in the Rufiji and
Pangani basins due to support availed from varying initiatives. However, many flow monitoring
stations in other basins are inoperative, and there are insufficient resources to allow for the regular
reading of those that do remain operational. Groundwater monitoring is currently only being
conducted in several select areas. Similarly, water quality sampling and analysis are also hampered
due to limited available funding and inadequately equipped analysis laboratories. The major water
sources (catchments, groundwater recharge areas, and wetlands) have not been properly delineated
and are thus not being adequately monitored or protected. The absence of systematic and
comprehensive monitoring regimes is limiting and precluding knowledge on the severity and extent
of the adverse impacts of climate change.
Apart from climate stressors, non-climate factors, such as, population, economic situations,
technology, social and political factors can also affect future supply and demand for water in
Tanzania. These factors are likely to present additional uncertainties to those associated with climate
variables. For instance, an assessment of socio-economic, cultural and livelihood factors that
influence community participation in restoring and managing water resources in the Uluguru
Mountains revealed that conflicts and competition for water during the dry season majorly hinders
conservation efforts in the catchments14. In a survey on the impact of population growth on water
resources availability in Western District, Zanzibar, it was found that 78.8% of the households face
domestic water scarcity because of rapid increase of population15.
Macroeconomic impacts
The current climate variability and occurrence of extreme weather and climate events have impacts
beyond agriculture, causing major economic costs to Tanzania.16 Climate variability and climate
change already affect ’Tanzania’s economic growth potential. Macro-economic impact assessments
performed in the context of the preparation of this programme shows that the country currently loses
about 8.5% of its growth potential due to temperature and hydrometeorological extremes, including
changing precipitation, temperature, and wind patterns. Looking into the future (2040s), the negative
impacts due to climate change could widen this gap in all climate scenarios. Even in the lowest
warming scenario (RCP2.6), losses of about 10.3% are projected, and losses could increase up to
16.3% where global emissions to remain unabated in accordance with a high-warming scenario
(RCP8.5). Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), eradicating poverty, and ensuring
food security will require significant effective investments in adaptation, especially in the agriculture
sector.
Potential for adaptation and programme relevance
As noted, the agricultural sector, a key pilar of Tanzania’s economy and the focus of this programme
will be severely affected by the consequences of climate change. Under current projections, there
will be significant and consequential impacts on Tanzania’s economy and food security. As an
illustration of a climatic suitability analysis conducted on 22 crops currently in CRDB Bank’s loan
portfolio, the suitability of cassava and beans is described below.
14 Munishi, P.K.T., Ngaga, Y. M. and Soka, G. E. (2008). Socio-economic, cultural and livelihood factors influencing local people
participation in water resource managem ent in the Uluguru Mountains, Eastern Tanzania. Tanzania Journal of Forestry and Nature
Conservation 78: 43–53.
15 Ayoub, Salma Yahya (2019) The Impact of Population Growth on Water Resources Availability in Western District, Zanzibar. Masters
thesis, The Open University of Tanzania.
16 Shemsanga, Nyatichi Omambia, and Gu (2010). The Cost of Climate Change in Tanzania: Impacts and Adaptations.

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 78
B
Cassava, a key food staple in Tanzania, is produced extensively in the country in almost all districts.
Current climate suitability widely varies from 0.3 (unsuitable) in the country’s central districts to above
0.9 (very suitable) in the western districts. Cassava’s climatic suitability is projected to decrease in
nearly all areas of the country, with a decrease of 1-5% between now and the 2040s. Beans are
another key staple as well as an export crop in Tanzania. For beans with a medium to long cropping
cycle, climatic suitability ranges between 0.6 and 1 in all districts, reflecting beans’ relatively good
adaptation to current climatic conditions. However, moving into the future, the suitability could rapidly
decrease. For example, climatic suitability in southeastern districts is projected to decrease by up to
10% compared to current conditions. On average, all districts could face a rapid decrease in
suitability, primarily driven by a steep decrease in temperature suitability.
To counter the projected negative consequences of climate change on crop productivity in Tanzania,
nine categories of adaptation measures and technologies are proposed according to the level of
suitability and changes in precipitation and precipitation extremes; temperature and temperature
extremes; and wind speed and changes in extreme wind condition (e.g., wind-proofed measures).
For example, in areas where crop suitability falls below 0.5, the programme will either support shifting
towards varieties with a more adequate length of the growing cycle (e.g., beans with higher suitability)
or even shifting crops (e.g., promoting non-irrigated paddy rice). When suitability is higher than 0.9,
indicating close to optimal growing conditions, risk transfer products could be proposed to farmers.
For suitability ranging from 0.5 to 0.9, a range of adaptation categories and parameters are proposed
to determine appropriate measures, including (1) the severity of the change in hydrometeorological
extremes and temperature patterns and (2) the level of uncertainty associated with the results.
The overall objective of the programme is to support farmers with adaptation tools, knowledge, and
capacity to enable and unlock the best adaptation options to current and future climatic contexts and
agronomic specificities.
Alignment with the country’s national priorities and strong country ownership approach:
This project will provide a direct and substantive contribution to the implementation of key climate
change and sectorial policy frameworks in Tanzania, including the following:
• Tanzania’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)17 provided an initial estimate of
immediate and start-up financing needs for enhancing adaptive capacity at approximately
USD 150 million. An additional estimated USD 500 million per year is needed to address
climate change adaptation and build resilience through 2020, increasing to USD 1 billion per
year by 2030. The NDC found costs are likely to increase depending on global mitigation
efforts, with total estimated costs totaling up to USD 60 billion by 2030 for mitigation and
adaptation investments in Tanzania. The NDC adaptation component for the agriculture sector
offered solutions towards the achievement of all the five targeted objectives: a) Up-scaling the
level of improvement of agricultural land and water management; b) Increasing yields through
inter alia climate-resilient agriculture; c) Protecting smallholder farmers against climate-related
shocks including through crop insurance; d) Strengthening the capacity of Agriculture
research institutions to conduct basic and applied research; and e) Strengthening knowledge,
extension services, and agricultural infrastructure to target climate actions;
• Tanzania’s National Agriculture Policy (2013)18 aims at addressing challenges that hamper
the development of the country’s agricultural sector, including low productivity of factors of
production, overdependence on rain-fed agriculture, climate change, the inadequate
participation of the private sector, environmental degradation, and crop disease. The policy
promotes environmental conservation through discouraging unsustainable agricultural
17 The United Republic of Tanzania (2016). Tanzania: Intended Nationally Determined Contributions.
18 The United Republic of Tanzania (2013 ). National Agriculture Policy.

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 78
B
practices, including slash-and-burn practices and the cultivation of sensitive and marginal
lands. Furthermore, it fosters improved land husbandry through soil erosion control and soil
fertility improvement and promotes activities contributing to sustainable land management and
addressing climate change.
• The Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilient Plan19, an elaborated policy for the period of
2014-2019, suffered from a lack of operationalization due to a lack of resources to support
its implementation. This project will contribute significantly towards achieving its resilience
activities and investment priorities that aim at i) improving agricultural land and water
management; (ii) increasing yields; (iii) protecting the most vulnerable against climate
shocks; and (iv) strengthening knowledge and system to target climate action,
• The recently adopted National Climate Change Strategy priorities for adaptation: The strategy
covers broader areas and actionable strategic objectives that need to be implemented and
related to adaptation, mitigation, and cross-cutting issues. The strategy indicates that
adaptation remains amongst the highest priorities for Tanzania. This Strategy provides the
basis for identifying short, medium- and long-term adaptation activities designed to address
existing and emerging climate change threats. The adaptation strategies identified in this
section are built on and extend beyond the NAPA, envisioned National Adaptation Plans
(NAPs), and Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) which identify medium- and long-
term adaptation actions. Agriculture is central to the strategy, which recommends the
following urgent actions: Promote uptake of climate-smart agriculture practices and
technologies; Reduce post-harvest losses and promote value addition of agriculture produce;
and Promote the development of climate risk management mechanisms.
• The programme is in full accordance with the Tanzania’s Development Vision 202520 and the
Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP II).21 By reducing risks on farming systems, it will enable
the implementation of the allow for mobilized private investments in the agriculture sector as
outlined in the Second Agriculture Sector Development Program (ASDP II)22, which maps the
path for agriculture through 2028. Adopted in 2018, the ASDP II, is set up with goals to
transform agriculture by promoting commercialization, prioritizing high-potential commodity
value chains, and mobilizing capital by giving the formal private sector a growing role in
agriculture. The programme acknowledges that the current transformation of agriculture
offers an excellent opportunity to catalyze private investments and raise the incomes of the
poor. Private investment is central to financing Tanzania’s strategy for sustained growth, and
to its economic transformation. ASDP II recognizes that public funding will not be sufficient to
meet its objectives and that private investment is essential. Of the total needed financing of
USD 45 billion, private investment is expected to contribute USD 20 billion.
• The programme remains fully in accordance with the 2007 National Adaptation Programme
of Actions which list 14 adaptation measures to be supported with national and international
financial and technical assistance, including (i) Water efficiency in crop production irrigation
to boost production and conserve water in all areas; (ii) Alternative farming systems and water
harvesting; (iii) Develop alternative water storage programs and technology for communities;
(iv) Community based catchments conservation and management programs; (v) Explore and
invest in alternative clean energy sources e.g. Wind, Solar, biodiesel, etc. to compensate for
lost hydro potential; (vi) promotion of application of cogeneration in the industry sector for lost
hydro potential; (vii) Afforestation programmes in degraded lands using more adaptive and
19 The United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
20 The United Republic of Tanzania (1999 ). Tanzania Development Vision 2025.
21 The United Republic of Tanzania (2016). The Second Five Year Development Plan, 2016/17- 2020/21.
22 The United Republic of Tanzania (2019). Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase II.

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 78
B
fast growing tree species: (iix) Develop community forest fire prevention plans and
programmes; (ix) Establishing and Strengthening community awareness programmes on
preventable major health hazards; (x) Implement sustainable tourism activities in the coastal
areas and relocation of vulnerable communities from low-lying areas; (xi) Enhance wildlife
extension services and assistance to rural communities in managing wildlife resources; (xii)
Water harvesting and recycling: (xiii) Construction of artificial structures, e.g., sea walls,
artificially placing sand on the beaches and coastal drain beach management system; (xiv)
Establish good land tenure system and facilitate sustainable human settlements
Main root causes and barriers that need to be addressed with this proposal: the overall performance
of agriculture has been less than ideal in recent past years: little private investment has gone into
agribusiness with growing concerns about the future. From 2006 to 2016, growth in agricultural GDP
averaged only 3.5% against an overall 6% annual growth rate generally considered necessary to
reduce poverty sustainably. Labor productivity in agriculture has gone up slightly, but land productivity
has stagnated despite land expansion accounting for most agricultural growth. This observation
signals potentially combined effects from climate change and current agricultural practices. As a
consequence of this increasing impact of climate change, it indicates clearly that the Tanzanian
agricultural sector will not be able to attain its growth, social, and employment targets without
ensuring that all investments made in the sector adequately consider adaptation to climate change
and increase its resilience. Investments in the sector should contribute to better management of the
potential adverse effects of accelerated climate-related impacts on intensified agriculture on the
environment and related ecosystems. Considering the high reliance of economic growth on
agriculture, it is imperious to better manage ecological impacts of current agriculture intensification
and transformation approach through sustained changes in agriculture practices and the promotion
of adaptation and climate resilient measures with no or very limited negative environmental
externalities. The required effort is beyond existing approaches mostly consisting of mechanization,
abundant use of fertilizers and improved seeds. There is an urgent need to shift to technologies
supporting climate-related pest management, climate strategic soil management practices, climate-
ready crops, conservation agriculture (CA), and patch intensification. A wider range of adaptation
approaches, such as technological upgrades and changes in farming practices, have a huge potential
to harness the triple imperative to adapt the sector to climate change, increase productivity, and
reduce emissions of greenhouse gas and other negative environmental impacts. Other such benefits
include reduced pest pressure, improved soil fertility and moisture retention, carbon sequestration
(with attendant mitigation benefits), yield, and livelihoods. Despite its growing importance in the
economic development of Tanzania, the financial private sector still plays a limited role in the
agricultural sector. It is not only the regulatory frameworks or trade barriers that explains this limited
role but also the growing risk induced by climate variability and change. As an example, in
neighboring country of Uganda, it was reported that more than 80% of the default on loans in the
agricultural sector were related to deficient production due to extreme weather events. Climate risk
thus poses a twofold intertwined consequence on the participation of the private sector in agricultural
finance. Firstly, by increasing risk, it reduces the appetite of private banks as there are other less
risky and therefore more profitable sectors (real estate, retail, etc.). As a consequence, fewer financial
actors operate in the sector, which decreases competition and also innovation. Secondly, banks
operating in the agricultural sector have to account for the higher risk associated with farming activities
(e.g., climate, price volatility), leading to higher interest rates than other economic activities. Higher
interest rates and the low creditworthiness of farmers (when credit history is even available) limit the
capacity of those in the agriculture sector to access short- to long-term credit, contributing to
stagnating and even decreasing productivity in the sector due to the lack of investments, resulting in
a downward vicious economic cycle.

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 78
B
Agriculture in Tanzania is primarily a price-taker in regional and global markets because of its small
size and its trading exchange rate. In addition, the applicable fiscal policies are mostly set outside
agriculture, leaving little latitude to use domestic price policies alone to affect agricultural incentives.
Due to the importance of the sector for the economy, it benefits from huge public intervention, which
is expected and necessary. However, there is an assumption that, in some areas, such as subsidies
for fertilizers and agriculture inputs, the public sector may be crowding out the private sector or
undermining competition. This increases the need for the consideration of a progressive shift of public
spending on agriculture from providing substantial private goods towards core public goods, in order
to catalyze corresponding private investments in production and distribution. The implementation of
this programme will provide such positive incentives and advocate for the reduction of regulatory
barriers to investment and reduce high compliance costs. It is also based on the assumption that
promoting higher quality products through effective adaptation measures and the strengthening of
the entire value chain would naturally improve the overall Tanzania Agriculture market positioning
with controlled rebound effect. The implementation of this project will also incentivize the removal of
policy distortions and barriers to trade that discourage private investment while making land tenure
more secure to reduce risks to investors and lenders. Hence, the programme will provide a more
substantial basis for agri-food based tax revenue needed to support governmental revenue collection
and limit the current accumulation of arrears and domestic, commercial debt. This programme will
also be implemented through a strong gender lens, ensuring specific targets for women farmers
groups and female agribusinesses.
The comprehensive stakeholders’ engagement survey undertaken as part of the project preparation
identified additional gaps. Major barriers and risks associated to this programme are summarized
in Table B.1.1 below:
Table B.1.1: Major Barriers and Risks
Financial/Credit
Real and perceived risk among financial institutions of lending and engaging with the agriculture sector
Inadequate risk/return profile
Lack of awareness/ability to engage with the wide set of private actors responsible for managing the
majority of finance flows
Lack of tailored climate investment instruments
Regulatory
Regulatory barriers limiting the extent of private sector engagement in agriculture investments and lending
Weak enabling environments
Lack of financial resources for strategic investment, development, and project formulation
Climate Risks
Lack of climate risk and vulnerability knowledge among end-users in the agriculture sector as well as by
financial institutions serving farmers and agribusinesses
Lack of available climate risk and analysis data at the macro and micro level to support and direct climate
investments
Gaps in knowledge/skills needed for 2/1.5 degree-compatible, transformational design
Gaps in skills/capacity needed to structure and implement innovative projects
Lack of climate risk and vulnerability knowledge among end-users in the agriculture sector as well as by
financial institutions serving farmers and agribusinesses
Lack of available climate risk and analysis data at the macro and micro level to support and direct climate
investments
Production
Limited investment in water harvesting and storage system for irrigation
Shifting cropping calendars that are unpredictable to farmers
Poor crop protection surveillance, early warning, and response systems
Degradation of arable land mainly due to erosive runoff, deforestation, and unsustainable farming practic
Limited investment in water harvesting and storage system for irrigation

--- Table 1 on Page 20 ---
Agriculture in Tanzania is primarily a price-taker in regional and global markets because of its small
size and its trading exchange rate. In addition, the applicable fiscal policies are mostly set outside
agriculture, leaving little latitude to use domestic price policies alone to affect agricultural incentives.
Due to the importance of the sector for the economy, it benefits from huge public intervention, which
is expected and necessary. However, there is an assumption that, in some areas, such as subsidies
for fertilizers and agriculture inputs, the public sector may be crowding out the private sector or
undermining competition. This increases the need for the consideration of a progressive shift of public
spending on agriculture from providing substantial private goods towards core public goods, in order
to catalyze corresponding private investments in production and distribution. The implementation of
this programme will provide such positive incentives and advocate for the reduction of regulatory
barriers to investment and reduce high compliance costs. It is also based on the assumption that
promoting higher quality products through effective adaptation measures and the strengthening of
the entire value chain would naturally improve the overall Tanzania Agriculture market positioning
with controlled rebound effect. The implementation of this project will also incentivize the removal of
policy distortions and barriers to trade that discourage private investment while making land tenure
more secure to reduce risks to investors and lenders. Hence, the programme will provide a more
substantial basis for agri-food based tax revenue needed to support governmental revenue collection
and limit the current accumulation of arrears and domestic, commercial debt. This programme will
also be implemented through a strong gender lens, ensuring specific targets for women farmers
groups and female agribusinesses.
The comprehensive stakeholders’ engagement survey undertaken as part of the project preparation
identified additional gaps. Major barriers and risks associated to this programme are summarized
in Table B.1.1 below:
Table B.1.1: Major Barriers and Risks
Financial/Credit
Real and perceived risk among financial institutions of lending and engaging with the agriculture sector
Inadequate risk/return profile
Lack of awareness/ability to engage with the wide set of private actors responsible for managing the
majority of finance flows
Lack of tailored climate investment instruments
Regulatory
Regulatory barriers limiting the extent of private sector engagement in agriculture investments and lending
Weak enabling environments
Lack of financial resources for strategic investment, development, and project formulation
Climate Risks
Lack of climate risk and vulnerability knowledge among end-users in the agriculture sector as well as by
financial institutions serving farmers and agribusinesses
Lack of available climate risk and analysis data at the macro and micro level to support and direct climate
investments
Gaps in knowledge/skills needed for 2/1.5 degree-compatible, transformational design
Gaps in skills/capacity needed to structure and implement innovative projects
Lack of climate risk and vulnerability knowledge among end-users in the agriculture sector as well as by
financial institutions serving farmers and agribusinesses
Lack of available climate risk and analysis data at the macro and micro level to support and direct climate
investments
Production
Limited investment in water harvesting and storage system for irrigation
Shifting cropping calendars that are unpredictable to farmers
Poor crop protection surveillance, early warning, and response systems
Degradation of arable land mainly due to erosive runoff, deforestation, and unsustainable farming practi
Limited investment in water harvesting and storage system for irrigation |  | 
 |  | Financial/Credit
 | Real and perceived risk among financial institutions of lending and engaging with the agriculture sector | 
 | Inadequate risk/return profile | 
 | Lack of awareness/ability to engage with the wide set of private actors responsible for managing the
majority of finance flows | 
 | Lack of tailored climate investment instruments | 
 |  | Regulatory
 | Regulatory barriers limiting the extent of private sector engagement in agriculture investments and lending | 
 | Weak enabling environments | 
 | Lack of financial resources for strategic investment, development, and project formulation | 
 |  | Climate Risks
 | Lack of climate risk and vulnerability knowledge among end-users in the agriculture sector as well as by
financial institutions serving farmers and agribusinesses | 
 | Lack of available climate risk and analysis data at the macro and micro level to support and direct climate
investments | 
 | Gaps in knowledge/skills needed for 2/1.5 degree-compatible, transformational design | 
 | Gaps in skills/capacity needed to structure and implement innovative projects | 
 | Lack of climate risk and vulnerability knowledge among end-users in the agriculture sector as well as by
financial institutions serving farmers and agribusinesses | 
 | Lack of available climate risk and analysis data at the macro and micro level to support and direct climate
investments | 
 |  | Production
 | Limited investment in water harvesting and storage system for irrigation | 
 | Shifting cropping calendars that are unpredictable to farmers | 
 | Poor crop protection surveillance, early warning, and response systems | 
 | Degradation of arable land mainly due to erosive runoff, deforestation, and unsustainable farming practi | 
 | Limited investment in water harvesting and storage system for irrigation | 

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 78
B
Post-Harvest & Markets
Lack of tailored credit and insurance products in agriculture
Underdeveloped and underfunded dryland crops value chains
Policy
Weak integration of climate change in social protection programming
Limited funding of climate change adaptation and resilience actions
Inadequate disaster risk management capacity in terms of preparedness, response, and recovery mechanisms
Productivity
Inadequately funded national research systems
Inadequate adapted innovation products for farmers use
Weak links, mechanisms, and mainstreaming of innovations
Inadequate crop research
Inadequate control of diseases and pests
Inadequate extension service equipment
Market Potential
Huge post-harvest losses (30% or more)
Inadequate market information research
Inadequate enforcement of standards in food quality and safety
Weak farmer organizations
Underdeveloped private sector facing challenges in business environment and investment climate
Challenging business and investment environment
Limited access to credit/finance and insurance
Enabling Environment
Inadequate implementation and coherence of policies
Inadequate institutional coordination
Inadequate data and data systems
Inadequate infrastructure
Inadequate land tenure systems, planning, and enforcement
Weak link between the public and private sectors
Weak capacity to respond to climate change challenges
Sector characteristics and market dynamics: The considerable growth of Tanzanian agriculture,
especially since 2008, has been primarily due to the rapid expansion of cropped areas rather than
productivity. This progress has been achieved with some environmental damage, including
deforestation, erosion, and inadequate fertility responsible for the degradation of more than 60% of
the land presently used for the production of crops, livestock, and forest products and services, and
there is a high probability that these damages will be increasing throughout the years. Due to the
critical nature of agricultural transformation for the success of the national development plans and
to avoid jeopardizing future prospects, climate risks should be properly understood and managed.
The effects of climate risks and attendant lack of adaptation in the agricultural sector are detrimental
to the achievement of Tanzania’s development goals. There is a clear need to incentivize private
sector intervention in key agricultural value chains when considering the massive investment needed
for sustainable and climate-compatible growth in the sector.
According to the 2016/2017 Annual Agriculture Sample Survey (AASS)23, there is an estimated
8,763,267 farm operators in Tanzania, out of which 17.9% (1,576,235) are officially registered.
Moreover, 56% of these operators are engaged in growing crops, only 2% in livestock, and the
remaining 42% are engaged in both. Regardless of the size of these operators (smallholders/micro-
enterprises, small- and medium-sized enterprises, or larger corporates), their support services are
increasingly through private businesses. Furthermore, the nascent transformation of the Tanzania
agriculture sector is manifested through an increase in the number of medium-scale farms, which
are estimated to have grown from 408,000 in 2008 to 776,000 in 2014. In recent years, farming in
Tanzania revealed an increasingly commercial orientation to crop production, with farmers
marketing a larger share of their crops. Between 2008 and 2014, these operators rose from 36 to
23 United Republic of Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics. 2016/2017 Annual Agriculture Sample Survey.

--- Table 1 on Page 21 ---
Post-Harvest & Markets
Lack of tailored credit and insurance products in agriculture
Underdeveloped and underfunded dryland crops value chains
Policy
Weak integration of climate change in social protection programming
Limited funding of climate change adaptation and resilience actions
Inadequate disaster risk management capacity in terms of preparedness, response, and recovery mechanism
Productivity
Inadequately funded national research systems
Inadequate adapted innovation products for farmers use
Weak links, mechanisms, and mainstreaming of innovations
Inadequate crop research
Inadequate control of diseases and pests
Inadequate extension service equipment
Market Potential
Huge post-harvest losses (30% or more)
Inadequate market information research
Inadequate enforcement of standards in food quality and safety
Weak farmer organizations
Underdeveloped private sector facing challenges in business environment and investment climate
Challenging business and investment environment
Limited access to credit/finance and insurance
Enabling Environment
Inadequate implementation and coherence of policies
Inadequate institutional coordination
Inadequate data and data systems
Inadequate infrastructure
Inadequate land tenure systems, planning, and enforcement
Weak link between the public and private sectors
Weak capacity to respond to climate change challenges
Sector characteristics and market dynamics: The considerable growth of Tanzanian agriculture,
especially since 2008, has been primarily due to the rapid expansion of cropped areas rather than
productivity. This progress has been achieved with some environmental damage, including
deforestation, erosion, and inadequate fertility responsible for the degradation of more than 60% of
the land presently used for the production of crops, livestock, and forest products and services, and
there is a high probability that these damages will be increasing throughout the years. Due to the
critical nature of agricultural transformation for the success of the national development plans and
to avoid jeopardizing future prospects, climate risks should be properly understood and managed.
The effects of climate risks and attendant lack of adaptation in the agricultural sector are detrimental
to the achievement of Tanzania’s development goals. There is a clear need to incentivize private
sector intervention in key agricultural value chains when considering the massive investment needed
for sustainable and climate-compatible growth in the sector.
According to the 2016/2017 Annual Agriculture Sample Survey (AASS)23, there is an estimated
8,763,267 farm operators in Tanzania, out of which 17.9% (1,576,235) are officially registered.
Moreover, 56% of these operators are engaged in growing crops, only 2% in livestock, and the
remaining 42% are engaged in both. Regardless of the size of these operators (smallholders/micro-
enterprises, small- and medium-sized enterprises, or larger corporates), their support services are
increasingly through private businesses. Furthermore, the nascent transformation of the Tanzania
agriculture sector is manifested through an increase in the number of medium-scale farms, which
are estimated to have grown from 408,000 in 2008 to 776,000 in 2014. In recent years, farming in
Tanzania revealed an increasingly commercial orientation to crop production, with farmers
marketing a larger share of their crops. Between 2008 and 2014, these operators rose from 36 to | Post-Harvest & Markets |  | 
 | Lack of tailored credit and insurance products in agriculture |  | 
 | Underdeveloped and underfunded dryland crops value chains |  | 
 |  | Policy | 
 | Weak integration of climate change in social protection programming |  | 
 | Limited funding of climate change adaptation and resilience actions |  | 
 | Inadequate disaster risk management capacity in terms of preparedness, response, and recovery mechanism |  | 
 |  | Productivity | 
 | Inadequately funded national research systems |  | 
 | Inadequate adapted innovation products for farmers use |  | 
 | Weak links, mechanisms, and mainstreaming of innovations |  | 
 | Inadequate crop research |  | 
 | Inadequate control of diseases and pests |  | 
 | Inadequate extension service equipment |  | 
 |  | Market Potential | 
 | Huge post-harvest losses (30% or more) |  | 
 | Inadequate market information research |  | 
 | Inadequate enforcement of standards in food quality and safety |  | 
 | Weak farmer organizations |  | 
 | Underdeveloped private sector facing challenges in business environment and investment climate |  | 
 | Challenging business and investment environment |  | 
 | Limited access to credit/finance and insurance |  | 
 |  | Enabling Environment | 
 | Inadequate implementation and coherence of policies |  | 
 | Inadequate institutional coordination |  | 
 | Inadequate data and data systems |  | 
 | Inadequate infrastructure |  | 
 | Inadequate land tenure systems, planning, and enforcement |  | 
 | Weak link between the public and private sectors |  | 
 | Weak capacity to respond to climate change challenges |  | 

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 78
B
41%. This suggests a greater penetration of traders into villages and improved market access for
crop farmers. Yet, despite its agricultural resources and market opportunities, Tanzania itself is a
major importer of cereals, having bought nearly 3.5 million metric tons (MMT) of maize, wheat, and
rice in 2017. These dynamics indicate the necessity to support the high transformational potential
of Tanzanian agriculture, upholding sustainability, climate change adaptation, and resilience as the
cornerstones of this transformation strategy.
CRDB Bank’s product offerings largely target agriculture development and modernization and there
is limited overlap with adaptation and climate resilience. There is a climate capacity gap and a need
for support in developing and implementing a dedicated adaptation and climate resilience strategy
to further CRDB Bank’s commitment to becoming a leading bank with established climate and
sustainable practices. CRDB Bank’s successful advancement of climate practices is expected to
help crowd-in other private sector players in the adaptation and mitigation agriculture space – both
lenders and end-users – with the potential of spurring climate activity in agriculture sub-sectors and
related sectors as well. The Technology and Practice Needs Assessment (TPNA) prepared under
the Project Preparation Facility (PPF) for the Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Deployment Programme (TACATDP) found several key categories of agricultural technologies and
practices that will support resilience building and adaptation of Tanzanian agriculture.
The TPNA also found significant capacity gaps and room for alignment between CRDB Bank’s
portfolio and national agriculture and adaptation strategic goals. An examination of CRDB Bank’s
portfolio found that none of the 12 agriculture technologies identified in CRDB Bank’s portfolio for
current physical assets are aligned with Tanzania’s National Climate-Smart Agriculture Strategy,
while 8 align with the ASDP II. Additionally, there are 20 agriculture practices and technologies
identified as fixed physical assets in CRDB Bank’s portfolio; 3 of the 20 align with the National
Climate-Smart Agriculture Strategy (irrigation, drip irrigation equipment, and fishing gear) and 3 align
with ASDP II (irrigation, drip irrigation equipment, and financial education and training). Overall,
there are 64 agricultural technologies and practices identified that can be incorporated into CRDB
Bank’s portfolio to advance and align with Tanzania’s national agriculture, adaptation, and
sustainable development goals.
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram)
The proposed program will seek to transform the country's agricultural sector while building its
resilience to climatic variabilities and the adverse effects of climate change. In doing so it will
strengthen the financial and technical capacity of both the financial sector (including CRDB Bank
itself, the insurance providers, the guarantee managers) and of the farmers, a situation which will in
turn support livelihoods, health and the sustainability of the environment.
This proposal addresses key barriers hampering the mobilization of climate investments at scale to
support the adaptation of the agriculture sector in Tanzania. In recent years, private sector
agriculture operations and agribusinesses have received relatively low investment due to perceived
risks in the sector, consequently leading to the sector’s growth underperforming in comparison to
other sectors. From 2006 through 2016, the agriculture sector experienced an average 3.5% annual
growth rate compared to Tanzania’s overall national GDP averaging 6% annual growth.
Therefore,
If the proposed programme leverages both GCF and additional private climate finance targeted at
tackling the adverse effects of climate change in the domestic agricultural sector, then the
Tanzania’s agriculture sector would become more sustainable and resilient to the adverse effects
of climate change and the country’s increased vulnerability, because Tanzania’s financial sector
will have achieved better knowledge and capacity to prioritize climate-resilient and adaptation
measures with mitigation co-benefits, thus increasing the share of climate-compatible investments
in the agriculture sector.

--- Table 1 on Page 22 ---
41%. This suggests a greater penetration of traders into villages and improved market access for
crop farmers. Yet, despite its agricultural resources and market opportunities, Tanzania itself is a
major importer of cereals, having bought nearly 3.5 million metric tons (MMT) of maize, wheat, and
rice in 2017. These dynamics indicate the necessity to support the high transformational potential
of Tanzanian agriculture, upholding sustainability, climate change adaptation, and resilience as the
cornerstones of this transformation strategy.
CRDB Bank’s product offerings largely target agriculture development and modernization and there
is limited overlap with adaptation and climate resilience. There is a climate capacity gap and a need
for support in developing and implementing a dedicated adaptation and climate resilience strategy
to further CRDB Bank’s commitment to becoming a leading bank with established climate and
sustainable practices. CRDB Bank’s successful advancement of climate practices is expected to
help crowd-in other private sector players in the adaptation and mitigation agriculture space – both
lenders and end-users – with the potential of spurring climate activity in agriculture sub-sectors and
related sectors as well. The Technology and Practice Needs Assessment (TPNA) prepared under
the Project Preparation Facility (PPF) for the Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Deployment Programme (TACATDP) found several key categories of agricultural technologies and
practices that will support resilience building and adaptation of Tanzanian agriculture.
The TPNA also found significant capacity gaps and room for alignment between CRDB Bank’s
portfolio and national agriculture and adaptation strategic goals. An examination of CRDB Bank’s
portfolio found that none of the 12 agriculture technologies identified in CRDB Bank’s portfolio for
current physical assets are aligned with Tanzania’s National Climate-Smart Agriculture Strategy,
while 8 align with the ASDP II. Additionally, there are 20 agriculture practices and technologies
identified as fixed physical assets in CRDB Bank’s portfolio; 3 of the 20 align with the National
Climate-Smart Agriculture Strategy (irrigation, drip irrigation equipment, and fishing gear) and 3 align
with ASDP II (irrigation, drip irrigation equipment, and financial education and training). Overall,
there are 64 agricultural technologies and practices identified that can be incorporated into CRDB
Bank’s portfolio to advance and align with Tanzania’s national agriculture, adaptation, and
sustainable development goals. |  | 
 | B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) | 
The proposed program will seek to transform the country's agricultural sector while building its
resilience to climatic variabilities and the adverse effects of climate change. In doing so it will
strengthen the financial and technical capacity of both the financial sector (including CRDB Bank
itself, the insurance providers, the guarantee managers) and of the farmers, a situation which will in
turn support livelihoods, health and the sustainability of the environment.
This proposal addresses key barriers hampering the mobilization of climate investments at scale to
support the adaptation of the agriculture sector in Tanzania. In recent years, private sector
agriculture operations and agribusinesses have received relatively low investment due to perceived
risks in the sector, consequently leading to the sector’s growth underperforming in comparison to
other sectors. From 2006 through 2016, the agriculture sector experienced an average 3.5% annual
growth rate compared to Tanzania’s overall national GDP averaging 6% annual growth.
Therefore,
If the proposed programme leverages both GCF and additional private climate finance targeted at
tackling the adverse effects of climate change in the domestic agricultural sector, then the
Tanzania’s agriculture sector would become more sustainable and resilient to the adverse effects
of climate change and the country’s increased vulnerability, because Tanzania’s financial sector
will have achieved better knowledge and capacity to prioritize climate-resilient and adaptation
measures with mitigation co-benefits, thus increasing the share of climate-compatible investments
in the agriculture sector. |  | 

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 78
B
The theory of change for this programme is illustrated as below:
Figure B.2.2: Programme Theory of Change

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 78
B
The introduction of tailored agriculture adaptation financial instruments, the establishment of a
dedicated facility to invest in climate adaptation measures, integrating climate risk assessment and
management tools, and providing key stakeholders technical assistance and capacity building will
contribute to a paradigm shift in Tanzania’s financial and agriculture sector to spur the prioritization
of climate mitigation and adaptation measures. Such a shift will ensure the avoidance of
maladaptation from spontaneous adaptation efforts by financial institutions, agribusinesses, and
farmers and demonstrate the high additional value from adaptation in terms of long-term growth,
higher returns, avoided greenhouse gas emissions, and the advancement of sustainable
development goals. The programme supports CRDB Bank’s efforts to establish vertical integration
of climate risks throughout its agriculture lending decision-making process embedding scientific
evidence into financial investments, and to make the evidence-based business case for bankable
private investment in climate change adaptation and resilience measures in the agriculture sector.
This programme will catalyze a national market for adaptation products and services, contribute to
rapidly evolving resilience standards and metrics, and promote low emission and climate resilient
development.
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages)
The role of CRDB Bank in the Tanzanian agriculture sector is very significant, comprising
approximately 45% of total URT commercial lending to the agriculture sector over the past five
years. The current size of CRDB's agriculture portfolio is USD 314 million, and approximately 13%
of CRDB Bank’s total lending portfolio in 2020 is directed toward the agriculture sector (23% when
not including personal/individual loans). Lending towards agriculture has dropped from
approximately 19% of CRDB Bank’s portfolio in 2015 to 13% in 2020, and CRDB Bank’s total
lending towards the agriculture sector dropped by approximately 16% over the same time frame.
Agriculture is a high-risk sector, owing to its interdependence with climatic variability and the
interconnectedness with ensuing climate risks. Climate change presents cascading risks through
the loss of revenues for farm operators, the deterioration of the Bank balance sheet, and the decline
of the country’s growth potential and overall development outlook.
In order to avoid further drops in an important sector and restore performance, proactive
management of climate risks and increased investments in adaptation are needed to foster the
CRDB Bank’s agricultural lending portfolio and consequently farmers’ revenues and national
development. This programme focuses on the Tanzanian Agriculture crop sector to promote the
adoption of adaptation technologies that are: i) most suited to the local contexts, ii) catered to
effectively address current and future climate risks to ensure a resilient increase in crop yields and
iii) have demonstrated market demand and high revenue generation potential. Some of these
technologies can require high up-front costs and hence the need to promote their acquisition
through tailored financial products that will address the affordability of these critical adaptation
measures. Even those adaptation technologies that are cheaper remain relatively expensive and,
since farmers cannot self-finance their acquisition, hence requiring concessional funds to ensure
farmer operators remain creditworthy keeping under control credit needed for cyclical agriculture
activities as well as additional investments required to resiliently increase their cropping systems’
yield.
By integrating climate risk assessments in agriculture lending operations and establishing a
dedicated facility offering financing for adaptive investments for farmers of different categories
(smallholders, medium-scale, and cooperative farmers), this programme will facilitate the
deployment of adaptation and climate resilient practices together with the most cost-effective
technologies to boost resilience to climate change. Innovative financial instruments will be informed
by science-based climate risk assessments to reduce the climate risks of investments and therefore
crowd-in private sector capital for both soft and hard adaptation of resilient crop production. CRDB
Bank will establish a facility dedicated to resilient and innovative financial instruments to facilitate
farmers’, communities’, and other key stakeholders’ investments in cost-effective adaptive solutions

--- Table 1 on Page 24 ---
The introduction of tailored agriculture adaptation financial instruments, the establishment of a
dedicated facility to invest in climate adaptation measures, integrating climate risk assessment and
management tools, and providing key stakeholders technical assistance and capacity building will
contribute to a paradigm shift in Tanzania’s financial and agriculture sector to spur the prioritization
of climate mitigation and adaptation measures. Such a shift will ensure the avoidance of
maladaptation from spontaneous adaptation efforts by financial institutions, agribusinesses, and
farmers and demonstrate the high additional value from adaptation in terms of long-term growth,
higher returns, avoided greenhouse gas emissions, and the advancement of sustainable
development goals. The programme supports CRDB Bank’s efforts to establish vertical integration
of climate risks throughout its agriculture lending decision-making process embedding scientific
evidence into financial investments, and to make the evidence-based business case for bankable
private investment in climate change adaptation and resilience measures in the agriculture sector.
This programme will catalyze a national market for adaptation products and services, contribute to
rapidly evolving resilience standards and metrics, and promote low emission and climate resilient
development. |  | 
 | B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) | 
The role of CRDB Bank in the Tanzanian agriculture sector is very significant, comprising
approximately 45% of total URT commercial lending to the agriculture sector over the past five
years. The current size of CRDB's agriculture portfolio is USD 314 million, and approximately 13%
of CRDB Bank’s total lending portfolio in 2020 is directed toward the agriculture sector (23% when
not including personal/individual loans). Lending towards agriculture has dropped from
approximately 19% of CRDB Bank’s portfolio in 2015 to 13% in 2020, and CRDB Bank’s total
lending towards the agriculture sector dropped by approximately 16% over the same time frame.
Agriculture is a high-risk sector, owing to its interdependence with climatic variability and the
interconnectedness with ensuing climate risks. Climate change presents cascading risks through
the loss of revenues for farm operators, the deterioration of the Bank balance sheet, and the decline
of the country’s growth potential and overall development outlook.
In order to avoid further drops in an important sector and restore performance, proactive
management of climate risks and increased investments in adaptation are needed to foster the
CRDB Bank’s agricultural lending portfolio and consequently farmers’ revenues and national
development. This programme focuses on the Tanzanian Agriculture crop sector to promote the
adoption of adaptation technologies that are: i) most suited to the local contexts, ii) catered to
effectively address current and future climate risks to ensure a resilient increase in crop yields and
iii) have demonstrated market demand and high revenue generation potential. Some of these
technologies can require high up-front costs and hence the need to promote their acquisition
through tailored financial products that will address the affordability of these critical adaptation
measures. Even those adaptation technologies that are cheaper remain relatively expensive and,
since farmers cannot self-finance their acquisition, hence requiring concessional funds to ensure
farmer operators remain creditworthy keeping under control credit needed for cyclical agriculture
activities as well as additional investments required to resiliently increase their cropping systems’
yield.
By integrating climate risk assessments in agriculture lending operations and establishing a
dedicated facility offering financing for adaptive investments for farmers of different categories
(smallholders, medium-scale, and cooperative farmers), this programme will facilitate the
deployment of adaptation and climate resilient practices together with the most cost-effective
technologies to boost resilience to climate change. Innovative financial instruments will be informed
by science-based climate risk assessments to reduce the climate risks of investments and therefore
crowd-in private sector capital for both soft and hard adaptation of resilient crop production. CRDB
Bank will establish a facility dedicated to resilient and innovative financial instruments to facilitate
farmers’, communities’, and other key stakeholders’ investments in cost-effective adaptive solutions |  | 

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 78
B
to build up the resilience of the agriculture sector.
TACATDP is expected to increase the adaptive capacity and enhance the resilience of vulnerable
farmers to climate change. This programme provides farm operators with affordable credit to invest
in productive assets to combat recent rapid drying and warming trends, especially those observed
in the northeastern and western regions of the country, respectively. Investments in rainwater
harvesting, solar pumps, and land restoration, for example, will protect farmers against extreme
weather events such as droughts and floods. By protecting crops from damage, this programme
also protects farmers from lost income and promotes food security.
The facility will address the need for i) seasonal operational expenditure and short- to medium-term
adaptation financing in the form of working capital and/or ii) longer-term fixed asset capital or capital
expenditure for cost-efficient adaptive technologies. The pricing structure and improved climate risk
management will also promote the reduction of the current high interest rate regime of shorter-term
credit for farmers. Indeed, it is anticipated that the financial products, coupling longer-term
adaptation capital expenditure with short-term productive loans, will reduce the impact of
widespread agricultural loan defaults on lenders during adverse systemic climatic events, thereby
allowing lenders to expand access to credit among farm operators and consequently reduce interest
rates. It will also facilitate commercial banks’ greater involvement in cost-effective adaptive
technologies identified through robust decision-making methods accounting for a large number of
parameters and their uncertainties, including in climate, soil, crop characteristics, technologies, etc.
In other words, once borrowers have invested in new adaptive technologies and begin repaying
their loans, other commercial banks will likely increase their lending to the sector, leading to more
funding flowing to climate resilient agriculture overall. The product offerings as well as their pricing
will also be structured to guarantee affordability for different types of farmers and cost-effectiveness
for both parties.
The first draft of the market study being finalized for this programme indicates a huge appetite
among all categories of farm operators for the solutions envisaged as part of this program. Further
insight on the potential market size will be provided in the next iteration of the Funding Proposal. A
non-exhaustive list of eligible adaptation measures is as follows:
Technologies & practices needs Related Climate Hazards/Risks
Access to climate information All; primarily drought/rainfall statistics
Advanced modern undercover growing solutions Extreme heat primarily
adapted to specific crops and local climate
All; primarily seasonal shifting due to uncertainty
Agronomic optimization techniques such as season around rainy/dry seasons, seeding and planting
duration and planting time management services optimization.
Climate-informed irrigation calendar All; primarily drought, or excess rainfall (leading to
flooding, mudslides, etc…)
Commercial valorization of microorganisms as Drought relief, prevent flood damage
substitute for or in diminution of mineral N fertilizer
and pesticides for crop production
Crop management technologies All
Crop shifting All
Digital farming systems All
Efficient nature-based and artificial run-off reduction Especially excess rainfall, which leads to flooding
& drainage measures
Improved / Precision irrigation Drought, extreme heat, excess rainfall
Low cost locally manufactured protected cultivation Extreme heat, drought
solutions (net shade or poly houses or structures)
adapted to specific crops and local climate
Low-cost hydroponics solutions All
Micro-harvesting nature-based methods (e.g., zai, Drought
half-moon)

--- Table 1 on Page 25 ---
 | Technologies & practices needs |  |  | Related Climate Hazards/Risks | 
Access to climate information |  |  | All; primarily drought/rainfall statistics |  | 
Advanced modern undercover growing solutions
adapted to specific crops and local climate |  |  | Extreme heat primarily |  | 
Agronomic optimization techniques such as season
duration and planting time management services |  |  | All; primarily seasonal shifting due to uncertainty
around rainy/dry seasons, seeding and planting
optimization. |  | 
Climate-informed irrigation calendar |  |  | All; primarily drought, or excess rainfall (leading to
flooding, mudslides, etc…) |  | 
Commercial valorization of microorganisms as
substitute for or in diminution of mineral N fertilizer
and pesticides for crop production |  |  | Drought relief, prevent flood damage |  | 
Crop management technologies |  |  | All |  | 
Crop shifting |  |  | All |  | 
Digital farming systems |  |  | All |  | 
Efficient nature-based and artificial run-off reduction
& drainage measures |  |  | Especially excess rainfall, which leads to flooding |  | 
Improved / Precision irrigation |  |  | Drought, extreme heat, excess rainfall |  | 
Low cost locally manufactured protected cultivation
solutions (net shade or poly houses or structures)
adapted to specific crops and local climate |  |  | Extreme heat, drought |  | 
Low-cost hydroponics solutions |  |  | All |  | 
Micro-harvesting nature-based methods (e.g., zai,
half-moon) |  |  | Drought |  | 

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 78
B
Nature-based shading (agroforestry) All
Other modern agriculture adaptation solutions All
applicable in local context
Other proven ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) All
solutions selected through defined quality standard
criteria.
Post-harvest solutions Drought, excess rainfall
Precision fertilization Drought, flood management
Precision irrigation All; primarily drought, or excess rainfall (leading to
flooding, mudslides, etc…)
Production and/or commercialization of bio and Linked to soil health and related measures to avoid
organic pesticides drought
Promotion of biological agriculture and Linked to soil health and related measures to avoid
permaculture drought
Selected economic diversification activities such as All
aquaculture, aquaponics systems,
Shading house Excess heat; drought
Storage facilities for crop protection Excess heat; drought
Transformation of agricultural products using All, by addressing post-harvest and food losses
energy efficient and renewable solutions (value resulting from higher temperatures, greater pest
addition in the value chain) damage, among other factors
Water storage facilities Drought; excess rainfall
Windspeed intensification; soil evaporation and
Windbreaking humidity
Specific attention will be given to ensure the facility also benefits small-scale and medium-scale farm
operations, including offering tailored financial products to meet their needs such as aggregation
and debt mutualization; leasing contracts for cooperatives primarily through agricultural and
marketing cooperatives societies (AMCOS), pay-as-you-buy options as well as the promotion of low
cost and high quality locally manufactured of some of these technologies (e.g., net shading and
polyhouses).
The project includes a technical assistance component that will ensure the credit provided deliver
real, effective, and transformational cost-effective adaptation solutions. A tailored climate
assessment and investment decision-making tool informed by state-of-the-art methods will be made
available to support all relevant actors and beneficiaries for a comprehensive, reliable, and robust
prioritization of the adaptation measures and technologies that will request financing through the
facility. In-depth climate analysis undertaken as part of this programme will inform dialogue, capacity
building, and technical assistance interventions included in this programme (See illustration in
Figure B.2.3 below).
The technical assistance component will include activities needed to incentivize policy and
regulatory reforms to increase private investment in both input and output markets; implement
capacity building for various actors across the crop value chain to better integrate climate risks and
adaptation practices in their decision making process; promote stronger institutions and improved
dialogue between agricultural lenders, value chain participants, farmer groups, and agricultural
policymakers for a comprehensive solution for agricultural transformation that is climate resilient and
sustainable; develop a local ecosystem to support sustainability of the operations and maintenance
of newly adopted technology etc. This technical assistance will be implemented through mobilization
of best-in-class expertise to deliver required services and build the capacity of CRDB Bank, key
public and private sector stakeholders to be identified and narrowed, including those from relevant
government agencies, AMCOS, microfinance institutions, and other community institutions to
integrate climate risk assessment in their operations.
Figure B.2.3: Examples of the state of art analysis as part of the climate risk modeling and
assessments

--- Table 1 on Page 26 ---
Nature-based shading (agroforestry) | All
Other modern agriculture adaptation solutions
applicable in local context | All
Other proven ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA)
solutions selected through defined quality standard
criteria. | All
Post-harvest solutions | Drought, excess rainfall
Precision fertilization | Drought, flood management
Precision irrigation | All; primarily drought, or excess rainfall (leading to
flooding, mudslides, etc…)
Production and/or commercialization of bio and
organic pesticides | Linked to soil health and related measures to avoid
drought
Promotion of biological agriculture and
permaculture | Linked to soil health and related measures to avoid
drought
Selected economic diversification activities such as
aquaculture, aquaponics systems, | All
Shading house | Excess heat; drought
Storage facilities for crop protection | Excess heat; drought
Transformation of agricultural products using
energy efficient and renewable solutions (value
addition in the value chain) | All, by addressing post-harvest and food losses
resulting from higher temperatures, greater pest
damage, among other factors
Water storage facilities | Drought; excess rainfall
Windbreaking | Windspeed intensification; soil evaporation and
humidity

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 78
B
Information for CRDB Bank and AMCOS integration of climate risk assessments to appraise ARA loans
Information for agriculture advisors: integration of climate risk assessments in extension & advisory services
Information for farmers: integration of climate risk assessments in agricultural practices & technology prioritization
(through an updated extension services programme)

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 78
B
Components/outputs and subcomponents/activities to address the above barriers identified that
will lead to the expected outcomes.
Programme Components
This programme is being developed through the implementation of 2 components. A first component
comprises 3 interrelated activities to support the deployment of several blended finance financial
instruments – such as loans, a guarantee credit-enhancement facility, and the consideration of an
insurance scheme for smallholder farmers – to de-risk agricultural investments by offering new
financing products at an affordable price, while creating and demonstrating the viability of a deep
market for adaptation technologies in the URT. In addition, a second component of technical
assistance and capacity building exercises will be implemented to complement and support
Component 1 interventions. The two components are as follows:
Component 1: Innovative financial products for adaptation and climate resilient agriculture
technologies including:
Activity 1.1: Establishment of a dedicated credit line for CRDB ARA lending operations
Objective: The agriculture sector is by far the leading economic sector in Tanzania, yet it remains
highly vulnerable to climate change and with limited capacity to implement critical adaptation and
resilience measures because of limited access to financial services from the country’s financial
institutions due to associated risks and high costs financing for sector participants. With GCF
funding, CRDB Bank will be able to scale up its lending appetite for adaptation agriculture at
relatively affordable costs and harness untapped opportunities by transforming the traditional
practice to modern and environmentally friendly farming.
Agriculture Resilience and Adaptation (ARA) activities will be financed through the USD 170 million
facility. A senior loan of USD 70 million from GCF is being requested to leverage USD 100 million
from CRDB Bank. GCF, by providing senior debt to the programme, will enable CRDB Bank to
leverage its own capital within the lending scheme more rapidly and fluidly. The requested loan of
USD 70 million from GCF is thus unlocking USD 100 million from CRDB Bank to be extended in
ARA loans to smallholder farmers, micro-enterprises, small- and medium-sized enterprises, and
larger corporates (estimated at approximately 1% of expected borrowers under the TACATDP).
Loans will be directly provided by CRDB Bank to end-users in the agriculture sector: smallholders
through AMCOS; as well as small- and medium-sized enterprises and limited larger corporates and
farm operators. CRDB Bank will be responsible of the ARA lending products development and
pricing, including ARA loan origination and appraisal by CRDB Bank; ARA loan disbursements
through CRDB Bank directly; ARA loan monitoring; ARA loan repayment by farmers to CRDB Bank
and repayment by CRDB Bank to GCF. CRDB Bank will advance the loans as blended resources
(i.e., GCF proceeds and CRDB co-financing blended as a single tranche loan).
CRDB Bank's adaptation credit will be used to:
(a) Introduce innovative, simplified, and affordable financial products tailored to increasing
farmers’ adaptation and resiliency, improving their long-term wellbeing and sustainability.
(b) Increase financial inclusion for smallholder farmers (as an estimated 3% of smallholder
farmers have access to formal credit in Tanzania24), helping to make high-cost technologies
accessible and establishing service delivery channels that will ease access to financial
services, particularly in the rural areas, thus boosting smallholder farmers’ productivity.
(c) Be used specifically to cover adaptation-related investments, including support to organic
24 Nsubili Isaga (2018). Access to Bank Credit by Smallholder Farmers in Tanzania: A Case Study.

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 78
B
farming practices; reducing the use of uncertified seeds, industrial fertilizers, and pesticides;
support for water and resource efficiency.
These activities will build towards the following impacts:
(d) Promote long-term investment projects in the agriculture sector, with a focus on value-
addition to create a reliable market for agricultural produce, thereby enhancing resiliency in
agriculture via food security across the country for those most at-risk while encouraging
climate resilient and environmentally conscious practices.
(e) Aggregate smallholder farmers to improve farming activities by promoting investment in
large-scale environmentally friendly infrastructure to better address climatic challenges and
adaptations, enhance the preservation of water resources, and advance sustainable
development.
(f) Support the structuring of smallholder farming around climate resilient agriculture practices,
as well as long-term support networks through instruments such as saving accounts, health
insurance, and other social support systems.
Activity 1.2: Establish and implement a dedicated ARA Guarantee Credit Facility.
Objective: The objective of Activity 1.2 is to support the operationalization of a guarantee credit-
enhancement facility to support dedicated credit lines, which support agriculture resilience and
adaptation lending, and to spur financial institutions’ participation in the program.
GCF is being requested to provide the initial capital and liquidity for a USD 10 million guarantee
credit-enhancement facility in order to support participating smallholder farmers and small- and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) engaged in the agriculture sector with risk sharing in the ARA
lending portfolio. CRDB and GCF will agree on upfront guidelines/policies to ensure the Guarantee
Facility is not subject to conflicts or other potential risks and to create an information barrier and
transparency for all parties involved. The sub-loans to be partially guaranteed by GCF under Activity
1.2 apply to certain eligible sub-loans advanced by CRDB under Activity 1.1.
With the establishment of a guarantee credit-enhancement facility to help de-risk smallholder farmers
and agriculture SMEs, CRDB Bank will be able to unlock increased capacity of ARA lending. Such a
facility will provide a partial credit risk guarantee to cover the losses, with current practices setting a
risk sharing ratio of 50-80% of losses (up to 80% is offered to women). As evidenced by decreasing
and lowering rates of lending towards the agriculture sector, there are further market incentives
required to best stimulate and promote a paradigm shift towards sustainable and long-term lending
to the sector, particularly in the new field of adaptation and resilience. The guarantee credit-
enhancement facility is an essential feature of the program, as it will help CRDB Bank overcome
several challenges specific to climate investments in the agriculture sector, particularly the high credit
risks of borrowers which lead to elevated interest rates and higher collateral requirements that
smallholder farmers and SMEs cannot afford. The guarantee credit-enhancement facility can
address these barriers and help to unlock private investments for ARA lending. The beneficiaries are
local farmers, individually and through AMCOS, micro-enterprises, SMEs, and corporates across
the agriculture value-chain that will realize greater available credit.
Activity 1.3: Establishment of an insurance scheme dedicated to ARA for smallholder farmers.
Objective: The objective of Activity 1.3 is to promote the creation of an innovative insurance scheme
in Tanzania dedicated to ARA and focused on smallholder farmers. As has been piloted in other
markets, “index” or “parametric” insurance products are a relatively new instrument for the agriculture
sector globally that are gaining popularity. The goals of Activity 1.3 in the TACATDP project will be
to work with CRDB Bank and other insurance companies (there are a limited number of local crop
insurance providers in Tanzania) to conduct all necessary studies as a first step to launching a new

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 78
B
product. The objective of these studies is to identify and refine potential targeted recipients and
insurance policies, and the pilot seeks to reduce the vulnerability of smallholder farmers to climate
change by protecting their incomes and overall livelihoods through an affordable insurance scheme.
As noted above in the programme description, the climatic patterns are shifting fairly dramatically in
Tanzania. There are increasing temperatures and unpredictable rainfall patterns in some parts of
the country, followed by prolonged droughts or dry spells with no rainfall impacting the crops in
question. Depending on the key crops which will be the main funding beneficiaries (the emphasis of
the TACATDP is on food crops as opposed to cash crops), CRDB will design a new climate insurance
scheme. The principal objective of the TACATDP insurance sub-component is to study the new
product and launch a pilot phase in conjunction with the lending program. This component will be
supported with a USD 10 million grant from GCF to support the costs of market studies, designing
the insurance program, and cost-sharing for the insurance premiums (at a cost-sharing percentage
rate to be determined via market studies and other engagement with insurance market players in
Tanzania). CRDB will finalize and approve the cost-sharing mechanism (premium subsidies) after
integrating insights from the market studies.
There is no insurance scheme or insurance mechanisms dedicated to strengthening and targeting
ARA activities currently in Tanzania. TACATDP includes grants from GCF to support the
implementation of a pilot programme to specifically accelerate ARA insurance schemes for
smallholder farmers. The eligible beneficiaries under Activity 1.3, which will access the premium
subsidies under the insurance scheme, are limited to the sub-borrowers selected under Activities
1.1 and 1.2 and potentially other smallholder farmers that meet the same eligibility criteria.CRDB
will have final approval over the selection of targeted beneficiaries to access this insurance
scheme.
To establish the scheme and prove its sustainability, a GCF grant will be used to pilot the initiative,
serving as a “market maker” to induce insurance providers to extend climate-related index or
parametric insurance products catering to smallholder farmers. It should be noted that this risk
transfer mechanism is directed towards the borrowers (i.e., smallholder farmers) and is meant as a
way of protecting these borrowers from climate-related hazards and enabling them to repay their
loans, which they otherwise would be unable to do under a scenario in which their food crops were
to be significantly impacted and they would have no other means of repaying their loans. CRDB is
still developing a more detailed budget, which will require future input from insurance company
partners and the market studies, and a more granular view on the flow of funds regarding the use of
GCF grants to pilot the insurance scheme. CRDB intends for this insurance programme to become
sustainable, scalable, and commercially independent in the long term.
The main crops to benefit from a new form of index or parametric insurance could be selected based
on their relative importance to food security and other criteria, but for example, maize and rice are
considered the main food crops, but cassava and beans as well are good export crops, all of which
are fundamental to smallholder farmers livelihoods in Tanzania. The necessary market demand
needs to be established (this means a large enough number of smallholder farmers who would
become policyholders, hundreds maybe even thousands of smallholder farmers) and a targeted
region in Tanzania, perhaps in the northern part that faces increasing droughts and greater food
insecurity.
CRDB plans to launch the five-year insurance pilot by offering a 100 percent premium subsidy to
eligible beneficiaries in the first year beneficiaries sign up. In doing so, CRDB hopes to encourage
high participation in the scheme. After the first year, CRDB will apply a digressive approach to the
premium subsidies, gradually reducing the rate by 15 percent over the last four years of the pilot. For
example, CRDB will offer an 85 percent premium subsidy in the second year, and beneficiaries will
be responsible for the remaining 15 percent through cash contributions. Altogether, the loans made
to beneficiaries promote food security and more income through investments in ARA technologies,
while climate insurance protects those assets and associated benefits. Hence, this digressive
approach to the insurance pilot is part of an exit strategy aiming to empower beneficiaries with the

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 78
B
capacity (income via productive ARA assets) and knowledge (trust and experience in climate
insurance) to be self-sufficient in managing climatic risks after the pilot. Again, this proposed
approach is preliminary, and CRDB will rely on insights from the market studies to finalize all
arrangements.
The proposed scheme results in a win-win scenario because CRDB creates a new product with
sufficient demand from the market to increase its insurance offerings in Tanzania's insurance
marketplace. More importantly, this scheme enables smallholder farmers to be more resilient to
climate change as the insurance policies protect their livelihoods and assets from climate-related
events. Similarly, the insurance payouts may help smallholder farmers avoid defaults on their loans
under TACATDP after climatic shocks, which benefits both beneficiaries and CRDB.
All these steps will require extensive capacity building and working with different actors in Tanzania
in order to successfully launch a climate insurance product that is part of the ARA suite of lending
that will occur. The need for Technical Assistance to support each of these activities is manifest and
GCF’s support will clearly be catalytic in this regard.
While a GCF USD 10 million will support the initial piloting of this initiative, it is planned and expected
that the successful pilot will provide the basis for a sustainable and long-term market that will attract
other partners and include the wider Tanzanian insurance market.
Typology of beneficiaries of the innovative financial instruments
The beneficiaries of Component 1 are local farmers and communities that will realize greater
available credit.
Furthermore, Agricultural and Marketing Cooperative Societies (AMCOS) are agriculture marketing
cooperatives societies. All members are engaged in Agriculture with similar crop or activities joining
for better production and better common market for their farm produce. They have a board and
management that is responsible and answerable to members of the particular AMCOS. AMCOS are
then under agriculture UNION society that has so many AMCOS with similar activities to oversee.
AMCOS are highly regulated by The Registrar of Cooperatives. The AMCOS have formal designation
from the government, have constitution governing their daily operations, they also have the governing
board of from 7 to 10 board members. All the decisions regarding AMCOS operations, including but
not limited to loan application are deliberated at the members' Annual General Meeting (AGM). The
AMCOS need to get clearance from Registrar of Cooperative's Office for any loan application. They
are normally issued with Maximum Liabilities Certificates (MLC) which states the amount to be
borrowed, purpose and name of the Bank to avoid diversion of funds. The AMCOS are used as
essential aggregation point for smallholder farmers dealing with various strategic crops in the
country, helping them to easily mobilize their stock and sale to key off-takers linked by CRDB BANK
PLC in their respective value chains.
Below the TACATDP eligibility criteria for the different categories of beneficiaries
AMCOS/ Medium size Farm
Small holders Farm operators operators / Agri SMSEs/ Agro Large farm operators
processors
- Be either a farmer owner, - Be an officially registered - Be a formally registered
or operating under a lease AMCOS or MSME large agribusiness
farmland lease or engage - Have in place accounting, - Well-established
in sharecropping financial reporting, and accounting and financial
- Have the required auditing systems reporting systems and
experience and - Demonstrate capacity to auditing in place
qualifications establish such a system - ESS policy in place
- Demonstrate capacity to within a short time
repay the loan

--- Table 1 on Page 31 ---
Small holders Farm operators | AMCOS/ Medium size Farm
operators / Agri SMSEs/ Agro
processors | Large farm operators
- Be either a farmer owner,
or operating under a lease
farmland lease or engage
in sharecropping
- Have the required
experience and
qualifications
- Demonstrate capacity to
repay the loan | - Be an officially registered
AMCOS or MSME
- Have in place accounting,
financial reporting, and
auditing systems
- Demonstrate capacity to
establish such a system
within a short time | - Be a formally registered
large agribusiness
- Well-established
accounting and financial
reporting systems and
auditing in place
- ESS policy in place

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 78
B
- Demonstrate a record for - Commitment to ES and - Demonstrate willingness to
a good credit rating with climate safeguards mainstream gender
the selected banks - Commitment to promoting equality
- Ability to articulate how gender equality - Good credit records
climate vulnerability and - Experience in managing - Interventions need to be
change affects farming loans linked to climate change
activities - Strong adaptation and impacts in the agricultural
climate resilient elements in sector
the business plan - Targeted beneficiaries
- Requirement for ESMF for must show that they are
category B projects vulnerable to climate
change
- Requirement for ESMF for
category B projects
Component 2: Policy interventions and Technical Assistance to advance ARA in Tanzania
Activities will be financed by a GCF grant of USD 7.0345 million. This grant will be managed and
monitored directly by CRDB Bank through its Programme Management Unit (PMU).
Beneficiaries: The beneficiaries of this component are CRDB Bank, the Government of Tanzania,
other financial institutions, AMCOS, NGOs, associated farmers, and overall local communities.
Objective: The objective of Component 2 is to facilitate the implementation of the entire Programme
and the continued and long-term capacity of financial institutions and other stakeholders to provide
all segments of the agricultural value chain with services to support climate adaptation.
Overview: This comprehensive targeted TA comprises five (5) capacity building sub-activities and
five (5) policy interventions has the potential to reduce the high risks of lending associated with
climate-compatible agribusiness and promote the large adoption of climate-compatible adaptation
solutions. CRDB Bank, the Government and the other stakeholders will be given the opportunity to
innovate on delivery mechanisms, systems, and products essential for profitable climate-compatible
agricultural financing, including agribusiness. Capacity-building activities will include upgrading the
CRDB Bank staff’s skills to perform climate risk assessments and integrating climate risk
management within their agricultural lending portfolio.
The TA will enable the Government of Tanzania via governmental agencies to deepen its
understanding of the agricultural sector's intrinsic climatic risks, while taking into consideration
updated analysis, knowledge, and insights. Strengthened by this experience and evidence, the
Government of Tanzania can successfully and actively develop an updated climate strategy to better
engage the private banking sector to diagnose climate-related constraints with agricultural
investments, investigate opportunities for profitable investments in the sector, and incentivize
greater adaptation investments and strategies.
CRDB will be Executing Entity for the Technical Assistance and will procure the services through
third parties’ partners competitively selected in line with CRDB procurement policy.
Following are the sub-activities of the targeted technical assistance.
Activity 2.1: Integration of climate risks assessments in CRDB Bank lending operations through the
development of an Online Interface and training support for the CRDB Bank to use, maintain and
upgrade the tool overtime.

--- Table 1 on Page 32 ---
- Demonstrate a record for
a good credit rating with
the selected banks
- Ability to articulate how
climate vulnerability and
change affects farming
activities | - Commitment to ES and
climate safeguards
- Commitment to promoting
gender equality
- Experience in managing
loans
- Strong adaptation and
climate resilient elements in
the business plan
- Requirement for ESMF for
category B projects | - Demonstrate willingness to
mainstream gender
equality
- Good credit records
- Interventions need to be
linked to climate change
impacts in the agricultural
sector
- Targeted beneficiaries
must show that they are
vulnerable to climate
change
- Requirement for ESMF for
category B projects

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 78
B
Technological innovation will be at the center of this project to support the transformation of the
agriculture sector to address climate change: Indeed, facing climate challenges requires globally
innovative approaches, especially in the agriculture sector. The development of an Online Interface
for financial institutions to access the results of climate-crop modeling, associated risks, and an
impacts assessment tool for prioritization of adaptation measures in agriculture will be designed to
help CRDB Bank and all sub-lenders involved in the project improve their understanding of climate
risk exposure in their agriculture loan portfolio and credit products. The state-of- the-art analytical
tool will estimate risk exposures based on the latest climate scenarios and their potential impacts to
loan portfolios and will reflect the climate risk associated with bank counterparties. The tool,
integrating climate risks and impacts, will help inform users on prioritizing technologies to best
manage and respond to risks. (See Figure B.2.3 for examples of assessments to be performed).
The Online Interface and data collection (building upon Activity 3.2) embeds three major innovations
that should lead to a complete overhaul of the way agriculture is undertaken today in Tanzania.
These innovations aim at supporting the full and progressive transformation of the agriculture and
agribusiness sector in Tanzania, the financing for the sector, as described below, as well as the
ways associated risks will be managed at the design, implementation, and capitalization stage. Such
institutional innovations include:
- Mainstreaming robust decision-making for agriculture: Agricultural planning is crippled with
uncertainties such as the future climate, the reaction of crops to temperature or water stress,
commodity prices on the local market, etc. To provide farmers and their financiers with profitable
and resilient options, the Online Interface implements a high-resolution adaptation model built
using methods of decision-making under deep uncertainty. The model will be further developed
and calibrated for Tanzania to enable the robust prioritization of adaptation options specific to
various types of crops, the timeframe of the investments, the exact location of the farm etc.
- Democratizing robust decision-making: After the calibration of the model with CRDB Bank, rural
agriculture advisors and extensions services providers as well as local research institutions in
Tanzania, the results will be made available to participating cooperatives and cooperative banks.
User-friendly and low-bandwidth application (app) will be provided on a tablet (along with the
table) to all offices. With the new developed app, CRDB Bank, its sub-lenders, and other
stakeholders of the value chain will be able:
1. To estimate farmers’ climate risk rating depending on their location, type of crops and
the management practices already implemented by the farmers.
2. To provide advice on robust and profitable technologies to improve productivity
(including by reducing the water yield gap) and increase resilience to climate-related
shocks financed by longer-term loan tenor of the credit line offered by the GCF.
3. To re-estimate farmer’s climate risk rating based on the productivity and resilience
effects of the deployed technology.
- Expanding and/or deploying innovative adaptation technologies: The online interface will
include at design an estimated 100 technologies and practices for improved natural resources
management (including water) and agriculture resilience. Some technologies are already
available and implemented in Tanzania (e.g., micro-catchment and water harvesting methods,
such as Zai), while some are proven technologies that are relatively uncommon and
unaffordable within Tanzania (e.g., net shading, protected cultivated technologies that enable
controlled climates, devices to improve resilience towards strong winds and insects). In
addition, other modern and innovative agricultural technologies will be introduced as
appropriate considering local demand, among other facts on the ground. The model will assess
the relevance of the measures to the specific farm context (crop, geography, etc.). The farmer
contracting the loan will then have to select his / her preferred technologies, if necessary, with
the support of local public or private extension services.
The roll out of the online tool will be supported by dedicated capacity building and TA for CRDB

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 78
B
Bank to better integrate Climate Risk Analysis. This will include:
- TA to support CRDB Bank integrate improved climate risks assessments and agriculture
climate scenario development within its operations, including stress tests on CRDB Bank’s
lending portfolio.
- Support establishing effective and appropriate institutional architecture to best maintain this
new capacity and ensure its long-term integration within CRDB Bank’s firm-wide operations.
- Staff training for CRDB Bank and local financial intermediaries on best practices in integrating
climate risks and considerations within regular banking operations.
CRDB confirms it will only use the "online interface" developed under Activity 2.1 in Tanzania for
the purpose of this programme and that the TA activities only target the agriculture sector in
Tanzania. The system's calibration is only for Tanzania's climate and agroecological conditions,
crops in CRDB's loan portfolio, and CRDB's credit terms. Finally, the tool will have several uses: to
inform CRDB's ARA credit appraisal, the ministry of agriculture's agriculture advisory service, and
provide real-time climate advisory services for end-users through their mobile devices and other
channels.
CRDB is the Executing Entity for Activity 2.1, and as such, CRDB will be solely responsible for the
development, operation, regular update, and ownership of the online interface.
Activity 2.2: Customer capacity building on adaptation technologies and business development
This TA aims to enhance the capacity of the extended financial and agriculture value chain to better
conceptualize, design, plan, and execute adaptation technologies and business ventures.
Activity 2.2.1: Capacity building for farmers and other key stakeholders involved in crop value
chains in the face of climate change.
Activity 2.2.2: Capacity development and training for farmers and other end-users to
integrate, operate, and maintain adaptation technologies within their regular agribusiness
operations and support in investigating potential to invest and develop local manufacturing
capacity of affordable, modern adaptation technologies (such as net shade screen houses,
automated drip irrigation kits, incorporating solar powered sensors).
Activity 2.2.3: Business development with new and potential investors in adaptive agribusiness
interventions.
Activity 2.3: Tailored TA for the integration of climate and ESG risk assessments in agriculture
support programmes, including the extension service.
TA specifically to support the integration and full embeddedness of climate risk assessments within
a CRDB Bank extension service programme.
Activity 2.3.1: Training for the integration of climate and ESG risk assessments in agriculture
support programmes, including the extension service
Activity 2.3.2: Operationalizing an updated and implemented new extension service
programme (including internal and external marketing and rollout)
The extension service is not new. Agriculture advisory practices are in place in Tanzania for many
years. However, implemented programmes have not been updated more recently. Hence, , this
activity will provide the additional support needed for the systematic integration of climate risk
assessments and management into existing extension programmes, which are outdated and not fit
for current and future climatic conditions.
Activity 2.4: Capacity building for the establishment of the new parametric Insurance programme
Such capacity building will support and complement Activity 1.3 by providing capacity building,
knowledge sharing, and associated support to CRDB Bank, the Government of Tanzania, industry

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 78
B
representatives, community leaders and associations, and end-users on parametric insurance
products to enhance farmers’ adaptation and long-term resilience. TA will ensure the long-term
sustainability of the programme within the context of CRDB Bank and Tanzania’s insurance market.
Activity 2.4.1: Engagement and outreach to CRDB Bank and crop insurance companies,
including targeted training and workshops with key personnel and staff, to expand insurance
programming to include parametric/index products, including establishing insurance
parameters and selecting target crops for protection, assessing current operations and
capacity levels, showcasing and highlighting best practices, mapping opportunities to
leverage existing partnerships and existing institutional resources to maximize the
programme’s success, and identifying key stakeholders beyond the insurance department
to integrate within the programme’s establishment, roll out, and implementation.
Activity 2.4.2: Expanded training and workshops for other relevant CRDB Bank personnel,
Government of Tanzania regulatory officials and professionals, and key industry
stakeholders. Such training and workshop will ensure that 1) the regulatory space is
conducive to parametric insurance, 2) relevant stakeholders have the knowledge and
capacity to promote, oversee, and implement such a program, 3) relevant bodies and
agencies have the capacity to appropriately integrate available data analytics into product
design for optimal impact, and 4) participating institutions have the appropriate and adequate
legal framework and legal instruments in place to enable parametric insurance products
incorporation within banking operations.
Activity 2.4.3: Technical assistance and capacity building with leading smallholder farmer
reps regarding parametric insurance
Activity 2.4.4: Extended capacity building and outreach to key community stakeholders and
local organizations to increase awareness of parametric/index insurance products and
address any existing knowledge gaps on the integration of such financial mechanisms within
smallholder farmers’ and agribusinesses existing financing frameworks
Activity 2:4.5: Marketing and training of financial officers at CRDB Bank and parametric
insurance product-bundling sales promotion
Activity 2.5: Dedicated legal and financial TA including support for sourcing.
Activity 2.5.1: Legal instruments drafting and development
Activity 2.5.2: Financial risks modeling and insurance protection
Legal TA consists of capacity building to support farmers/farmer groups in better understanding
modalities and arrangements for collective ownership/collective investments, contracting and
agreement, and leasing options. The training will help farmers understand how to safeguard land
tenure rights and policies in the context of collective investments.
Financial TA will help them understand how to perform financial assessments of the viability of
investments considering climate change and how to potentially combine products (e.g., working
capital and capital investment for adaptation technology, loans and guarantees, loans and
insurance, etc.).
Activity 2.6: Support for the implementation of the Tanzania’s National Climate Change Strategy
implementation
Implementing Tanzania’s recently adopted National Climate Change Strategy will require intensive
and proactive coordination among Government of Tanzania national, regional, and local divisions,
ministries, and agencies, as well as close collaboration with industry actors.
Activity 2.6.1: Capacity building exercises with Tanzania’s Division of Environment, Vice
President’s Office (VPO) on leading the implementation of Tanzania’s National Climate
Change Strategy, including identifying priorities, key public and private stakeholders, and
organizing a multifaceted multisectoral engagement and implementation approach.

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 78
B
Activity 2.6.2: Workshops and coordination exercises between Tanzania’s Division of
Environment, VPO, national, regional, and local divisions, ministries, and agencies, and
private sector industry actors, and community stakeholders.
Activity 2.7: Policy interventions and support for the ministry of agriculture and development of
Agriculture Adaptation Routine Data System (AARDS)
Provide support for the integration of climate risks in agriculture policies and investments
frameworks, and capacity to create a regulatory and financial environment conducive to public and
private investment in climate adaptation and agricultural investments, in conjunction with the
supporting national data collection efforts on crop production, both in terms of ongoing production
as well as incorporating historical data, predictive modeling, and scenario analysis, among other
tools.
The Agriculture Adaptation Routine Data System (AARDS) is the next iteration of the Agricultural
Routine Data System (ARDS), developed and piloted by the Tanzanian Ministry of Agriculture. The
Ministry of Agriculture has requested CRDB to use AARDS to plan and monitor Activities under
TACATDP, and CRDB confirms its intention to comply fully. Under Activity 2.7.4, AARDS will build
upon ARDS by implementing adaptation indicators, tracking capacity, indexing, and filtering
features. CRDB will be supporting the Ministry of Agriculture in this effort.
Activity 2.7.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between Ministry of Agriculture, CRDB Bank,
MFIs, other local financial institutions and the Government of Tanzania on private sector
engagement and mobilization for adaptation of the agriculture sector to advance critical
actionable policy reforms.
Activity 2.7.2: Coordinating ongoing dialogue and facilitating the generation of knowledge
products to support local financial institutions and Tanzania’s financial systems to be in line
with Paris Agreement statutes and regulations.
Activity 2.7.3: Coordinating dialogue and capacity development for key stakeholders
(financial institutions, financial intermediaries, local leaders, agribusiness owners,
smallholder farmers) on integrating climate assessment tools and technologies within
agriculture extension services.
Activity 2.7.4: Support to the Ministry of Agriculture and regional- and local-level agencies
on expanding the piloted ARDS to include adaptation indicators, tracking capacity, indexing,
and filtering, including engagement with local stakeholders on the value-added benefits of a
AARDS for project planning and monitoring, including the provision of equipment necessary
equipment upgrades.
Activity 2.7.5: Training expanded government agencies and personnel on institutionalizing
using the AARDS to maximize programmatic outputs and operational efficiency as best
practice, including developing training manuals and other operational support.
Activity 2.7.6: Support for adaptation data collection at the village/ward-level by agriculture
extension service officers, including with equipment upgrades, technical support, and
supervisory site visits.
Activity 2.7.7: Training and support for the submission of appropriate and comprehensive
data at the regional and local level by villages and wards to Local Government Authorities
(LGAs).
Activity 2.7.8: Operationalizing the regular delivery reporting from LGAs to national-level
authorities delivered on a monthly, quarterly, and annually to support comprehensive data
collection and analysis efforts.
Activity 2.8: Support to the Tanzania Meteorological Authority for climate information services for
agriculture and water resources monitoring
Support to the Tanzania Meteorological Authority to better integrate climate information services for
agriculture and water resources monitoring within its operations, including the gathering, analysis,
and dissemination of such information to relevant public and private institutions and organizations
and agriculture end-users (including smallholder farmers and farming collectives)

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 78
B
Activity 2.8.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between the Tanzania Meteorological Authority,
CRDB Bank, MFIs, other local financial institutions, and key stakeholders in the agriculture
value-chain on information gaps in agriculture and water resources monitoring and methods
to establish best practices in information gathering and dissemination.
Activity 2.8.2: Support to the Tanzania Meteorological Authority on informational gaps within
the Authority’s current operations, identifying and addressing areas in which services could
be better tailored towards agriculture and water resources monitoring, developing updated
operational manuals and guiding frameworks.
Activity 2.8.3: Technical training support on integrating upgraded equipment to conduct
modern and advanced agriculture and water resources monitoring.
Activity 2.9: Support to the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority for further development of crop
parametric insurance in Tanzania
Provide support to the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority on crop parametric/index insurance
in Tanzania, including capacity to create a regulatory and financial environment conducive to public
and private parametric insurance product.
Activity 2.9.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory
Authority, CRDB Bank, MFIs, other local financial institutions, and key stakeholders in the
agriculture value-chain on private sector engagement in parametric insurance products and
critical actionable policy reforms needed to best facilitate the offering of such products.
Activity 2.9.2: Coordinating ongoing dialogue and facilitating the generation of knowledge
products to support the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority and local agencies monitor
and oversee the parametric insurance market.
Activity 2.9.3: Coordinating dialogue and capacity development for the Tanzania Insurance
Regulatory Authority, CRDB Bank, MFIs, other local financial institutions, and relevant
regional actors on best practices in the oversight, regulation, management, and
implementation of crop parametric insurance products.
Activity 2.10: Support to the Financial Sector Deepening Trust (FSDT) for the integration of climate
risks into financial sector
Provide support for the FSDT in the effective and sustainable integration of climate risks in the
organization’s agriculture policies, investments frameworks, and overall financing operations.
The Financial Sector Deepening Trust (FSDT) is an independent trust incorporated in Tanzania.
FSDT's Board and Programme Investment Committee (PIC) members include the Bank of Tanzania
(the Central Bank of Tanzania), Global Affairs Canada, the Embassy of Denmark, the Embassy of
Sweden, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and the Dar Teknohama Business Incubator. FSDT's
mission is to improve financial inclusion in Tanzania, and its beneficiaries include women, rural youth,
rural farmers, and enterprises.
As the Executing Entity of the programme, CRDB will decide and have final approval over the
technical assistance given to FTSD.
Activity 2.10.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between FSDT, CRDB Bank, other local
financial institutions, and the Government of Tanzania on best practices for integrating
climate risks into financing decision making.
Activity 2.10.2: Supporting FSDT operationalize climate risk considerations throughout the
organization, including developing training manuals and guiding operation frameworks.
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
Accredited Entities and Partners:
CRDB Bank (Accredited Entity and Executing Entity): CRDB Bank PLC is a leading privatized

--- Table 1 on Page 37 ---
Activity 2.8.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between the Tanzania Meteorological Authority,
CRDB Bank, MFIs, other local financial institutions, and key stakeholders in the agriculture
value-chain on information gaps in agriculture and water resources monitoring and methods
to establish best practices in information gathering and dissemination.
Activity 2.8.2: Support to the Tanzania Meteorological Authority on informational gaps within
the Authority’s current operations, identifying and addressing areas in which services could
be better tailored towards agriculture and water resources monitoring, developing updated
operational manuals and guiding frameworks.
Activity 2.8.3: Technical training support on integrating upgraded equipment to conduct
modern and advanced agriculture and water resources monitoring.
Activity 2.9: Support to the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority for further development of crop
parametric insurance in Tanzania
Provide support to the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority on crop parametric/index insurance
in Tanzania, including capacity to create a regulatory and financial environment conducive to public
and private parametric insurance product.
Activity 2.9.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory
Authority, CRDB Bank, MFIs, other local financial institutions, and key stakeholders in the
agriculture value-chain on private sector engagement in parametric insurance products and
critical actionable policy reforms needed to best facilitate the offering of such products.
Activity 2.9.2: Coordinating ongoing dialogue and facilitating the generation of knowledge
products to support the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority and local agencies monitor
and oversee the parametric insurance market.
Activity 2.9.3: Coordinating dialogue and capacity development for the Tanzania Insurance
Regulatory Authority, CRDB Bank, MFIs, other local financial institutions, and relevant
regional actors on best practices in the oversight, regulation, management, and
implementation of crop parametric insurance products.
Activity 2.10: Support to the Financial Sector Deepening Trust (FSDT) for the integration of climate
risks into financial sector
Provide support for the FSDT in the effective and sustainable integration of climate risks in the
organization’s agriculture policies, investments frameworks, and overall financing operations.
The Financial Sector Deepening Trust (FSDT) is an independent trust incorporated in Tanzania.
FSDT's Board and Programme Investment Committee (PIC) members include the Bank of Tanzania
(the Central Bank of Tanzania), Global Affairs Canada, the Embassy of Denmark, the Embassy of
Sweden, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and the Dar Teknohama Business Incubator. FSDT's
mission is to improve financial inclusion in Tanzania, and its beneficiaries include women, rural youth,
rural farmers, and enterprises.
As the Executing Entity of the programme, CRDB will decide and have final approval over the
technical assistance given to FTSD.
Activity 2.10.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between FSDT, CRDB Bank, other local
financial institutions, and the Government of Tanzania on best practices for integrating
climate risks into financing decision making.
Activity 2.10.2: Supporting FSDT operationalize climate risk considerations throughout the
organization, including developing training manuals and guiding operation frameworks. |  | 
 | B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) | 
Accredited Entities and Partners:
CRDB Bank (Accredited Entity and Executing Entity): CRDB Bank PLC is a leading privatized |  | 

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 78
B
Financial Services Provider based in Dar Es Salaam in the United Republic of Tanzania with
presence in Burundi. CRDB Bank’s history can be traced back to when it was established in 1947 as
Land Bank of Tanganyika and subsequently restructured into Tanzania Rural Development Bank,
then Cooperative and Rural Development Bank (CRDB). CRDB was privatized in 1996 and listed
on the Dar Es Salaam Stock Exchange in 2009. Over 70% of shareholding stock belongs to local
Tanzanians, with other stockholders including the Danish International Development Agency’s
Investment Fund. CRDB Bank extends short, medium, and long-term loans, working capital and
guarantee credit facilities to various sectors that include climate related activities. As of 31 March
2020, CRDB Bank’s total loans and advances stood at USD 1,683,766,027.39 in diversified sectors
that also embrace the achievement of the climate change Framework Convention and the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals. CRDB also sets aside 1% of its net profit as a Corporate
Social Investment, which invests in education, health, youth, and the environment.
CRDB does not have extensive experience with adaptation technologies. However, the purpose of
TACATDP is to equip CRDB with the financial and non-financial (TA, capacity building) resources
to offer more ambitious and innovative adaptation technologies, especially to smallholder farmers,
who typically cannot or struggle to access any agriculture adaptation technology. Hence, CRDB will
engage several key government agencies and third-party service providers mentioned below to help
facilitate certain activities under TACATDP.
Prospective Partners:
CRDB Bank will interact with a number of service partners -- procured parties, beneficiaries of
programme activities, and financial intermediaries – through the programme’s two core
components, activities, and sub-activities. CRDB Bank will involve key and relevant governmental
agencies as well as independent service providers for the implementation of appropriate programme
activities as procured parties, beneficiaries of activities, and financial intermediaries

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 78
B
- The Government of Tanzania will be engaged as a beneficiary of various programmatic
activities and engaged to support policy interventions, mainly on the integration of climate risks
in agriculture advisory and extension services. Key offices include:
• Vice President Office (NDA) and Division of Environment
• Ministry of Agriculture
• The Tanzania Meteorological Authority
• Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority
• Financial Sector Deepening Trust (FSDT)
- Guarantee Providers to provide and support the guarantee credit-enhancement facility.
• GCF
- Insurance Providers to develop and implement insurance scheme
• CRDB Bank Plc - Banking, Lending, Cards, Insurance
- The independent services providers (procured parties) to support capacity building and
technical assistance programme component (to be selected through procurement)
The flow of funds will be directed by CRDB Bank, as the Accredited Entity and Executing Entity as
represented in Figure 1 and as described in the following:
Figure 1: Flow of fund
• Subject to the terms of the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA), CRDB will receive funding
from GCF for a total of USD 100 million (USD 70 million for the credit line, USD 10 million
for the guarantee, and USD 10 million for the crop insurance scheme)

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 78
B
• CRDB Bank will contribute USD 100 million as the Bank’s co-financing to make the ARA
credit facility of USD 170 million, will flow to beneficiaries (farmers) being accessed as
concessional loans for Agriculture activities as per TACATDP objectives.
• USD 10 million is for the guarantee facility, managed by GCF with claims paid out to CRDB
based on pre-agreed terms and conditions
• USD 7.0345 million as technical assistance to service providers – selected through a
competitive procurement process – to facilitate the Implementation arrangements of
adaptation technologies needed for the programme
• The USD 10 million will be for Insurance scheme arrangements and crop insurance cover
to loan beneficiaries.
• These beneficiaries will be responsible to repay the loans to CRDB and hence loan
repayment to GCF.
CRDB Bank will disburse funding (received from the GCF according to the detailed disbursement
schedule) through direct payments to end beneficiaries using the most appropriate internal
oversight, implementation, and governance structure.
Relevant CRDB Bank departments to be involved in the process, include the Sustainable Finance
Unit (SFU), Credit Department, Corporate Banking Department, Retail Banking Department, and
Department of Auditing. Some credit approvals will require decision-making from CRDB Bank’s
Board Credit Committee or the Board in line with CRDB Bank’s credit manual.
Credit lines: All credit lines will be centralized by the Retail Banking Department and the Corporate
Banking Department processes; all credit lines pass to the centralized Credit Department for
comments and decision-making according to limits that can be decided by the Director of Credit or
forwarded through to the Bank’s Credit Management Meetings or to the Board-level for decision-
making according to their recommendation.
Guarantee Facility: The guarantee facility will be managed by GCF with support from respective
CRDB departments.
Insurance: CRDB currently operates as bank assurance agent modality overseen through the
Retail Department. CRDB Bank onboards customers and directs them to insurers and insurance
companies in accordance with legal arrangements in place in line with new regulation that requires
any banks that operate insurance products must have bancassurance arrangement. All
recruitments of customers is being done and will be done under the branch networks being
overseen under the Retail Department headed by the Director of Retail Banking Department who
reports to the Chief Commercial Officer and who also reports to the Group CEO and Managing
Director.
The applications passes through branches credit committees, then forwarded to the Management
Credit Committee at the headquarters, if limits exceeds Management level the same will be
forwarded to the Board Credit Committee for inward Main Board decision.
Al the prescribed actions are being under the surveillance under the Department of Risk and
Compliance headed by the Director of Risk and Compliance who reports direct to the Group CEO
and Managing Director.
Disbursements: Disbursements will be undertaken under the Credit Department, as supervised by
the Director of Credit who reports to the Group CEO and Managing Director.

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 78
B
The Department of Audit, headed by the Director of Internal Audit will provide auditing oversight for
the whole flow of funds process. The Director of Internal Audit reports directly to the Board.
All procedures above will be undertaken in line with FAA, GCF's policies, and CRDB’s risk and
compliance regulations to ensure full compliance with agreed upon regulations, disbursements,
and use of funds.
All disbursements will be made in full compliance with standing CRDB Bank rules and regulations
and in accordance with GCF policies and CRDB Bank’s AMA with the GCF. Auditing will be
handled by a qualified, internationally recognized auditing firm, competitively selected by CRDB
Bank.
Below the overall approval loan process and implementation structure of the TACATDP

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 78
B
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR RELEVANT CRDB BANK DEPARTMENTS
CRDB Bank will disburse funding (received from the GCF according to the detailed disbursement
schedule) through direct payments to end beneficiaries using the most appropriate internal
oversight, implementation, and governance structure.

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 78
B
Relevant CRDB Bank departments to be involved in the process, include the Sustainable Finance
Unit (SFU), Credit Department, Corporate Banking Department, Retail Banking Department, and
Department of Auditing. Some credit approvals will require decision-making from CRDB Bank’s
Board Credit Committee or the Board in line with CRDB Bank’s credit manual.
Unit Responsibilities on Loan (credit) application
Sustainable - To oversee all TACATDP loan application
Finance Unit - Environmental and Social Safeguards
- Screening application criteria if qualify under ARA in line with TACATDP Programme
- Coordination with other internal and external programme interested parties
- Reporting to interested parties (including GCF and Bank’s Management)
- Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
- Grievance Mechanism
- Gender action Plan
- Training and Capacity building
- Relationship and out outreach to key stakeholders
Credit - Preparation of the Credit Appraisal Report
- Approval
- Credit Documentation
- credit disbursement
- credit records and files
- portfolio monitoring and quality assurance
- offsite monitoring and onsite inspection to business units/branches
- loan review and classification
- Preparing performance report to the Board of Directors quarterly
Business units : - Credit sales
Branch, DRB and - Inform the customer about the bank is lending requirements and eligibility criteria.
DCB - Appraisal of credit applications
- Document collections from borrowers.
- Portfolio Monitoring And Quality Assurance
- Credit Collection
Responsibilities of - Implementing the credit risk management strategies and policies by ensuring credit
the Senior procedures and that processes are well translated and are put in place to manage and
Management control credit risk and the quality of the credit portfolio in accordance with this Bank’s Credit
(Chief Executive Policy.
Officer, Chief - Chief Commercial Officer- Chairing Loan Collection Committees
Financial Officer,
Chief Commercial
Officer and Chief
Operation Officer)
Responsibility of - Continuous overall credit control oversight, carry out independent reviews on credit related
the Risk and processes and controls
Compliance - Support the design and evaluation of controls to mitigate credit risk
Department - Independently, monitor and report the overall Bank’s credit risk profile and management
process to the relevant committees and/or authorities in the Bank.
- Continuously monitor and report compliance with the requirements of the Bank’s Credit
policy and banking prudential regulations governing lending operations.
Responsibility of - Carry out quarterly routine and ad-hoc audit of the credit management processes in the Bank
the Internal Audit as per annual audit plan to ascertain compliance to bank’s credit policy and adequacy of
Department controls implemented to mitigate risks inherent in the lending business.
Responsibilities - Overall, in charge of branch portfolio, responsible for both growth and quality
and Role of Branch - conducting inspection of client’s business and collateral with a view of confirming location
Managers and existence of both business and collateral(s) and ensure borrower’s documentations are
properly executed, kept securely and intact
- Booking of quality loans and daily monitoring of the branch credit portfolio and take timely
corrective actions in compliance with this Policy to prevent adverse migrations of the
portfolio;
- Timely inform the responsible business department at Headquarters and where necessary
Credit Department on any known or found deviations from the expected performance of any
customer or portfolio;

--- Table 1 on Page 43 ---
Relevant CRDB Bank departments to be involved in the process, include the Sustainable Finance
Unit (SFU), Credit Department, Corporate Banking Department, Retail Banking Department, and
Department of Auditing. Some credit approvals will require decision-making from CRDB Bank’s
Board Credit Committee or the Board in line with CRDB Bank’s credit manual.
Unit Responsibilities on Loan (credit) application
Sustainable - To oversee all TACATDP loan application
Finance Unit - Environmental and Social Safeguards
- Screening application criteria if qualify under ARA in line with TACATDP Programme
- Coordination with other internal and external programme interested parties
- Reporting to interested parties (including GCF and Bank’s Management)
- Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
- Grievance Mechanism
- Gender action Plan
- Training and Capacity building
- Relationship and out outreach to key stakeholders
Credit - Preparation of the Credit Appraisal Report
- Approval
- Credit Documentation
- credit disbursement
- credit records and files
- portfolio monitoring and quality assurance
- offsite monitoring and onsite inspection to business units/branches
- loan review and classification
- Preparing performance report to the Board of Directors quarterly
Business units : - Credit sales
Branch, DRB and - Inform the customer about the bank is lending requirements and eligibility criteria.
DCB - Appraisal of credit applications
- Document collections from borrowers.
- Portfolio Monitoring And Quality Assurance
- Credit Collection
Responsibilities of - Implementing the credit risk management strategies and policies by ensuring credit
the Senior procedures and that processes are well translated and are put in place to manage and
Management control credit risk and the quality of the credit portfolio in accordance with this Bank’s Credit
(Chief Executive Policy.
Officer, Chief - Chief Commercial Officer- Chairing Loan Collection Committees
Financial Officer,
Chief Commercial
Officer and Chief
Operation Officer)
Responsibility of - Continuous overall credit control oversight, carry out independent reviews on credit related
the Risk and processes and controls
Compliance - Support the design and evaluation of controls to mitigate credit risk
Department - Independently, monitor and report the overall Bank’s credit risk profile and management
process to the relevant committees and/or authorities in the Bank.
- Continuously monitor and report compliance with the requirements of the Bank’s Credit
policy and banking prudential regulations governing lending operations.
Responsibility of - Carry out quarterly routine and ad-hoc audit of the credit management processes in the Bank
the Internal Audit as per annual audit plan to ascertain compliance to bank’s credit policy and adequacy of
Department controls implemented to mitigate risks inherent in the lending business.
Responsibilities - Overall, in charge of branch portfolio, responsible for both growth and quality
and Role of Branch - conducting inspection of client’s business and collateral with a view of confirming location
Managers and existence of both business and collateral(s) and ensure borrower’s documentations are
properly executed, kept securely and intact
- Booking of quality loans and daily monitoring of the branch credit portfolio and take timely
corrective actions in compliance with this Policy to prevent adverse migrations of the
portfolio;
- Timely inform the responsible business department at Headquarters and where necessary
Credit Department on any known or found deviations from the expected performance of any
customer or portfolio; |  | 
 | Unit | Responsibilities on Loan (credit) application
 | Sustainable
Finance Unit | - To oversee all TACATDP loan application
- Environmental and Social Safeguards
- Screening application criteria if qualify under ARA in line with TACATDP Programme
- Coordination with other internal and external programme interested parties
- Reporting to interested parties (including GCF and Bank’s Management)
- Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
- Grievance Mechanism
- Gender action Plan
- Training and Capacity building
- Relationship and out outreach to key stakeholders
 | Credit | - Preparation of the Credit Appraisal Report
- Approval
- Credit Documentation
- credit disbursement
- credit records and files
- portfolio monitoring and quality assurance
- offsite monitoring and onsite inspection to business units/branches
- loan review and classification
- Preparing performance report to the Board of Directors quarterly
 | Business units :
Branch, DRB and
DCB | - Credit sales
- Inform the customer about the bank is lending requirements and eligibility criteria.
- Appraisal of credit applications
- Document collections from borrowers.
- Portfolio Monitoring And Quality Assurance
- Credit Collection
 | Responsibilities of
the Senior
Management
(Chief Executive
Officer, Chief
Financial Officer,
Chief Commercial
Officer and Chief
Operation Officer) | - Implementing the credit risk management strategies and policies by ensuring credit
procedures and that processes are well translated and are put in place to manage and
control credit risk and the quality of the credit portfolio in accordance with this Bank’s Credit
Policy.
- Chief Commercial Officer- Chairing Loan Collection Committees
 | Responsibility of
the Risk and
Compliance
Department | - Continuous overall credit control oversight, carry out independent reviews on credit related
processes and controls
- Support the design and evaluation of controls to mitigate credit risk
- Independently, monitor and report the overall Bank’s credit risk profile and management
process to the relevant committees and/or authorities in the Bank.
- Continuously monitor and report compliance with the requirements of the Bank’s Credit
policy and banking prudential regulations governing lending operations.
 | Responsibility of
the Internal Audit
Department | - Carry out quarterly routine and ad-hoc audit of the credit management processes in the Bank
as per annual audit plan to ascertain compliance to bank’s credit policy and adequacy of
controls implemented to mitigate risks inherent in the lending business.
 | Responsibilities
and Role of Branch
Managers | - Overall, in charge of branch portfolio, responsible for both growth and quality
- conducting inspection of client’s business and collateral with a view of confirming location
and existence of both business and collateral(s) and ensure borrower’s documentations are
properly executed, kept securely and intact
- Booking of quality loans and daily monitoring of the branch credit portfolio and take timely
corrective actions in compliance with this Policy to prevent adverse migrations of the
portfolio;
- Timely inform the responsible business department at Headquarters and where necessary
Credit Department on any known or found deviations from the expected performance of any
customer or portfolio;

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 78
B
- Daily monitoring of the branch individual borrower’s accounts conducts and overall portfolio
covering all segments and products with a view of ensuring compliance with credit granting
and monitoring procedures and quality of the branch overall credit portfolio;
- Timely closure of all credit related control issues/ breaches observed at the branch by various
control reviewers(Quality Assurance, Risks , Internal and External Audit and BOT
examination) as per given timeline and ensure non-recurrence going forward;
- All times, ensure completeness of borrower’s credit files with fully executed loan agreements,
perfection of collaterals covering insurance policy being available at all times and land rent
payments (depending on the nature of collateral)
Responsibilities - Accountable for leadership, credit business generation and quality of the credit portfolio in
and Role of Zonal respective zone branches.
Managers
①
The Branch Manager;
②
The Director of Credit (including Credit Heads and Managers with delegated approving
mandates in Credit Department);
Approval
Authorities
③
Chief Commercial Officer (Retail Credit Committee)
④
The Managing Director (Management Credit Committee);
⑤
The Credit Committee of the Board;
⑥
The Board.
Below the schematic representation of decision making and authority for approval of ARA under
the TACATDP

--- Table 1 on Page 44 ---
- Daily monitoring of the branch individual borrower’s accounts conducts and overall portfolio
covering all segments and products with a view of ensuring compliance with credit granting
and monitoring procedures and quality of the branch overall credit portfolio;
- Timely closure of all credit related control issues/ breaches observed at the branch by various
control reviewers(Quality Assurance, Risks , Internal and External Audit and BOT
examination) as per given timeline and ensure non-recurrence going forward;
- All times, ensure completeness of borrower’s credit files with fully executed loan agreements,
perfection of collaterals covering insurance policy being available at all times and land rent
payments (depending on the nature of collateral)
Responsibilities - Accountable for leadership, credit business generation and quality of the credit portfolio in
and Role of Zonal respective zone branches.
Managers
①
The Branch Manager;
②
The Director of Credit (including Credit Heads and Managers with delegated approving
mandates in Credit Department);
Approval
③
Authorities Chief Commercial Officer (Retail Credit Committee)
④
The Managing Director (Management Credit Committee);
⑤
The Credit Committee of the Board;
⑥
The Board.
Below the schematic representation of decision making and authority for approval of ARA under
the TACATDP |  | - Daily monitoring of the branch individual borrower’s accounts conducts and overall portfolio
covering all segments and products with a view of ensuring compliance with credit granting
and monitoring procedures and quality of the branch overall credit portfolio;
- Timely closure of all credit related control issues/ breaches observed at the branch by various
control reviewers(Quality Assurance, Risks , Internal and External Audit and BOT
examination) as per given timeline and ensure non-recurrence going forward;
- All times, ensure completeness of borrower’s credit files with fully executed loan agreements,
perfection of collaterals covering insurance policy being available at all times and land rent
payments (depending on the nature of collateral)
 | Responsibilities
and Role of Zonal
Managers | - Accountable for leadership, credit business generation and quality of the credit portfolio in
respective zone branches.
 | Approval
Authorities | ①
The Branch Manager;
②
The Director of Credit (including Credit Heads and Managers with delegated approving
mandates in Credit Department);
③
Chief Commercial Officer (Retail Credit Committee)
④
The Managing Director (Management Credit Committee);
⑤
The Credit Committee of the Board;
⑥
The Board.

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 78
B
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Agriculture is one of the sectors most affected by climate change in the United Republic of Tanzania.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security developed a policy and strategy to focus on climate
change, with a strong focus on adaptation to climate change in the agriculture sector and food
security of the country and region at large. The Country recognizes the importance climate
adaptation and resilience plays, and its inter-linkage with sustainable development, food security
and shifting agriculture activities to low-carbon economy-agriculture. However, the transformation
toward adaptation and climate-resilient agriculture is costly because of the new technologies and
investments in large-scale infrastructure needed to fully transform the sector. The public resource
allocations towards increased resilience are limited, while the costs of adapting to climate change
is increasing. The Government of Tanzania has ratified the National Agriculture Climate Resilient
Plan that identifies key adaptation measures that are urgent to protect Tanzanian agriculture from
the adverse effects of climate change.
This project focusses on adaptation measures in agriculture by implementing a number of activities
that will offer adaptation and resilient solutions linked to increased smallholder farmers’ productivity
and incomes by intensifying farming activities, so as to protect scarce water resources and reduce
application of industrial fertilizers and pesticides, utilize properly certified seeds and contain post-
harvest loss. In this regard, facilitation by international stakeholders (including multilateral donors
such as GCF, and bilateral aid) to this project proposal will enable smooth implementation of activities
that complement the Government programs towards the Agriculture Climate Resilience. Currently,
the main sources of finance for the agriculture sector come from both public and private sources,
but overall needed investment for the development of the sector remains limited, while the additional
resources needed to ensure the sector’s adaptation to climate change is almost non-existent.
Regarding public sources, investments come basically from Government budget and international
official development assistance (ODA).
Public expenditure: Although more than 70 % of Tanzanians depend directly or indirectly on
agriculture for their livelihoods, agriculture is allocated only 2.5 % of public spending; and even then,
33 % of public spending on agriculture is for private goods, such as subsidies for buying fertilizers.
In 2018, all funders worldwide committed $200.09 million in development finance to Tanzania for
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing. Of this amount, $127.43 million (63.7%) was provided as ODA
grants, while $38.11mn (19%) was provided in the form of ODA loans.
Private finance: The main sources of private finance are Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) and credit
from local banks. Private agribusiness investments have been modest, especially from foreign
sources, probably due to a lack of a supporting policy environment. On average, between 2007 and
2017 only 4 % of FDI went into agriculture, fisheries, and forestry together. Commercial Banks are
extending credit to the private sector, but the rates are relatively high. Commercial lending rates
averaged 17 %, down from 17.5 % in 2018. Commercial bank lending to agriculture dropped 7 %
down from 10 % over the past five years. In 2019, the Tanzanian banking sector registered a growth
in credit to the private sector reflecting an uptick in consumer confidence that coincides with the
liquidity- easing measures of the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) and a gradual decline in nonperforming
loans (NPLs). In 2019, there was growth in credit of 68.5 % to agriculture, with commercial banks
share of lending to the agriculture sector rising to 16% of total lending, which remains limited despite
the outstanding progress. CRDB Bank’s agriculture portfolio indicates an overall declining trend due
to increased risks that could result potentially in more payment defaults.
Constrained Banking business model in Tanzania : One of the main challenge faced by the Banking
sector in Tanzania relates to the intermediation of domestic deposits for credit provision and
investment in government securities: As majority of Banks in Tanzania, CRDB experience short-
term liabilities (deposits) mismatch with the increasing demand for longer-term assets by
households, Agri firms and the Government to protect agriculture and other assets from climate
change impacts: Most of CRDB capital come from deposits from its clients. CRDB primarily business

--- Table 1 on Page 45 ---
 | B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) | 
Agriculture is one of the sectors most affected by climate change in the United Republic of Tanzania.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security developed a policy and strategy to focus on climate
change, with a strong focus on adaptation to climate change in the agriculture sector and food
security of the country and region at large. The Country recognizes the importance climate
adaptation and resilience plays, and its inter-linkage with sustainable development, food security
and shifting agriculture activities to low-carbon economy-agriculture. However, the transformation
toward adaptation and climate-resilient agriculture is costly because of the new technologies and
investments in large-scale infrastructure needed to fully transform the sector. The public resource
allocations towards increased resilience are limited, while the costs of adapting to climate change
is increasing. The Government of Tanzania has ratified the National Agriculture Climate Resilient
Plan that identifies key adaptation measures that are urgent to protect Tanzanian agriculture from
the adverse effects of climate change.
This project focusses on adaptation measures in agriculture by implementing a number of activities
that will offer adaptation and resilient solutions linked to increased smallholder farmers’ productivity
and incomes by intensifying farming activities, so as to protect scarce water resources and reduce
application of industrial fertilizers and pesticides, utilize properly certified seeds and contain post-
harvest loss. In this regard, facilitation by international stakeholders (including multilateral donors
such as GCF, and bilateral aid) to this project proposal will enable smooth implementation of activities
that complement the Government programs towards the Agriculture Climate Resilience. Currently,
the main sources of finance for the agriculture sector come from both public and private sources,
but overall needed investment for the development of the sector remains limited, while the additional
resources needed to ensure the sector’s adaptation to climate change is almost non-existent.
Regarding public sources, investments come basically from Government budget and international
official development assistance (ODA).
Public expenditure: Although more than 70 % of Tanzanians depend directly or indirectly on
agriculture for their livelihoods, agriculture is allocated only 2.5 % of public spending; and even then,
33 % of public spending on agriculture is for private goods, such as subsidies for buying fertilizers.
In 2018, all funders worldwide committed $200.09 million in development finance to Tanzania for
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing. Of this amount, $127.43 million (63.7%) was provided as ODA
grants, while $38.11mn (19%) was provided in the form of ODA loans.
Private finance: The main sources of private finance are Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) and credit
from local banks. Private agribusiness investments have been modest, especially from foreign
sources, probably due to a lack of a supporting policy environment. On average, between 2007 and
2017 only 4 % of FDI went into agriculture, fisheries, and forestry together. Commercial Banks are
extending credit to the private sector, but the rates are relatively high. Commercial lending rates
averaged 17 %, down from 17.5 % in 2018. Commercial bank lending to agriculture dropped 7 %
down from 10 % over the past five years. In 2019, the Tanzanian banking sector registered a growth
in credit to the private sector reflecting an uptick in consumer confidence that coincides with the
liquidity- easing measures of the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) and a gradual decline in nonperforming
loans (NPLs). In 2019, there was growth in credit of 68.5 % to agriculture, with commercial banks
share of lending to the agriculture sector rising to 16% of total lending, which remains limited despite
the outstanding progress. CRDB Bank’s agriculture portfolio indicates an overall declining trend due
to increased risks that could result potentially in more payment defaults.
Constrained Banking business model in Tanzania : One of the main challenge faced by the Banking
sector in Tanzania relates to the intermediation of domestic deposits for credit provision and
investment in government securities: As majority of Banks in Tanzania, CRDB experience short-
term liabilities (deposits) mismatch with the increasing demand for longer-term assets by
households, Agri firms and the Government to protect agriculture and other assets from climate
change impacts: Most of CRDB capital come from deposits from its clients. CRDB primarily business |  | 

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 78
B
model consist of mobilizing savings, and to a lesser extent, other costlier, short-term, interbank
financing, and institutional deposit to intermediate credit, resulting in high cost of capital, operating
costs, and interest rate.
It is clear from these financial indicators that there is a very significant finance gap to support the
development and adaptation/resilience of the agriculture sector in the 6th most populated country in
Africa (24th most populated country in the world). Despite the growing contribution of the financial
system, there is an urgent and critical need for investment at scale for productivity enhancements
and the adaptation of the sector. GCF concessional loans are needed to offer an affordable lending
facility in the agriculture sector to all categories of farmers, with the highest level of concessionality
granted to smallholder farmers. In the absence of GCF concessionality, the combination of short-term
productive loans coupled with the long-term adaptation capital expenditure (CAPEX) requirement is
just unaffordable for farmers, and both the loans and CAPEX investment are needed for farmers.
The GCF concessionality will enable CRDB to price the loan at a similar financing conditions as it
has currently, with the expectation that the risks remain.
The GCF grant money is needed to finance a comprehensive targeted technical assistance package
that will enable a successful implementation of the project and ensure its sustainability. This
technical assistance package will support development of systems and tools, knowledge, skill and
expertise while supporting the organization of facilitated dialogues with the staff of the bank, the
partner network of MFIs, governmental officials, communities of farmers operators and local
population as beneficiaries. A recent analysis of modern services and tools recently promoted in
Eastern Africa to support the transformation of the agriculture sector. Up to 10 critical areas where
these emerging services and associated useful tools are being largely deployed such as: 1) financial
services, 2) farmers knowledge of agriculture practices, including novel farming practices, 3)
Agriculture biotech inputs, 4) mechanization including agriculture equipment; 5) robotics, 6)
midstream technologies, 7) access to resources, 8) farm management software, sensing and
internet of things, 9) agribusiness development and 10) access to marketplaces. Nonetheless, none
of these services clearly integrate climate change adaptation challenges that will need to be tackled
sooner rather than later to avoid a disruption of fragile systems. The support of the GCF is in
providing concessional resources for investments and technical assistance to fill the gaps of
targeted adaptation and resilient financial products is more than critical.
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
The exit strategy for the GCF is a straightforward repayment of the loan by CRDB Bank over the
twenty-year time frame or tenor of the loan. By investing in a robust climate risk assessments tool
and long-term capacity building for assessment and management of climate risks in the agriculture-
lending portfolio, this project will significantly contribute to reducing the risks perception associated
to this sector’s lending. The credit facility will enable CRDB Bank and others to invest in profitable
climate compatible agriculture solutions and technologies and to identify business opportunity in this
sector. GCF’s loan will leverage significant additional resources, as CRDB Bank will be investing
100 million USD alongside GCF proceeds under a facility specifically dedicated to concrete
adaptation investments as part of its current agriculture lending in the sector. The successful
implementation of this project will enable the identification of new business opportunities and
reduction of climate risks perception in agriculture adaptation technologies. That would incentivize
CRDB Bank to increase the share of its portfolio for adaptation in agriculture. The experience of
CRDB Bank will potentially attract other institutions of the banking sector in Tanzania and beyond,
enabling commercial banks financing of affordable climate resilient sustainable agriculture with
strong environmental benefits, including emissions reductions. At the same time, the integration
between blended instruments (loan and guarantee) and technical assistance for training and to raise
the technical / financial and legal expertise of the target beneficiaries, will also create a sustainable
context which in itself rests on overall enhanced capacity.
Agriculture in developing countries must undergo a significant transformation in order to meet the

--- Table 1 on Page 46 ---
model consist of mobilizing savings, and to a lesser extent, other costlier, short-term, interbank
financing, and institutional deposit to intermediate credit, resulting in high cost of capital, operating
costs, and interest rate.
It is clear from these financial indicators that there is a very significant finance gap to support the
development and adaptation/resilience of the agriculture sector in the 6th most populated country in
Africa (24th most populated country in the world). Despite the growing contribution of the financial
system, there is an urgent and critical need for investment at scale for productivity enhancements
and the adaptation of the sector. GCF concessional loans are needed to offer an affordable lending
facility in the agriculture sector to all categories of farmers, with the highest level of concessionality
granted to smallholder farmers. In the absence of GCF concessionality, the combination of short-term
productive loans coupled with the long-term adaptation capital expenditure (CAPEX) requirement is
just unaffordable for farmers, and both the loans and CAPEX investment are needed for farmers.
The GCF concessionality will enable CRDB to price the loan at a similar financing conditions as it
has currently, with the expectation that the risks remain.
The GCF grant money is needed to finance a comprehensive targeted technical assistance package
that will enable a successful implementation of the project and ensure its sustainability. This
technical assistance package will support development of systems and tools, knowledge, skill and
expertise while supporting the organization of facilitated dialogues with the staff of the bank, the
partner network of MFIs, governmental officials, communities of farmers operators and local
population as beneficiaries. A recent analysis of modern services and tools recently promoted in
Eastern Africa to support the transformation of the agriculture sector. Up to 10 critical areas where
these emerging services and associated useful tools are being largely deployed such as: 1) financial
services, 2) farmers knowledge of agriculture practices, including novel farming practices, 3)
Agriculture biotech inputs, 4) mechanization including agriculture equipment; 5) robotics, 6)
midstream technologies, 7) access to resources, 8) farm management software, sensing and
internet of things, 9) agribusiness development and 10) access to marketplaces. Nonetheless, none
of these services clearly integrate climate change adaptation challenges that will need to be tackled
sooner rather than later to avoid a disruption of fragile systems. The support of the GCF is in
providing concessional resources for investments and technical assistance to fill the gaps of
targeted adaptation and resilient financial products is more than critical. |  | 
 | B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
The exit strategy for the GCF is a straightforward repayment of the loan by CRDB Bank over the
twenty-year time frame or tenor of the loan. By investing in a robust climate risk assessments tool
and long-term capacity building for assessment and management of climate risks in the agriculture-
lending portfolio, this project will significantly contribute to reducing the risks perception associated
to this sector’s lending. The credit facility will enable CRDB Bank and others to invest in profitable
climate compatible agriculture solutions and technologies and to identify business opportunity in this
sector. GCF’s loan will leverage significant additional resources, as CRDB Bank will be investing
100 million USD alongside GCF proceeds under a facility specifically dedicated to concrete
adaptation investments as part of its current agriculture lending in the sector. The successful
implementation of this project will enable the identification of new business opportunities and
reduction of climate risks perception in agriculture adaptation technologies. That would incentivize
CRDB Bank to increase the share of its portfolio for adaptation in agriculture. The experience of
CRDB Bank will potentially attract other institutions of the banking sector in Tanzania and beyond,
enabling commercial banks financing of affordable climate resilient sustainable agriculture with
strong environmental benefits, including emissions reductions. At the same time, the integration
between blended instruments (loan and guarantee) and technical assistance for training and to raise
the technical / financial and legal expertise of the target beneficiaries, will also create a sustainable
context which in itself rests on overall enhanced capacity.
Agriculture in developing countries must undergo a significant transformation in order to meet the |  | 

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 78
B
related challenges of achieving food security and responding to climate change, which is highly
variable and complex, and climate trends already indicate that temperatures are rising, and rainfall is
becoming more erratic. Projections based on population growth and food consumption patterns
indicate that agricultural production will need to increase by at least 70 per cent to meet demands
by 2050. Most estimates also indicate that climate change is likely to reduce agricultural productivity,
production stability and incomes in some areas that already have high levels of food insecurity. This
is due to weather-related risks already impacting the agriculture sector, and without urgent adaptation
the impacts are likely to increase with rising climate variability. The Project will contribute significantly
to addressing challenges of achieving food security and responding to climate change, which is
highly variable and complex, and climate trends already indicate that temperatures are rising, and
rainfall is becoming more erratic. The project is designed so that its activities and transformation
become sustainable and replicable based on the following strategies:
1. Collaboration with partners and government agencies to institutionalize Climate
Resilient Agriculture: This project strongly highlights the requirement for partnering with
stakeholders that hold the paramount role to ensure that the Tanzanian society remain
committed to adoption and sustainability of project approaches. The project will design and
develop objectives and road maps for activities implementation as well as reporting matrix to
track project progress.
2. Replicating and Scaling-up Long-term Solutions: The project has chosen to work on
agricultural commodities and will promote the shifting of the farming community to a more
environmentally sustainable path for economic growth, which will involve trade-offs. One trade-
off is in investing resources for building long-term resilience versus investments for short-term
food security gains. Therefore, investing in long-term resiliency measures is vital for ensuring
long-term food security and remaining environmentally sound, while contributing towards GHG
emission reductions and sustainable development as core co-benefits.
3. Institutionalize financing policy and procedures on climate resilient lending in the Bank
lending context: The project includes capacity development activities for institutions involved,
extension workers, and beneficiary farmers regarding climate change adaptation and resilient
approaches and practices. Appropriate lending policy and procedures shall be drawn up to
ensure the sustainability of continuous adaptation and resilient to climate change.
4. Continuous sector funding allocation: The Bank shall continue to set aside funds and
enhance its lending appetite to the sector to ensure maintenance and sustainability of the
projects and replication to other agriculture commodities.
As mentioned previously for the exit, CRDB will fully repay the GCF according to the financial terms
set and agreed with GCF.
Type of Facility Currency Repayment Tenure Grace Period (Years)
(Years)
Senior Debt & Major Convertible 20 5
Guarantee Facility Currency, USD

--- Table 1 on Page 47 ---
Type of Facility | Currency | Repayment Tenure
(Years) | Grace Period (Years)
Senior Debt &
Guarantee Facility | Major Convertible
Currency, USD | 20 | 5

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 78
D
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested GCF funding Total amount Currency
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 100,000,000 million USD ($)
GCF financial instrument Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
(i) Senior loans USD 70 million 20 years 5 years Enter %
(ii) Subordinated loans Enter amount Enter years Enter years Enter %
Enter % equity
(iii) Equity Enter amount return
(iv) Guarantees USD 10 million Up to 20 years
(v) Reimbursable grants Enter amount
(vi) Grants USD 20 million
(vii) Results-based payments Enter amount
Total amount Currency
(b) Co-financing information
100 million USD ($)
Financial Tenor &
Name of institution Amount Currency Pricing Seniority
instrument grace
Senior Enter% senior
million 20 years
CRDB Bank Loans 100
USD ($) Enter years
20 years Enter% Options
Click here to enter text. Options Enter amount Options
Enter years
Enter years Enter% Options
Click here to enter text. Options Enter amount Options
Enter years
Enter years Enter% Options
Click here to enter text. Options Enter amount Options
Enter years
Amount Currency
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b)
200 million USD ($)
(d) Other financing Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from
arrangements and any type of guarantee (e.g., sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).
contributions (max. 250 Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax
words, approximately 0.5 exemptions and contributions of assets.
page) Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.
C.2. Financing by component
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and
disaggregate by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output.
Provide the summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million USD
million USD Instrument million USD Instrument Institutions
($)
($) ($)
Component 1: 70 Senior 100 Senior loans CRDB Bank
Increased Loans
Innovative
private Guarantees The
financial
investments guarantee
products for
into credit-
189.7407
adaptation
agriculture Enter enhancem
and climate 10 amount ent facility
resilient will be
agriculture Establishme managed
technologies nt of by GCF. A

--- Table 1 on Page 48 ---
 | FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) Requested GCF funding |  |  |  |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) |  |  |  |  |  | 100,000,000 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF financial instrument |  |  |  |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  |  | Pricing |  | 
(i) |  |  | Senior loans |  |  | USD 70 million |  |  |  |  | 20 years |  |  |  | 5 years |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  |  | 
(ii) |  |  | Subordinated loans |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  |  | 
(iii) |  |  | Equity |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Enter % equity
return |  |  | 
 | (iv) |  |  | Guarantees |  | USD 10 million |  |  |  |  | Up to 20 years |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(v) |  |  | Reimbursable grants |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vi) |  |  | Grants |  |  | USD 20 million |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vii) |  |  | Results-based payments |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(b) Co-financing information |  |  |  |  |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 100 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Name of institution |  |  |  |  |  |  | Financial |  | Amount |  |  |  | Currency |  |  | Tenor & |  | Pricing |  |  |  | Seniority | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | grace |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
CRDB Bank |  |  |  |  |  | Senior
Loans |  |  | 100 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  | 20 years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | senior | 
Click here to enter text. |  |  |  |  |  | Options |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Options |  | 20 years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | Options | 
Click here to enter text. |  |  |  |  |  | Options |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Options |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | Options | 
Click here to enter text. |  |  |  |  |  | Options |  |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Options |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | Options | 
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) |  |  |  |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 200 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (d) Other financing |  |  |  |  | Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from
any type of guarantee (e.g., sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax
exemptions and contributions of assets.
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | arrangements and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | contributions (max. 250 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | words, approximately 0.5 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.2. Financing by component |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and
disaggregate by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output.
Provide the summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million USD
million USD Instrument million USD Instrument Institutions
($)
($) ($)
Component 1: 70 Senior 100 Senior loans CRDB Bank
Increased Loans
Innovative
private Guarantees The
financial
investments guarantee
products for
into credit-
189.7407
adaptation
agriculture Enter enhancem
and climate 10 amount ent facility
resilient will be
agriculture Establishme managed
technologies nt of by GCF. A |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 48 ---
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b)

--- Table 3 on Page 48 ---
Component | Output | Indicative
cost
million USD
($) | GCF financing |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Name of
Institutions
 |  |  |  | million USD |  |  |  | million USD |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | ($) |  |  |  | ($) |  |  | 
Component 1:
Innovative
financial
products for
adaptation
and climate
resilient
agriculture
technologies | Increased
private
investments
into
agriculture
Establishme
nt of | 189.7407 | 70 |  |  | Senior
Loans | 100 |  |  | Senior loans | CRDB Bank
 |  |  | 10 |  |  | Guarantees | Enter
amount |  |  |  | The
guarantee
credit-
enhancem
ent facility
will be
managed
by GCF. A

--- Table 4 on Page 48 ---
Indicative
cost
million USD
($)

--- Table 5 on Page 48 ---
Financial
Instrument

--- Table 6 on Page 48 ---
Financial
Instrument

--- Table 7 on Page 48 ---
Name of
Institutions

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 78
D
Agriculture third party
resilience guarantee
and credit
adaptation provider
financing active in
products Tanzania,
PASS
Trust, will
also be
engaged
for
capacity
support,
public
outreach,
and other
partnershi
p services.
Insurance Grants
Pilot Project
and 9.7407
Associated
Activities
Prioritization Grants Enter Choose an Click here to
of risk- amount item. enter text.
reducing and
climate
adaptation
investments
Increase
availability of 1.4792 1.4792
climate data
analytics
Capacity
building of
core
Component 2: agencies and
Policy institutions
interventions Capacity .43 Grants Enter Choose an Click here to
and Technical building of amount item. enter text.
core .43
Assistance to
agencies and
advance ARA institutions
in Tanzania Integration of .9685 Grants Enter Choose an Click here to
climate risk amount item. enter text.
in .9685
development
programs
Establishme .2593 Grants Enter Choose an Click here to
nt of amount item. enter text.
Agriculture
resilience
and
adaptation
.2593
financing
products
Capacity
building of
core

--- Table 1 on Page 49 ---
 |  | Agriculture
resilience
and
adaptation
financing
products |  |  |  |  |  | third party
guarantee
credit
provider
active in
Tanzania,
PASS
Trust, will
also be
engaged
for
capacity
support,
public
outreach,
and other
partnershi
p services. | 
 |  | Insurance
Pilot Project
and
Associated
Activities |  | 9.7407 | Grants |  |  |  | 
 | Component 2:
Policy
interventions
and Technical
Assistance to
advance ARA
in Tanzania | Prioritization
of risk-
reducing and
climate
adaptation
investments
Increase
availability of
climate data
analytics
Capacity
building of
core
agencies and
institutions | 1.4792 | 1.4792 | Grants | Enter
amount | Choose an
item. | Click here to
enter text. | 
 |  | Capacity
building of
core
agencies and
institutions | .43 | .43 | Grants | Enter
amount | Choose an
item. | Click here to
enter text. | 
 |  | Integration of
climate risk
in
development
programs | .9685 | .9685 | Grants | Enter
amount | Choose an
item. | Click here to
enter text. | 
 |  | Establishme
nt of
Agriculture
resilience
and
adaptation
financing
products
Capacity
building of
core | .2593 | .2593 | Grants | Enter
amount | Choose an
item. | Click here to
enter text. | 

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 78
D
agencies and
institutions
Capacity 3.2873 Grants Enter Choose an Click here to
building of amount item. enter text.
core 3.2873
agencies and
institutions
M&E, ESMF Grants
Implementati 2.935
on, Gender
Additional 2.935
Action
Costs
Assessment
& Action
Plan
Project Grants
management
component
Project for
0.9 0.9
Management Component
Component 1 and
Component
2 of
TACATDP
Indicative total cost (USD)
200 100 100
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.
In case of a multi-country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in
annex 17, if available.
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? Yes No
☒ ☐
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? Yes No
☒ ☐
Component 2 of the programme is the facilitation of technical assistance (TA), capacity building, and
technology development/transfer to support the implementation of the entire programme as well as the
continued and long-term capacity of financial institutions and other stakeholders to provide all segments of
the agricultural value-chain with services to support climate adaptation.
This comprehensive targeted TA comprises five (5) capacity building sub-activities and five (5) policy
interventions has the potential to reduce the high risks of lending associated with climate-compatible
agribusiness and promote the large adoption of climate-compatible adaptation solutions. CRDB Bank, the
Government and the other stakeholders will be given the opportunity to innovate on delivery mechanisms,
systems, and products essential for profitable climate-compatible agricultural financing, including
agribusiness. Capacity-building activities will include upgrading the bank staff’s skills to perform climate risk
assessments and integrating climate risk management within their agricultural lending portfolio.
The TA will enable the Government of Tanzania via governmental agencies to deepen its understanding of
the agricultural sector's intrinsic climatic risks while taking into consideration updated analysis, knowledge,
and insights. Strengthened by this experience and evidence, the Government of Tanzania can successfully
and actively develop an updated climate strategy to better engage the private banking sector to diagnose
climate-related constraints with agricultural investments, investigate opportunities for profitable investments
in the sector, and incentivize greater adaptation investments and strategies.
Financing: TA activities will be financed by a GCF grant of USD 7.0345 million.

--- Table 1 on Page 50 ---
agencies and
institutions
Capacity 3.2873 Grants Enter Choose an Click here to
building of amount item. enter text.
core 3.2873
agencies and
institutions
M&E, ESMF Grants
Implementati 2.935
on, Gender
Additional 2.935
Action
Costs
Assessment
& Action
Plan
Project Grants
management
component
Project for
0.9 0.9
Management Component
Component 1 and
Component
2 of
TACATDP
Indicative total cost (USD)
200 100 100
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.
In case of a multi-country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in
annex 17, if available. |  |  | 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) |  |  | 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? |  |  | Yes No
☒ ☐
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? |  | Yes No
☒ ☐
Component 2 of the programme is the facilitation of technical assistance (TA), capacity building, and
technology development/transfer to support the implementation of the entire programme as well as the
continued and long-term capacity of financial institutions and other stakeholders to provide all segments of
the agricultural value-chain with services to support climate adaptation.
This comprehensive targeted TA comprises five (5) capacity building sub-activities and five (5) policy
interventions has the potential to reduce the high risks of lending associated with climate-compatible
agribusiness and promote the large adoption of climate-compatible adaptation solutions. CRDB Bank, the
Government and the other stakeholders will be given the opportunity to innovate on delivery mechanisms,
systems, and products essential for profitable climate-compatible agricultural financing, including
agribusiness. Capacity-building activities will include upgrading the bank staff’s skills to perform climate risk
assessments and integrating climate risk management within their agricultural lending portfolio.
The TA will enable the Government of Tanzania via governmental agencies to deepen its understanding of
the agricultural sector's intrinsic climatic risks while taking into consideration updated analysis, knowledge,
and insights. Strengthened by this experience and evidence, the Government of Tanzania can successfully
and actively develop an updated climate strategy to better engage the private banking sector to diagnose
climate-related constraints with agricultural investments, investigate opportunities for profitable investments
in the sector, and incentivize greater adaptation investments and strategies.
Financing: TA activities will be financed by a GCF grant of USD 7.0345 million. |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 50 ---
 | agencies and
institutions |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Capacity
building of
core
agencies and
institutions | 3.2873 | 3.2873 | Grants | Enter
amount | Choose an
item. | Click here to
enter text.
Additional
Costs | M&E, ESMF
Implementati
on, Gender
Action
Assessment
& Action
Plan | 2.935 | 2.935 | Grants |  |  | 
Project
Management
Component | Project
management
component
for
Component
1 and
Component
2 of
TACATDP | 0.9 | 0.9 | Grants |  |  | 
Indicative total cost (USD) |  | 200 | 100 |  | 100 |  | 

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 78
D
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
The project seeks to invest only in ‘fit for purpose’ adaptation and resilience measures to address climate
risks in the agriculture sector (cropping sector) in the face of current climate variability and future climate
change over the project’s operational life. Prioritized measures will ensure that beneficiary farmer operators
will not harm the resilience of the defined system they operate within. The measures will be identified through
application of climate scenarios based on IPCC representative concentration pathways (RCP) to ensure
consideration of a wide range of plausible risks including worst-case scenario. This approach is critical to
ensure proposed measures will not lock-in conditions that could result in maladaptation. Serious consideration
will be given in this project to avoidance of no adaptation and maladaptation. Maladaptation in this context is
understood as in the most recent IPCC 1.5 special report ensuring that proposed adaptation interventions
will not lead to unintended negative consequences, including: (a) exacerbate vulnerabilities and existing
inequalities due to poor design; (b) conflict with the adaptation of other fragile systems (e.g., rainwater
harvesting upstream that could potentially reduce water availability downstream); (c) present trade-offs for
adaptation or increased greenhouse gas emissions in the future. Rather adaptation measures to be
prioritized will ensure improved or more stable productivity (economic buffering of climate impacts):
increasing yields or yield stability, or reducing costs to produce net gains in products or revenues; diversified
production; enhancing savings and value of assets; increasing efficiency of water, energy, fertilizer and other
inputs; improving product storage capacities; using the agronomic practice best suited to changing climatic
conditions; reducing the percentage of area planted to vulnerable crops; increasing the percentage of
production under controlled environment agriculture. The expected number of beneficiaries is estimated at
62,064 per year during the project lifetime. In addition, the project will develop a tool and set of adaptation
indicators to annually monitor: (a) climate risks linked to farm holding, (b) climate resilience performance, (c)
appropriateness of climate resilience interventions with the view to adjust as necessary to address evolving
climate risks. This effort will contribute to the development of standards to measure progress in adaptation.
A total of 4,903,056 vulnerable people (4.67% of Tanzanian) will be supported with climate resilient and
adaptation practices and technologies.
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
By investing in a robust analytical tool for integration of climate risk assessments in CRDB Bank agriculture
lending portfolio and investing in the most optimal adaptation technologies, this project will have a huge
transformational effect, including through the introduction of a new agricultural system in areas where the
climate will soon be no longer suitable for current practices. This progressive shift of agriculture practices
will be critical by 2030 as climate harsh conditions increase and greater threats induced by climate change
appear such as the waves of locusts’ invasions currently affecting the Eastern Africa region. This project
will make a strong case for the important role of the private sector, in this instance the banking sector, in a
vital socio-economic sector, to support transformational adaptation. It will set a strong foundation for
mobilization of resources at scale to progressively and timely shift the most important economic sector of
Tanzania from the ravage of climate change, ensuring food production is not threatened and enabling
economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner. This project incorporates specific features that
will support innovation and sustainability. The state-of-the-art analytics will support the identification of most
appropriate including most advanced technological solutions, the development of a local ecosystem around
the operations, maintenance and local manufacture of low-cost solutions using locally available materials will
also foster endogenous innovation and ease the adoption of optimum adaptation solutions. Moreover, the
policy dialogue with governments and a wide range of relevant stakeholders will support policy, fiscal,
regulatory reforms as well as macroeconomic stimulus to support the refocus of limited public expenditures
on public goods that will stimulate a greater involvement of private sector in the provisions of private goods
and services.
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

--- Table 1 on Page 51 ---
 | EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA | 
 | This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the | 
 | GCF’s Initial Investment Framework. | 
 | D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | The project seeks to invest only in ‘fit for purpose’ adaptation and resilience measures to address climate | 
 | risks in the agriculture sector (cropping sector) in the face of current climate variability and future climate | 
 | change over the project’s operational life. Prioritized measures will ensure that beneficiary farmer operators | 
 | will not harm the resilience of the defined system they operate within. The measures will be identified through | 
 | application of climate scenarios based on IPCC representative concentration pathways (RCP) to ensure | 
 | consideration of a wide range of plausible risks including worst-case scenario. This approach is critical to | 
 | ensure proposed measures will not lock-in conditions that could result in maladaptation. Serious consideration | 
 | will be given in this project to avoidance of no adaptation and maladaptation. Maladaptation in this context is | 
 | understood as in the most recent IPCC 1.5 special report ensuring that proposed adaptation interventions | 
 | will not lead to unintended negative consequences, including: (a) exacerbate vulnerabilities and existing | 
 | inequalities due to poor design; (b) conflict with the adaptation of other fragile systems (e.g., rainwater | 
 | harvesting upstream that could potentially reduce water availability downstream); (c) present trade-offs for | 
 | adaptation or increased greenhouse gas emissions in the future. Rather adaptation measures to be | 
 | prioritized will ensure improved or more stable productivity (economic buffering of climate impacts): | 
 | increasing yields or yield stability, or reducing costs to produce net gains in products or revenues; diversified | 
 | production; enhancing savings and value of assets; increasing efficiency of water, energy, fertilizer and other | 
 | inputs; improving product storage capacities; using the agronomic practice best suited to changing climatic | 
 | conditions; reducing the percentage of area planted to vulnerable crops; increasing the percentage of | 
 | production under controlled environment agriculture. The expected number of beneficiaries is estimated at | 
 | 62,064 per year during the project lifetime. In addition, the project will develop a tool and set of adaptation | 
 | indicators to annually monitor: (a) climate risks linked to farm holding, (b) climate resilience performance, (c) | 
 | appropriateness of climate resilience interventions with the view to adjust as necessary to address evolving | 
 | climate risks. This effort will contribute to the development of standards to measure progress in adaptation. | 
 | A total of 4,903,056 vulnerable people (4.67% of Tanzanian) will be supported with climate resilient and | 
 | adaptation practices and technologies. | 
 |  | 
 | D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | By investing in a robust analytical tool for integration of climate risk assessments in CRDB Bank agriculture | 
 | lending portfolio and investing in the most optimal adaptation technologies, this project will have a huge | 
 | transformational effect, including through the introduction of a new agricultural system in areas where the | 
 | climate will soon be no longer suitable for current practices. This progressive shift of agriculture practices | 
 | will be critical by 2030 as climate harsh conditions increase and greater threats induced by climate change | 
 | appear such as the waves of locusts’ invasions currently affecting the Eastern Africa region. This project | 
 | will make a strong case for the important role of the private sector, in this instance the banking sector, in a | 
 | vital socio-economic sector, to support transformational adaptation. It will set a strong foundation for | 
 | mobilization of resources at scale to progressively and timely shift the most important economic sector of | 
 | Tanzania from the ravage of climate change, ensuring food production is not threatened and enabling | 
 | economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner. This project incorporates specific features that | 
 | will support innovation and sustainability. The state-of-the-art analytics will support the identification of most | 
 | appropriate including most advanced technological solutions, the development of a local ecosystem around | 
 | the operations, maintenance and local manufacture of low-cost solutions using locally available materials will | 
 | also foster endogenous innovation and ease the adoption of optimum adaptation solutions. Moreover, the | 
 | policy dialogue with governments and a wide range of relevant stakeholders will support policy, fiscal, | 
 | regulatory reforms as well as macroeconomic stimulus to support the refocus of limited public expenditures | 
 | on public goods that will stimulate a greater involvement of private sector in the provisions of private goods | 
 | and services. | 
 |  | 
 | D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 78
D
Economic benefits: The project will contribute to a significant increase in crop yields with a
o
high potential to lead to higher incomes for farmers. Reducing significant risks associated with
crop loss (pre- and post-harvest) will improve the efficiency of investment through improved
resource use efficiency and optimization of the application of external inputs.
Social benefits: The development and promotion of sustainable and adaptive agribusinesses
o
will contribute to several social benefits, including higher return on land and labor that will lead
to farmers’ communities' moral and psychological well-being and relieve pressures associated
with economic hardships. This could also increase employment among vulnerable populations
of women and youth, limit rural exodus, and reduce conflicts over land and other limited
resources.
Environmental benefits: The use of the best available technologies and inputs will minimize
o
environmental damages. As the prioritized adaptation measures will ensure the protection of
natural resources, maintain soil nutrient balance, reduce land degradation, reduce pollution,
and improve biodiversity. This will contribute to an increase in production without cultivating
more land or affecting the environment. These technologies will strengthen the optimal use of
natural, social, and human assets, reduce the negative impact of food production on the
environment and narrow the output gap.
Gender equity and women empowerment: By taking a deliberate, proactive, and positive
o
approach towards gender equality and women empowerment, the proposal will offer balanced
opportunities for women’s and men's active participation. Through a network of microfinance
partners and mobile banking facilities, the project will apply methods and approaches to
increase the engagement of small-scale female farm operators and women-led agribusinesses.
The project will make credit available to invest in enterprise expansion, productivity-enhancing
technologies, farm adaptation activities, and improved livelihood strategies. They will be
prioritized in capacity-building activities. It is expected that promoting the use of laborsaving
technologies will help ease the time burden on women; burden they face in their productive
capacities. The project will also reduce the burden of unpaid work that often disproportionately
falls on women and girls in every region of the world. The project will further explore and
implement an opportunity to address their access to and control over resources and their
decision-making ability over their work burden, opening greater opportunity for other socio-
economic perspectives, including girls' education and women’s engagement in economic
diversification and increase participation in social life. The project will focus on balancing
gender on 50/50 gender balance of potential beneficiaries during project execution.
Skills and knowledge development: This project places a strong emphasis on skills and
o
knowledge development around the integration of climate risk assessments in different
components of the project to ensure its sustainability. Capacity building will specifically enhance
staff (at CRDB and its network of microfinance institutions) capacity to use risk assessment tools
and to apply such assessments in the origination, offering, and administration of loan
adaptation activities. Farms and agribusiness operators as well as other stakeholders in the
agriculture value chain will be supported in the prioritization and adoption of optimal adaptation
technologies. Professional services will be extended to integrate climate change-related
advisory services and activities within operations, and local communities will be trained in
activities of operation and maintenance of modern, climate-smart, and high-productive
technologies, as well as the manufacture of low-cost locally adapted technologies. The wide
range of knowledge and skills offered through this project will have a long-lasting effect to spur
the fundamental transformation towards climate-resilient agriculture practices with immense
benefits for sustainable development and sectorial emission reductions in Tanzania.
Support recovery from COVID-19: As a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic and the
o
measures prescribed globally to prevent its spread, an initial estimate projects Tanzania GDP
growth to drop by 3.8 percentage points in 2020, from 5.8% in 2019 to 2.0% in 2020. This
proposed project will enable building back a more resilient rural economy. By investing USD
200+ million over the next five to seven years in making the agricultural sector more resilient,
the facility will reduce the consequences not only of the current crisis but also future climate-
related shocks on the agriculture sector and the overall economy. In addition, by increasing
domestic food production from small- to large-holder farmers, the credit line is likely to improve

--- Table 1 on Page 52 ---
 | Economic benefits: The project will contribute to a significant increase in crop yields with a
o | 
 | high potential to lead to higher incomes for farmers. Reducing significant risks associated with | 
 | crop loss (pre- and post-harvest) will improve the efficiency of investment through improved | 
 | resource use efficiency and optimization of the application of external inputs. | 
 | Social benefits: The development and promotion of sustainable and adaptive agribusinesses
o | 
 | will contribute to several social benefits, including higher return on land and labor that will lead | 
 | to farmers’ communities' moral and psychological well-being and relieve pressures associated | 
 | with economic hardships. This could also increase employment among vulnerable populations | 
 | of women and youth, limit rural exodus, and reduce conflicts over land and other limited | 
 | resources. | 
 | Environmental benefits: The use of the best available technologies and inputs will minimize
o | 
 | environmental damages. As the prioritized adaptation measures will ensure the protection of | 
 | natural resources, maintain soil nutrient balance, reduce land degradation, reduce pollution, | 
 | and improve biodiversity. This will contribute to an increase in production without cultivating | 
 | more land or affecting the environment. These technologies will strengthen the optimal use of | 
 | natural, social, and human assets, reduce the negative impact of food production on the | 
 | environment and narrow the output gap. | 
 | Gender equity and women empowerment: By taking a deliberate, proactive, and positive
o | 
 | approach towards gender equality and women empowerment, the proposal will offer balanced | 
 | opportunities for women’s and men's active participation. Through a network of microfinance | 
 | partners and mobile banking facilities, the project will apply methods and approaches to | 
 | increase the engagement of small-scale female farm operators and women-led agribusinesses. | 
 | The project will make credit available to invest in enterprise expansion, productivity-enhancing | 
 | technologies, farm adaptation activities, and improved livelihood strategies. They will be | 
 | prioritized in capacity-building activities. It is expected that promoting the use of laborsaving | 
 | technologies will help ease the time burden on women; burden they face in their productive | 
 | capacities. The project will also reduce the burden of unpaid work that often disproportionately | 
 | falls on women and girls in every region of the world. The project will further explore and | 
 | implement an opportunity to address their access to and control over resources and their | 
 | decision-making ability over their work burden, opening greater opportunity for other socio- | 
 | economic perspectives, including girls' education and women’s engagement in economic | 
 | diversification and increase participation in social life. The project will focus on balancing | 
 | gender on 50/50 gender balance of potential beneficiaries during project execution. | 
 | Skills and knowledge development: This project places a strong emphasis on skills and
o | 
 | knowledge development around the integration of climate risk assessments in different | 
 | components of the project to ensure its sustainability. Capacity building will specifically enhance | 
 | staff (at CRDB and its network of microfinance institutions) capacity to use risk assessment tools | 
 | and to apply such assessments in the origination, offering, and administration of loan | 
 | adaptation activities. Farms and agribusiness operators as well as other stakeholders in the | 
 | agriculture value chain will be supported in the prioritization and adoption of optimal adaptation | 
 | technologies. Professional services will be extended to integrate climate change-related | 
 | advisory services and activities within operations, and local communities will be trained in | 
 | activities of operation and maintenance of modern, climate-smart, and high-productive | 
 | technologies, as well as the manufacture of low-cost locally adapted technologies. The wide | 
 | range of knowledge and skills offered through this project will have a long-lasting effect to spur | 
 | the fundamental transformation towards climate-resilient agriculture practices with immense | 
 | benefits for sustainable development and sectorial emission reductions in Tanzania. | 
 | Support recovery from COVID-19: As a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic and the
o | 
 | measures prescribed globally to prevent its spread, an initial estimate projects Tanzania GDP | 
 | growth to drop by 3.8 percentage points in 2020, from 5.8% in 2019 to 2.0% in 2020. This | 
 | proposed project will enable building back a more resilient rural economy. By investing USD | 
 | 200+ million over the next five to seven years in making the agricultural sector more resilient, | 
 | the facility will reduce the consequences not only of the current crisis but also future climate- | 
 | related shocks on the agriculture sector and the overall economy. In addition, by increasing | 
 | domestic food production from small- to large-holder farmers, the credit line is likely to improve | 

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 78
D
in medium term Tanzania’s trade balance (today largely in deficit, in part due to food imports)
therefore consolidating the country’s GDP and reducing its vulnerability to external shocks.
Also, the M&E system to be put in place for this project will also keep track of its effect on
macroeconomic indicators and the resilience of the economy.
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Following strong growth over the past decade, the World Bank announced that Tanzania’s gross national
income (GNI) per capita increased from $1,020 in 2018 to $1,080 in 2019, exceeding the threshold for
lower-middle-income status. However, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have led to a less certain
economic outlook. While inflation has been low and stable, gross domestic product (GDP) growth fell to an
expected 2.0% in 2020 (compared to 5.8% in 2019). Reflecting tightening economic conditions, domestic
credit growth slowed to 6.9% in the first half (H1) 2020 compared to 8.9% in H1 2019.25 Growth in private
investment from COVID-19 is expected to fall from 8% in 2019 to 4% in 2020 due to the global uncertainty,
reduced capital inflows, and increased investor risk-aversion.26
A continued negative demand shock in global markets could further undermine the Tanzanian economy
through multiple channels, including a slowdown in the economies of Tanzania’s main trading partners
(slower growth in Tanzania’s trading partners has already reduced demand and prices for Tanzanian
agricultural commodities), limited international travel hurting tourism (tourism comprises approximately
15% of Tanzania’s GDP), and lower activity in the hospitality and foodservice sectors.27 In response to
decreasing growth conditions, the Government of Tanzania is planning for an 8.8% increase in priority
social spending in FY2020/21, including social protections and support for small businesses. Coupled with
a decrease in fiscal revenues by approximately 0.6 percentage points of GDP, there is a projected
increase in the country’s balance of payments financing gaps by USD 693 million (1% of GDP), and
authorities have been in discussions with the IMF and external lenders for emergency financial support.28
Tanzania, facing rising temperatures, declining rainfall, more frequent droughts, and a significant increase
in spatial and temporal variability of rainfall, is particularly vulnerable to climate change. By 2050, model
estimates show that climate change could cause GDP per capita to decrease by approximately 15.4% (in a
median scenario) compared to a scenario without climate change), while maximum losses of up to 37.5%
in a high-warming scenario (RCP8.5). Agriculture is the country’s dominant sector, generating 25% of the
country’s GDP, 24% of national exports, and serves as the predominant source of livelihoods for
approximately 75-80% of households, including the majority of those in poverty. Climate change has
already contributed to the declining productivity of maize and sorghum and is influencing sectoral planning,
with farmers placing a greater emphasis on drought-tolerant crops and those with greater resilience to
pests and diseases.29
Over the past two decades, the sector has experienced relatively low growth, seeing its GDP share from
29% in 2000 to 23% in 2012.30 The World Bank found that agricultural productivity in Tanzania already
suffers at least USD 200 million in annual losses due to weather-related risks – predominantly drought –
and that the sector will remain dependent on rainfall in the near term.31 Additional studies prepared under
the Project Preparation Facility (PPF) for the Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Deployment Programme have shown that, in 2019, climate variability and change may have cost 17% of
Tanzania's economic growth potential – marked as the adaptation deficit. As agriculture in Tanzania is
dominated by smallholder farmers – 80-90% of agricultural land is held by smallholder farmers – and 98%
25 World Bank Group (2020). The World Bank in Tanzania: Overview. https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/tanzania/overview#1
26 World Bank Group (2019). Tanzania Ec onomic Update: Transforming Agriculture - Realizing the Potential of Agriculture for Inclusive
Growth and Poverty Reduction.
27 International Monetary Fund, African Department (2020). United Republic of Tanzania: Request for Debt Relief under the Catastrophe
Containment and Relief Trust-Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for the United Republic of Tanzania.;
World Bank Group (2019). Tanzania Economic Update: Transforming Agriculture - Realizing the Potential of Agriculture for Inclusive
Growth and Poverty Reduction.
28 International Monetary Fund, African Department (2020). United Republic of Tanzania: Request for Debt Relief under the Catastrophe
Containment and Relief Trust-Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for the United Republic of Tanzania.
29 The United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
30 The United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
31 World Bank Group (2015). Tanzania: Agricultural Sector Risk Assessment.

--- Table 1 on Page 53 ---
 | in medium term Tanzania’s trade balance (today largely in deficit, in part due to food imports) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | therefore consolidating the country’s GDP and reducing its vulnerability to external shocks. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Also, the M&E system to be put in place for this project will also keep track of its effect on |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | macroeconomic indicators and the resilience of the economy. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Following strong growth over the past decade, the World Bank announced that Tanzania’s gross national |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | income (GNI) per capita increased from $1,020 in 2018 to $1,080 in 2019, exceeding the threshold for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | lower-middle-income status. However, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have led to a less certain |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | economic outlook. While inflation has been low and stable, gross domestic product (GDP) growth fell to an |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | expected 2.0% in 2020 (compared to 5.8% in 2019). Reflecting tightening economic conditions, d |  |  |  |  |  |  | omestic |  |  | 
 | credit growth slowed to 6.9% in the first half (H1) 2020 compared to 8.9% in H1 2019.25 |  |  |  |  |  | Growth in private |  |  |  | 
 | investment from COVID-19 is expected to fall from 8% in 2019 to 4% in 2020 due to the global uncertainty, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | reduced capital inflows, and increased investor risk-aversion.26 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | A continued negative demand shock in global markets could further undermine the Tanzanian economy |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | through multiple channels, including a |  |  |  | slowdown in the economies of Tanzania’s main trading partners |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (s | lower growth in Tanzania’s trading partners has already |  |  |  | reduced demand and prices for Tanzanian |  |  |  |  | 
 | agricultural commodities), |  | limited | international travel hurting tourism (tourism comprises approximately |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 15% of Tanzania’s GDP), and lower activity in the hospitality and foodservice sectors.27 In response to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | decreasing growth conditions, the Government of Tanzania is planning for an 8.8% increase in priority |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | social spending in FY2020/21, including social protections and support for small businesses. Coupled with |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | a decrease in fiscal revenues by approximately 0.6 percentage points of GDP, there is a projected |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | increase in the country’s balance of payments financing gaps by USD 693 million (1% of GDP), and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | authorities have been in discussions with the IMF and external lenders for emergency financial support.28 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Tanzania, facing rising temperatures, declining rainfall, more frequent droughts, and a significant increase |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | in spatial and temporal variability of rainfall, is particularly vulnerable to climate change. By 2050, model |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | estimates show that climate change could cause GDP per capita to decrease by approximately 15.4% (in a |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | median scenario) compared to a scenario without climate change), while maximum losses of up to 37.5% |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | in a high-warming scenario (RCP8.5). Agriculture is the country’s dominant sector, generating 25% of the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | country’s GDP, 24% of national exports, and serves as the predominant source of livelihoods for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | approximately 75-80% of households, including the majority of those in poverty. Climate change has |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | already contributed to the declining productivity of maize and sorghum and is influencing sectoral planning, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | with farmers placing a greater emphasis on drought-tolerant crops and those with greater resilience to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | pests and diseases.29 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Over the past two decades, the sector has experienced relatively low growth, seeing its GDP share from |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 29% in 2000 to 23% in 2012.30 The World Bank found that agricultural productivity in Tanzania already |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | suffers at least USD 200 million in annual losses due to weather-related risks – predominantly drought – |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and that the sector will remain dependent on rainfall in the near term.31 Additional studies prepared under |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the Project Preparation Facility (PPF) for the Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Deployment Programme have shown that, in 2019, climate variability and change may have cost 17% of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Tanzania's economic growth potential – marked as the adaptation deficit. As agriculture in Tanzania is |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | dominated by smallholder farmers – 80-90% of agricultural land is held by smallholder farmers – and 98% |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 78
D
of economically active rural Tanzanian women engaged in farming, decreasing sectoral productivity
disproportionately impacts the country’s most vulnerable populations.32
As growth slows, budget allocations towards agriculture have similarly declined. According to Tanzania's
Ministry of Finance's Citizens Budget, sectoral allocations to the agriculture, livestock, and fisheries sector
have declined by more than 70% between the 2015/2016 to 2020/2021 budgets, from 1,560 billion
Tanzanian shillings to 459.74 billion Tanzanian shillings.33 However, private sector financing in agriculture,
due to regulatory barriers, perceived risks, and historic investment policies, has been relatively low
compared to financing directed towards manufacturing, trade, and other service sectors. With limited
commercial ties and financial institutions limited penetration in rural and agricultural communities, only 3%
of farming households have access to credit and 48% of those involved in agribusinesses self-finance their
activities. The lack of access to financing has limited the ability to invest in innovation, modernization,
improved technology, and resilience efforts.34 This is reflected by the low adoption of agriculture technology,
as seen by cultivation still primarily done by hand hoe rather than by tractor (62% v. 14%).35
Tanzania’s National Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) Guidelines provide recommended technologies and
practices to advance an integrated approach to land and resources management to address the interlinked
challenges of food security and accelerating climate change.36 The guidance targets decision-makers,
researchers, farmers, civil society organizations, cooperatives, community-based organizations, and the
private sector, the primary intended users are district development planners and extension agents.
However, the implementation of CSA technologies and practices requires substantial and sustainable
financial mechanisms, as both public and private funds are needed to secure and support CSA uptake. A
technology gap analysis prepared under the PPF found that several critical CSA recommended
technologies are practices are not currently within CRDB Bank’s portfolio and are not being adequately
financed within Tanzania. These include a number of recommendations relating to rainwater harvesting and
storage; agroforestry practices and technologies; soil and water conservation practices and technologies;
conservation agriculture practices and technologies; soil fertility management practices and technologies;
crop management practices and technologies; and fishing and aquaculture enterprises.
While the Bank of Tanzania and the Government of Tanzania have taken steps in response to the COVID-
19 pandemic to support domestic capital markets, including increasing the daily limits on mobile money
transactions, lowering the minimum reserve requirement, and providing greater regulatory flexibility to
banks for loan restructuring operations, there remains a significant need to spur investment in resilient,
adaptive, and climate-smart agriculture.37
Tanzania’s climate context, risks, vulnerabilities, and needs are further addressed in section B.1, further
information on the socio-economic challenges and barriers to finance for the agricultural sector and
smallholder farmers are described in B.5, and the need for strengthening institutions and implementation
capacity is covered in sections B.1 and B.4. TACATDP will provide CRDB, the Government, and other
stakeholders with the opportunity to enhance delivery mechanisms, systems, and products required for
sustainable adaptation agriculture financing and agribusiness. Additional opportunities to strengthen
institutional capacity include upskilling CRDB staff on mainstreaming climate risks within its agriculture
lending portfolio. These activities fall under the technical assistance (TA) delivered in Component 2 of the
programme, and more details are in B.3 and E.6.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
32 The United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
33 The United Republic of Tanzania (2015 & 2020). Citizens Budget, 2015/2016 & 2020/21.
34 Nsubili Isaga (2018). Access to Bank Credit by Smallholder Farmers in Tanzania: A Case Study.
35 The United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
36 The United Republic of Tanzania (2017). National Climate Smart Agriculture Guidelines.
37 International Monetary Fund, African Department (2020). United Republic of Tanzania: Request for Debt Relief under the Catastrophe
Containment and Relief Trust-Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for the United Republic of Tanzania.

--- Table 1 on Page 54 ---
 | of economically active rural Tanzanian women engaged in farming, decreasing sectoral productivity | 
 | disproportionately impacts the country’s most vulnerable populations.32 | 
 |  | 
 | As growth slows, budget allocations towards agriculture have similarly declined. According to Tanzania's | 
 | Ministry of Finance's Citizens Budget, sectoral allocations to the agriculture, livestock, and fisheries sector | 
 | have declined by more than 70% between the 2015/2016 to 2020/2021 budgets, from 1,560 billion | 
 | Tanzanian shillings to 459.74 billion Tanzanian shillings.33 However, private sector financing in agriculture, | 
 | due to regulatory barriers, perceived risks, and historic investment policies, has been relatively low | 
 | compared to financing directed towards manufacturing, trade, and other service sectors. With limited | 
 | commercial ties and financial institutions limited penetration in rural and agricultural communities, only 3% | 
 | of farming households have access to credit and 48% of those involved in agribusinesses self-finance their | 
 | activities. The lack of access to financing has limited the ability to invest in innovation, modernization, | 
 | improved technology, and resilience efforts.34 This is reflected by the low adoption of agriculture technology, | 
 | as seen by cultivation still primarily done by hand hoe rather than by tractor (62% v. 14%).35 | 
 |  | 
 | Tanzania’s National Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) Guidelines provide recommended technologies and | 
 | practices to advance an integrated approach to land and resources management to address the interlinked | 
 | challenges of food security and accelerating climate change.36 The guidance targets decision-makers, | 
 | researchers, farmers, civil society organizations, cooperatives, community-based organizations, and the | 
 | private sector, the primary intended users are district development planners and extension agents. | 
 | However, the implementation of CSA technologies and practices requires substantial and sustainable | 
 | financial mechanisms, as both public and private funds are needed to secure and support CSA uptake. A | 
 | technology gap analysis prepared under the PPF found that several critical CSA recommended | 
 | technologies are practices are not currently within CRDB Bank’s portfolio and are not being adequately | 
 | financed within Tanzania. These include a number of recommendations relating to rainwater harvesting and | 
 | storage; agroforestry practices and technologies; soil and water conservation practices and technologies; | 
 | conservation agriculture practices and technologies; soil fertility management practices and technologies; | 
 | crop management practices and technologies; and fishing and aquaculture enterprises. | 
 |  | 
 | While the Bank of Tanzania and the Government of Tanzania have taken steps in response to the COVID- | 
 | 19 pandemic to support domestic capital markets, including increasing the daily limits on mobile money | 
 | transactions, lowering the minimum reserve requirement, and providing greater regulatory flexibility to | 
 | banks for loan restructuring operations, there remains a significant need to spur investment in resilient, | 
 | adaptive, and climate-smart agriculture.37 | 
 |  | 
 | Tanzania’s climate context, risks, vulnerabilities, and needs are further addressed in section B.1, further | 
 | information on the socio-economic challenges and barriers to finance for the agricultural sector and | 
 | smallholder farmers are described in B.5, and the need for strengthening institutions and implementation | 
 | capacity is covered in sections B.1 and B.4. TACATDP will provide CRDB, the Government, and other | 
 | stakeholders with the opportunity to enhance delivery mechanisms, systems, and products required for | 
 | sustainable adaptation agriculture financing and agribusiness. Additional opportunities to strengthen | 
 | institutional capacity include upskilling CRDB staff on mainstreaming climate risks within its agriculture | 
 | lending portfolio. These activities fall under the technical assistance (TA) delivered in Component 2 of the | 
 | programme, and more details are in B.3 and E.6. | 
 |  | 
 | D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 78
D
As previously referenced, this programme is in direct alignment with Tanzania’s national strategies and
goals, contributing to the advancement and achievement of Tanzania’s intended Nationally Determined
Contribution (INDC), national climate change strategies, and national sustainable development
strategies. The proposal was first advanced and approved as a readiness Programme, with significant
contributions by several domestic actors, with a stakeholders' relations and outreach. The technical
assistance component of the proposal (component 2) introduces important aspects of regulatory and
policy support which governmental and public authorities, aligned with the stated targets of the project.
By designing and implementing the technical assistance in close alignment with the beneficiaries of this
assistance and in close collaboration with Tanzania’s NDAs, this program will endeavour to ensure that
the policy and regulatory support activities are implemented successful. The details of these activities,
the indicators that will be used to track them, and the deliverables are all listed in Section E.6.
Furthermore, marked by the support of from the Office of the Vice President of Tanzania, GCF's National
Designated Authority (NDA), the programme will provide substantial contributions to the implementation
and achievement of the following guiding policy frameworks:
• Tanzania’s INDC38: In Tanzania’s INDC, submitted in 2018, it is estimated that an immediate and
start-up financing of about USD 150 million is needed to enhance the country’s adaptation capacity
and that approximately USD 500 million per year will be needed to address climate change adaptation
and resilience through 2020, increasing up to USD 1 billion per year by 2030. Within the INDC
adaptation contribution are several objectives under the categories of agriculture, water resources,
and livestock that this project will directly advance, supporting Tanzania’s progress against the climate
investment gap. These include:
• Agriculture:
A) Up-scaling the level of improvement of agricultural land and water management;
B) Increasing yields through inter alia climate-resilient agriculture;
C) Protecting smallholder farmers against climate-related shocks including through crop
insurance;
D) Strengthening the capacity of Agriculture research institutions to conduct basic and
applied research; and
E) Strengthening knowledge, extension services and agricultural infrastructure to target
climate action.
• Water Resources:
A) Promoting integrated water resources development and management practices;
B) Investment in protection and conservation of water catchments including flood control
and rainwater harvesting structures;
C) Promoting wastewater reuse and recycling technologies; and
D) Development and exploitation of groundwater resources. The programme will directly
contribute to the advancement of the INDC.
• Livestock:
A) Promoting climate change resilient traditional and modern knowledge on sustainable
pasture and range management systems;
B) Enhancing development of livestock infrastructure and services;
C) Promoting livelihood diversification of livestock keepers; and
D) Promoting development of livestock insurance strategies.
• National Climate Change Strategy39: The national climate change policy framework includes
overarching strategic interventions and adaptation strategies to build upon the country's National
Adaptation Programme of Action and serve as the basis for identifying short-, medium-, and long-
term adaptation activities. Among those objectives described are: To invest and promote
appropriate water management technologies; To invest in exploration and extraction of
underground water; To improve water quality; To identify suitable crops for new agroecological
38 The United Republic of Tanzania (2016). Tanzania: Intended Nationally Determined Contributions.
39 The United Republic of Tanzania (2012 ). National Climate Change Strategy.

--- Table 1 on Page 55 ---
 | As previously referenced, this programme is in direct alignment with Tanzania’s national strategies and | 
 | goals, contributing to the advancement and achievement of Tanzania’s intended Nationally Determined | 
 | Contribution (INDC), national climate change strategies, and national sustainable development | 
 | strategies. The proposal was first advanced and approved as a readiness Programme, with significant | 
 | contributions by several domestic actors, with a stakeholders' relations and outreach. The technical | 
 | assistance component of the proposal (component 2) introduces important aspects of regulatory and | 
 | policy support which governmental and public authorities, aligned with the stated targets of the project. | 
 | By designing and implementing the technical assistance in close alignment with the beneficiaries of this | 
 | assistance and in close collaboration with Tanzania’s NDAs, this program will endeavour to ensure that | 
 | the policy and regulatory support activities are implemented successful. The details of these activities, | 
 | the indicators that will be used to track them, and the deliverables are all listed in Section E.6. | 
 |  | 
 | Furthermore, marked by the support of from the Office of the Vice President of Tanzania, GCF's National | 
 | Designated Authority (NDA), the programme will provide substantial contributions to the implementation | 
 | and achievement of the following guiding policy frameworks: | 
 |  | 
 | • Tanzania’s INDC38: In Tanzania’s INDC, submitted in 2018, it is estimated that an immediate and | 
 | start-up financing of about USD 150 million is needed to enhance the country’s adaptation capacity | 
 | and that approximately USD 500 million per year will be needed to address climate change adaptation | 
 | and resilience through 2020, increasing up to USD 1 billion per year by 2030. Within the INDC | 
 | adaptation contribution are several objectives under the categories of agriculture, water resources, | 
 | and livestock that this project will directly advance, supporting Tanzania’s progress against the climate | 
 | investment gap. These include: | 
 | • Agriculture: | 
 | A) Up-scaling the level of improvement of agricultural land and water management; | 
 | B) Increasing yields through inter alia climate-resilient agriculture; | 
 | C) Protecting smallholder farmers against climate-related shocks including through crop | 
 | insurance; | 
 | D) Strengthening the capacity of Agriculture research institutions to conduct basic and | 
 | applied research; and | 
 | E) Strengthening knowledge, extension services and agricultural infrastructure to target | 
 | climate action. | 
 | • Water Resources: | 
 | A) Promoting integrated water resources development and management practices; | 
 | B) Investment in protection and conservation of water catchments including flood control | 
 | and rainwater harvesting structures; | 
 | C) Promoting wastewater reuse and recycling technologies; and | 
 | D) Development and exploitation of groundwater resources. The programme will directly | 
 | contribute to the advancement of the INDC. | 
 | • Livestock: | 
 | A) Promoting climate change resilient traditional and modern knowledge on sustainable | 
 | pasture and range management systems; | 
 | B) Enhancing development of livestock infrastructure and services; | 
 | C) Promoting livelihood diversification of livestock keepers; and | 
 | D) Promoting development of livestock insurance strategies. | 
 |  | 
 | • National Climate Change Strategy39: The national climate change policy framework includes | 
 | overarching strategic interventions and adaptation strategies to build upon the country's National | 
 | Adaptation Programme of Action and serve as the basis for identifying short-, medium-, and long- | 
 | term adaptation activities. Among those objectives described are: To invest and promote | 
 | appropriate water management technologies; To invest in exploration and extraction of | 
 | underground water; To improve water quality; To identify suitable crops for new agroecological | 

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 78
D
zones; To promote appropriate agricultural practices that increase resilience to climate change; To
promote use of appropriate technologies for production, processing, storage, and distribution.
• Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan (ACRP), 2014-201940: Building off the National Climate
Change Strategy, the ACRP is intended to provide Tanzania’s crop agriculture sector and
stakeholders with a roadmap for meeting the challenges of climate change, presenting a range of
adaptation options, such as improving agricultural land and water management; accelerating
uptake of climate-smart practices; reducing the impacts of climate shocks through risk
management; strengthening knowledge and systems to target climate action. The ACRP, however,
has not been fully operationalized due to lack of resources to support its implementation. This
project will contribute significantly towards achieving its resilience actions and investment priorities
aiming at a) improving agricultural land and water management; (b) increase yields; (c) protect the
most vulnerable against climate shocks; and (d) strengthen knowledge and systems to target
climate action.
• Development Vision 202541: Tanzania’s Development Vision 2025 was developed to guide
national economic and social development efforts through 2025, with the objective of transforming
the country from a least developed country (LDC) to a middle-income country with a high degree
of human development. Accordingly, the vision sees the economy evolving from a low-productivity
agricultural-based economy to a diversified and semi-industrialized economy with a modern rural
sector and high productivity in agricultural production, which generates reasonably high incomes
and ensures food security and food self-sufficiency. The diversification of the economy is
envisioned as being based on a dynamic industrialization programme focused on local resource-
based industries (particularly agro-industries). The Development Vision 2025 includes five key
pillars of emphasis: High quality livelihoods; Peace, stability and unity; Good governance; A well-
educated and learned society; A competitive economy capable of producing sustainable growth
and shared benefits. The vision sees the need to address climate change within each of these
strategic pillars and includes a call for developing the low-productivity agricultural sector to
incorporating and expanding upon highly-productive agricultural activities. As today, however,
Tanzania’s economy has remained largely untransformed and has not followed the outlook laid
forth by Development Vision 2025. Agriculture, the backbone of the economy, continues to be
largely dependent on rainfall and still has low uptake of modern technologies, contributing to low
and erratic productivity in the sector.
• Agricultural Environmental Action Plan (2011–2017)42:
The Agricultural Environmental Action Plan (AEAP) was prepared to further mainstream
environmental protection in national development planning, agricultural strategizing, and project
implementation. The AEAP calls for strengthening climate mitigation and adaptation efforts in the
agriculture sector through a number of strategies, and calls for advancing cross-sectoral
collaborative efforts, including with the financial, livestock, forestry, and water resources sectors.
Key issues identified that the AEAP seeks to address through interventions include inadequate
finances to support agricultural environmental issues; poor water management for irrigation;
inadequate human resources; inadequate awareness on environmental issues.
• Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP II)43: The FYDP II includes agriculture and agro-processing
among the listed priority sectors, emphasizing increased agricultural productivity, deeper value-
chains, and improved supporting infrastructure through increasing production and productivity of
food and cash crops, developing irrigation schemes, and supporting the livestock, forestry, and
fisheries industries.
40 The United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
41 The United Republic of Tanzania (1999 ). Tanzania Development Vision 2025.
42 The United Republic of Tanzania (2020). Five Year Environmental Action Plan 2012-2017.
43 The United Republic of Tanzania (2016). The Second Five Year Development Plan, 2016/17- 2020/21.

--- Table 1 on Page 56 ---
 | zones; To promote appropriate agricultural practices that increase resilience to climate change; To | 
 | promote use of appropriate technologies for production, processing, storage, and distribution. | 
 |  | 
 | • Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan (ACRP), 2014-201940: Building off the National Climate | 
 | Change Strategy, the ACRP is intended to provide Tanzania’s crop agriculture sector and | 
 | stakeholders with a roadmap for meeting the challenges of climate change, presenting a range of | 
 | adaptation options, such as improving agricultural land and water management; accelerating | 
 | uptake of climate-smart practices; reducing the impacts of climate shocks through risk | 
 | management; strengthening knowledge and systems to target climate action. The ACRP, however, | 
 | has not been fully operationalized due to lack of resources to support its implementation. This | 
 | project will contribute significantly towards achieving its resilience actions and investment priorities | 
 | aiming at a) improving agricultural land and water management; (b) increase yields; (c) protect the | 
 | most vulnerable against climate shocks; and (d) strengthen knowledge and systems to target | 
 | climate action. | 
 |  | 
 | • Development Vision 202541: Tanzania’s Development Vision 2025 was developed to guide | 
 | national economic and social development efforts through 2025, with the objective of transforming | 
 | the country from a least developed country (LDC) to a middle-income country with a high degree | 
 | of human development. Accordingly, the vision sees the economy evolving from a low-productivity | 
 | agricultural-based economy to a diversified and semi-industrialized economy with a modern rural | 
 | sector and high productivity in agricultural production, which generates reasonably high incomes | 
 | and ensures food security and food self-sufficiency. The diversification of the economy is | 
 | envisioned as being based on a dynamic industrialization programme focused on local resource- | 
 | based industries (particularly agro-industries). The Development Vision 2025 includes five key | 
 | pillars of emphasis: High quality livelihoods; Peace, stability and unity; Good governance; A well- | 
 | educated and learned society; A competitive economy capable of producing sustainable growth | 
 | and shared benefits. The vision sees the need to address climate change within each of these | 
 | strategic pillars and includes a call for developing the low-productivity agricultural sector to | 
 | incorporating and expanding upon highly-productive agricultural activities. As today, however, | 
 | Tanzania’s economy has remained largely untransformed and has not followed the outlook laid | 
 | forth by Development Vision 2025. Agriculture, the backbone of the economy, continues to be | 
 | largely dependent on rainfall and still has low uptake of modern technologies, contributing to low | 
 | and erratic productivity in the sector. | 
 |  | 
 | • Agricultural Environmental Action Plan (2011–2017)42: | 
 | The Agricultural Environmental Action Plan (AEAP) was prepared to further mainstream | 
 | environmental protection in national development planning, agricultural strategizing, and project | 
 | implementation. The AEAP calls for strengthening climate mitigation and adaptation efforts in the | 
 | agriculture sector through a number of strategies, and calls for advancing cross-sectoral | 
 | collaborative efforts, including with the financial, livestock, forestry, and water resources sectors. | 
 | Key issues identified that the AEAP seeks to address through interventions include inadequate | 
 | finances to support agricultural environmental issues; poor water management for irrigation; | 
 | inadequate human resources; inadequate awareness on environmental issues. | 
 |  | 
 | • Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP II)43: The FYDP II includes agriculture and agro-processing | 
 | among the listed priority sectors, emphasizing increased agricultural productivity, deeper value- | 
 | chains, and improved supporting infrastructure through increasing production and productivity of | 
 | food and cash crops, developing irrigation schemes, and supporting the livestock, forestry, and | 
 | fisheries industries. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 78
D
• Agriculture Sector Development Program (ASDP II)44: Adopted in 2018, the ASDP II was
developed to foster the country’s economic development and guide the implementation and
prioritized interventions of the country’s Development Vision 2025. Overall, it is a ten-year
programme designed to be implemented in two (2) phases, each divided into five-year
implementation periods (the first being 2017/2018 – 2022/2023). The programme maps the path
for the agriculture sector’s transformation through 2028 and sets the path of promoting
commercialization, prioritizing high-potential commodity value-chains, and mobilizing capital by
giving the formal private sector a growing role in agriculture. The programme has four major
components which are:
(i) Sustainable Water and Land Use Management which aims at expanding sustainable water
and land use management for crops, livestock and fisheries;
(ii) Enhanced Agricultural Productivity and Profitability which will focus on increasing
productivity, for some priority commodities;
(iii) Commercialization and Value Addition which will focus on improved and expanded
marketing, competitive private sector and effective farmer organizations; and
(iv) Sector Enablers, Coordination and Monitoring & Evaluation which will strengthen
institutions, create enabling conditions and provide coordination framework.
The programme acknowledges that the current transformation of agriculture offers an excellent
opportunity to catalyze private investments and raise the incomes of the poor. Private investment
is central to financing Tanzania’s strategy for sustained growth, and to its economic transformation.
ASDP II recognizes that public funding will not be sufficient to meet its objectives and that private
investment is therefore essential. Of the total needed financing of USD 45 billion, private
investment is expected to contribute USD 20 billion. By reducing risks in the farming systems, the
programme will enable the prioritization of adaptive, resilient, climate-smart agricultural
investments and mobilize private investments for the agriculture sector as outlined in ASDP II.
• Tanzania Agriculture and Food Security Investment Plan (TAFSIP)45: TAFSIP is Tanzania’s
10-year roadmap for agricultural and rural development, designed to operationalize the objectives
of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP). The Plan stands as
a framework for the prioritization, planning, coordination, and harmonization of investments to drive
agricultural development, including achieving an average annual agriculture sectoral growth of 6%;
attaining food and nutrition security; further developing national agricultural markets; and better
integrating farmers into the national and regional market economy.
Box: Summary of Strategic interventions Related to Agriculture, National Climate Change
Strategy46
Crops and crop varieties
• Assessing crop vulnerability and suitability (including cropping pattern) for different Agro-ecological
zones
• Promoting early maturing and drought tolerant crops, use of pest/disease tolerant varieties, and adoption
of higher yielding technologies.
Water
• Promoting appropriate irrigation systems
• Protecting and conserving water catchments*
• Enhancing exploration and extraction of underground and other supplemental water sources*
• Facilitating and promoting water recycling and reuse and rainwater harvesting*
On-farm practices
• Addressing soil and degradation by promoting improved soil and land management practices/techniques.
• Strengthen integrated pest management techniques.
• Promoting appropriate indigenous knowledge practices, agro-forestry systems, minimum tillage and
efficient fertilizer utilization, and best agronomic practices such as conservation agriculture technologies
44 The United Republic of Tanzania (2019). Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase II.
45 The United Republic of Tanzania (2011 ). Tanzania Agriculture and Food Security Investment Plan (TAFSIP).
46 United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.

--- Table 1 on Page 57 ---
 | • Agriculture Sector Development Program (ASDP II)44: Adopted in 2018, the ASDP II was |  | 
 | developed to foster the country’s economic development and guide the implementation and |  | 
 | prioritized interventions of the country’s Development Vision 2025. Overall, it is a ten-year |  | 
 | programme designed to be implemented in two (2) phases, each divided into five-year |  | 
 | implementation periods (the first being 2017/2018 – 2022/2023). The programme maps the path |  | 
 | for the agriculture sector’s transformation through 2028 and sets the path of promoting |  | 
 | commercialization, prioritizing high-potential commodity value-chains, and mobilizing capital by |  | 
 | giving the formal private sector a growing role in agriculture. The programme has four major |  | 
 | components which are: |  | 
 | (i) Sustainable Water and Land Use Management which aims at expanding sustainable water |  | 
 | and land use management for crops, livestock and fisheries; |  | 
 | (ii) Enhanced Agricultural Productivity and Profitability which will focus on increasing |  | 
 | productivity, for some priority commodities; |  | 
 | (iii) Commercialization and Value Addition which will focus on improved and expanded |  | 
 | marketing, competitive private sector and effective farmer organizations; and |  | 
 | (iv) Sector Enablers, Coordination and Monitoring & Evaluation which will strengthen |  | 
 | institutions, create enabling conditions and provide coordination framework. |  | 
 | The programme acknowledges that the current transformation of agriculture offers an excellent |  | 
 | opportunity to catalyze private investments and raise the incomes of the poor. Private investment |  | 
 | is central to financing Tanzania’s strategy for sustained growth, and to its economic transformation. |  | 
 | ASDP II recognizes that public funding will not be sufficient to meet its objectives and that private |  | 
 | investment is therefore essential. Of the total needed financing of USD 45 billion, private |  | 
 | investment is expected to contribute USD 20 billion. By reducing risks in the farming systems, the |  | 
 | programme will enable the prioritization of adaptive, resilient, climate-smart agricultural |  | 
 | investments and mobilize private investments for the agriculture sector as outlined in ASDP II. |  | 
 |  |  | 
 | • Tanzania Agriculture and Food Security Investment Plan (TAFSIP)45: TAFSIP is Tanzania’s |  | 
 | 10-year roadmap for agricultural and rural development, designed to operationalize the objectives |  | 
 | of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP). The Plan stands as |  | 
 | a framework for the prioritization, planning, coordination, and harmonization of investments to drive |  | 
 | agricultural development, including achieving an average annual agriculture sectoral growth of 6%; |  | 
 | attaining food and nutrition security; further developing national agricultural markets; and better |  | 
 | integrating farmers into the national and regional market economy. |  | 
 |  |  | 
 | Box: Summary of Strategic interventions Related to Agriculture, National Climate Change |  | 
 | Strategy46 |  | 
 |  |  | 
 |  | Crops and crop varieties | 
 |  | • Assessing crop vulnerability and suitability (including cropping pattern) for different Agro-ecological | 
 |  | zones | 
 |  | • Promoting early maturing and drought tolerant crops, use of pest/disease tolerant varieties, and adoption | 
 |  | of higher yielding technologies. | 
 |  | Water | 
 |  | • Promoting appropriate irrigation systems | 
 |  | • Protecting and conserving water catchments* | 
 |  | • Enhancing exploration and extraction of underground and other supplemental water sources* | 
 |  | • Facilitating and promoting water recycling and reuse and rainwater harvesting* | 
 |  | On-farm practices | 
 |  | • Addressing soil and degradation by promoting improved soil and land management practices/techniques. | 
 |  | • Strengthen integrated pest management techniques. | 
 |  | • Promoting appropriate indigenous knowledge practices, agro-forestry systems, minimum tillage and | 
 |  | efficient fertilizer utilization, and best agronomic practices such as conservation agriculture technologies | 

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 78
D
• Enhancing management of agriculture wastes.
Information
• Strengthen early warning systems for pest surveillance
• Strengthening weather forecast information sharing for farmers
Markets
• Assess trade comparative advantage on traditional export crops w ith changing climate
• Enhancing agro-infrastructural (input, output, marketing, storage) systems
• Strengthening post-harvest processes and promote value addition
• Development pf crop insurance strategy
*Strategic interventions for the water sector that are closely linked with agriculture
As noted in the supporting letter signed by the Office of the Vice President, the NDA will play a direct
and supportive role in the implementation of the program. Within Tanzania, climate change issues and
processes are mandated to the Division of Environment, under the Office of the Vice President, as the
focal point for all matters related to environment. The Division of Environment and the Office of the Vice
President authored Tanzania’s INDC and the country’s Second National Communication (SNC) to
the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC47 and continues to play a leading role within the
country’s overall climate change mitigation and adaptation planning and programme implementation, of
which this project will play an instrumental role.
Furthermore, as further described in the theory of change, project description, and log frame, civil
society organizations and local stakeholders, including local community leaders, smallholder farmers
(most smallholder farmers are women and 98% of economically active rural Tanzanian women are
engaged in the agriculture sector), agricultural cooperatives, local financial institutions, and MFIs, will
play an instrumental role in the rollout and implementation of the project. In addition to incorporating
these local stakeholders’ feedback and input on project design and rollout, the project seeks to directly
support particularly marginalized and vulnerable communities in its essence. Further stakeholder
engagement is described in Annex 7 and Annex 8.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
The project estimates that it will mitigate climatic condition deterioration by adopting climate compatible
financing in agriculture practices and investing on agriculture infrastructures. Additionally, the project will
increase institutional capacity to become more effective in implementation on climate resilient agriculture
activities at concessions conditions. The Bank will also build its own capability that will enable it to continue
with climate resilient agriculture financing beyond the life of the project thus providing a long-term return on
investment that will ultimately make the project even more efficient. By providing a mix of financing
instruments for risk mitigation, capacity building as well as debt financing, the programme tackles the key
barriers to the larger scaling-up of agricultural finance. GCF financing in this programme will ensure that
the enabling conditions are strengthened, that risk is minimized and ultimately that the capacity of the
banking sector of Tanzania ins enhanced. The programme will facilitate banking interventions, in a manner
that will seek reduced concessionality as it moves forward. The Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) analysis has
been conducted for the programme, finding that, at the moment, without GCF concessionality, the
programme implementation IRR is too risky for the private sector. Eliminating the risks (through the
guarantee and insurance components), enhancing capacity (through the TA component) and supporting
the scaling up of lending, will all contribute to rising the profitability ratios of the program.
An integrated CBA of eight (8) ARA technologies and practices have been carried out to assess the
extent to which support is required for ARA investments to be implemented.
Further, in certain instances the project may not be financially viable when considering conventional costs
and benefits. On the other hand, when adding externalities, to capture the value created for society rather
than for an investor, the economic viability of the project improves and may determine whether to invest or
47 The United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania: Second National Communication (SNC) to the Conference of the Parties to the
UNFCCC.

--- Table 1 on Page 58 ---
 |  | • Enhancing management of agriculture wastes. |  | 
 |  | Information |  | 
 |  | • Strengthen early warning systems for pest surveillance |  | 
 |  | • Strengthening weather forecast information sharing for farmers |  | 
 |  | Markets |  | 
 |  | • Assess trade comparative advantage on traditional export crops w ith changing climate |  | 
 |  | • Enhancing agro-infrastructural (input, output, marketing, storage) systems |  | 
 |  | • Strengthening post-harvest processes and promote value addition |  | 
 |  | • Development pf crop insurance strategy |  | 
 |  | *Strategic interventions for the water sector that are closely linked with agriculture |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | As noted in the supporting letter signed by the Office of the Vice President, the NDA will play a direct |  |  | 
 | and supportive role in the implementation of the program. Within Tanzania, climate change issues and |  |  | 
 | processes are mandated to the Division of Environment, under the Office of the Vice President, as the |  |  | 
 | focal point for all matters related to environment. The Division of Environment and the Office of the Vice |  |  | 
 | President authored Tanzania’s INDC and the country’s Second National Communication (SNC) to |  |  | 
 | the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC47 and continues to play a leading role within the |  |  | 
 | country’s overall climate change mitigation and adaptation planning and programme implementation, of |  |  | 
 | which this project will play an instrumental role. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Furthermore, as further described in the theory of change, project description, and log frame, civil |  |  | 
 | society organizations and local stakeholders, including local community leaders, smallholder farmers |  |  | 
 | (most smallholder farmers are women and 98% of economically active rural Tanzanian women are |  |  | 
 | engaged in the agriculture sector), agricultural cooperatives, local financial institutions, and MFIs, will |  |  | 
 | play an instrumental role in the rollout and implementation of the project. In addition to incorporating |  |  | 
 | these local stakeholders’ feedback and input on project design and rollout, the project seeks to directly |  |  | 
 | support particularly marginalized and vulnerable communities in its essence. Further stakeholder |  |  | 
 | engagement is described in Annex 7 and Annex 8. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  | 
 | The project estimates that it will mitigate climatic condition deterioration by adopting climate compatible |  |  | 
 | financing in agriculture practices and investing on agriculture infrastructures. Additionally, the project will |  |  | 
 | increase institutional capacity to become more effective in implementation on climate resilient agriculture |  |  | 
 | activities at concessions conditions. The Bank will also build its own capability that will enable it to continue |  |  | 
 | with climate resilient agriculture financing beyond the life of the project thus providing a long-term return on |  |  | 
 | investment that will ultimately make the project even more efficient. By providing a mix of financing |  |  | 
 | instruments for risk mitigation, capacity building as well as debt financing, the programme tackles the key |  |  | 
 | barriers to the larger scaling-up of agricultural finance. GCF financing in this programme will ensure that |  |  | 
 | the enabling conditions are strengthened, that risk is minimized and ultimately that the capacity of the |  |  | 
 | banking sector of Tanzania ins enhanced. The programme will facilitate banking interventions, in a manner |  |  | 
 | that will seek reduced concessionality as it moves forward. The Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) analysis has |  |  | 
 | been conducted for the programme, finding that, at the moment, without GCF concessionality, the |  |  | 
 | programme implementation IRR is too risky for the private sector. Eliminating the risks (through the |  |  | 
 | guarantee and insurance components), enhancing capacity (through the TA component) and supporting |  |  | 
 | the scaling up of lending, will all contribute to rising the profitability ratios of the program. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | An integrated CBA of eight (8) ARA technologies and practices have been carried out to assess the |  |  | 
 | extent to which support is required for ARA investments to be implemented. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Further, in certain instances the project may not be financially viable when considering conventional costs |  |  | 
 | and benefits. On the other hand, when adding externalities, to capture the value created for society rather |  |  | 
 | than for an investor, the economic viability of the project improves and may determine whether to invest or |  |  | 

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 78
D
not (e.g., see the case of half/moons).
In summary, TACATDP uses low-interest, longer-tenor loans from the GCF solely to ensure borrowers
are not overburdened by high-interest rates, hence operating on a minimum concessionality basis.
Additionally, the other GCF proceeds for insurance, the The , and capacity building (TA) will help ensure
the project's viability and sustainability. While technologies are constantly changing, TACATDP is an
immediate solution to enhance the adaptive capacity of farmers, who have traditionally been overlooked.
The indicative financial model, Annex 3, details the programme’s outputs and sustainability.
Preliminary results show the programme to be sustainable throughout the duration of the
programme with GCF concessionality.

--- Table 1 on Page 59 ---
 | not (e.g., see the case of half/moons). | 
 |  | 
 | In summary, TACATDP uses low-interest, longer-tenor loans from the GCF solely to ensure borrowers | 
 | are not overburdened by high-interest rates, hence operating on a minimum concessionality basis. | 
 | Additionally, the other GCF proceeds for insurance, the The , and capacity building (TA) will help ensure | 
 | the project's viability and sustainability. While technologies are constantly changing, TACATDP is an | 
 | immediate solution to enhance the adaptive capacity of farmers, who have traditionally been overlooked. | 
 |  | 
 | The indicative financial model, Annex 3, details the programme’s outputs and sustainability. | 
 | Preliminary results show the programme to be sustainable throughout the duration of the | 
 | programme with GCF concessionality. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 78
E
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance
Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes
as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both.
Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways
☐
Increased climate resilient sustainable development
☒
E.2. Core indicator targets
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme.
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in
section A.
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to
Annual Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq
be reduced or avoided (mitigation
and cross-cutting only)
Lifetime Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq
(a) Total project financing _____ Choose an item.
(b) Requested GCF amount _____ Choose an item.
E
eq
.2
,
.
d
2
e
.
f
E
in
s
e
ti
d
m
a
a
s
te
t
d
o t
c
a
o
l
s
in
t
v
p
e
e
s
r
t m
t C
en
O
t
2 (c) Expected lifetime emission reductions _____ t CO2eq
cost / expected lifetime emission
(d) Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq (d = a / c) _____ Choose an item. / t
reductions (mitigation and cross-
CO eq
cutting only) 2
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO 2 eq removed _____ Choose an item. / t
(e = b / c) CO eq
2
(f) Total finance leveraged _____ Choose an item.
E.2.3. Expected volume of (g) Public source co-financed _____ Choose an item.
finance to be leveraged by the
proposed project/programme as a (h) Private source finance leveraged _____ Choose an item.
result of the Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) _____
private sources (mitigation and
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b) _____
cross-cutting only)
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) _____
1,241,288 direct beneficiaries
Direct
35% of female
E.2.4. Expected total number of
4,903,056 indirect beneficiaries
direct and indirect beneficiaries, Indirect
35% of female
(disaggregated by sex)
For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data
per country in annex 17.
Direct 1.2% (Expressed as %) of country(ies)
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
Indirect 4.67% (Expressed as %) of country(ies)
(disaggregated by sex)
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.

--- Table 1 on Page 60 ---
 | LOGICAL FRAMEWORK | 
 | This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance | 
 | Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes | 
 | as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing. | 
 | E.1. Paradigm shift objectives | 
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both.
Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways
☐
Increased climate resilient sustainable development
☒ |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 60 ---
 | E.2. Core indicator targets |  |  |  |  |  | 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme.
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in
section A. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon |  | Annual |  | Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq |  | 
 | dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | be reduced or avoided (mitigation |  | Lifetime |  | Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq |  | 
 | and cross-cutting only) |  |  |  |  |  | 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2
eq, defined as total investment
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) |  |  |  | (a) Total project financing |  | _____ Choose an item. | 
 |  |  |  | (b) Requested GCF amount |  | _____ Choose an item. | 
 |  |  |  | (c) Expected lifetime emission reductions |  | _____ t CO2eq | 
 |  |  |  | (d) Estimated cost per t CO eq (d = a / c)
2 |  | _____ Choose an item. / t
CO eq
2 | 
 |  |  |  | (e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO eqremoved
2
(e = b / c) |  | _____ Choose an item. / t
CO eq
2 | 
E.2.3. Expected volume of
finance to be leveraged by the
proposed project/programme as a
result of the Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and
private sources (mitigation and
cross-cutting only) |  |  |  | (f) Total finance leveraged |  | _____ Choose an item. | 
 |  |  |  | (g) Public source co-financed |  | _____ Choose an item. | 
 |  |  |  | (h) Private source finance leveraged |  | _____ Choose an item. | 
 |  |  |  | (i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) |  | _____ | 
 |  |  |  | (j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b) |  | _____ | 
 |  |  |  | (k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) |  | _____ | 
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
(disaggregated by sex) |  |  | Direct |  | 1,241,288 direct beneficiaries
35% of female |  | 
 |  |  | Indirect |  | 4,903,056 indirect beneficiaries
35% of female |  | 
 |  |  | For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data
per country in annex 17. |  |  |  | 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex) |  |  | Direct |  | 1.2% (Expressed as %) of country(ies) |  | 
 |  |  | Indirect |  | 4.67% (Expressed as %) of country(ies) |  | 
 |  |  | For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17. |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 60 ---
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2
eq, defined as total investment
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only)

--- Table 4 on Page 60 ---
E.2.3. Expected volume of
finance to be leveraged by the
proposed project/programme as a
result of the Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and
private sources (mitigation and
cross-cutting only)

--- Table 5 on Page 60 ---
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
(disaggregated by sex)

--- Table 6 on Page 60 ---
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex)

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 78
E
E.3. Fund-level impacts
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may
be selected per expected impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those
selected in section A.4 above. Add rows as needed.
Means of Target
Expected
Indicator Verification Baseline Assumptions
Results
(MoV) Mid-term Final
Field observation 0 males and 620,644 1,307,855 This is assuming
visits and impact females males and Adequate uptake of
assessment report benefitting males and females’ ARA credit for the
to be conducted by from the females’ direct adoption of climate
independent Party adoption of direct beneficiaries resilient
(e.g., Ministry of diversified, beneficiaries technologies and
Agriculture, climate practices
Sokoine University resilient
of Agriculture). livelihood
options
A1.2 Number of
Assuming adequate
A1.0 Increased availability of
males and females
resilience and Household and adaptation
benefiting from the
enhanced affected extension services
adoption of
livelihoods of stakeholder (whether CRDB-led
diversified, climate
the most surveys compiled or otherwise)
resilient livelihood
vulnerable by CRDB Bank’s
options (including
people, M&E Officer and
fisheries,
communities CRDB Bank staff.
agriculture,
and regions
tourism, etc.)
Progress reports
(annual) and final
report to be
completed by
CRDB Bank’s M&E
Officer and CRDB
Bank staff.
CRDB loans book In 2021, the 206,881 413,762 This is assuming
for TACATDP number of households households absence of extreme
people under
food security natural disasters,
line is new pandemic
Household and estimated at crisis
affected
5,1 million
stakeholder and economic
(WFP)
surveys compiled
A2.0 Increased A2.2 Number of by CRDB Bank’s shocks affecting
resilience of food secure M&E Officer and
health and well- households (in CRDB Bank staff. yields and
being, and food areas/periods at
household.
and water risk of climate
security change impacts)
Progress reports
(annual) and final
report to be
completed by
CRDB Bank’s M&E
Officer and CRDB
Bank staff.

--- Table 1 on Page 61 ---
 | E.3. Fund-level impacts |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may
be selected per expected impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those
selected in section A.4 above. Add rows as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected
Results |  | Indicator |  | Means of |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  |  |  | Assumptions | 
 |  |  |  | Verification |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | (MoV) |  |  |  | Mid-term |  |  | Final |  |  | 
A1.0 Increased
resilience and
enhanced
livelihoods of
the most
vulnerable
people,
communities
and regions |  | A1.2 Number of
males and females
benefiting from the
adoption of
diversified, climate
resilient livelihood
options (including
fisheries,
agriculture,
tourism, etc.) | Field observation
visits and impact
assessment report
to be conducted by
independent Party
(e.g., Ministry of
Agriculture,
Sokoine University
of Agriculture).
Household and
affected
stakeholder
surveys compiled
by CRDB Bank’s
M&E Officer and
CRDB Bank staff.
Progress reports
(annual) and final
report to be
completed by
CRDB Bank’s M&E
Officer and CRDB
Bank staff. |  |  | 0 males and
females
benefitting
from the
adoption of
diversified,
climate
resilient
livelihood
options | 620,644
males and
females’
direct
beneficiaries |  |  | 1,307,855
males and
females’
direct
beneficiaries |  |  | This is assuming
Adequate uptake of
ARA credit for the
adoption of climate
resilient
technologies and
practices
Assuming adequate
availability of
adaptation
extension services
(whether CRDB-led
or otherwise) | 
A2.0 Increased
resilience of
health and well-
being, and food
and water
security |  | A2.2 Number of
food secure
households (in
areas/periods at
risk of climate
change impacts) | CRDB loans book
for TACATDP
Household and
affected
stakeholder
surveys compiled
by CRDB Bank’s
M&E Officer and
CRDB Bank staff.
Progress reports
(annual) and final
report to be
completed by
CRDB Bank’s M&E
Officer and CRDB
Bank staff. |  |  | In 2021, the
number of
people under
food security
line is
estimated at
5,1 million
(WFP) | 206,881
households |  |  | 413,762
households |  |  | This is assuming
absence of extreme
natural disasters,
new pandemic
crisis
and economic
shocks affecting
yields and
household. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 61 ---
Expected
Results

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 78
E
E.4. Fund-level outcomes
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and corresponding
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected outcome. Add
rows as needed.
Means of Target
Expected
Indicator Verification Baseline Assumptions
Outcomes
(MoV) Mid-term Final
A5.0 A5.2 Number and Progress 0 3 6 mechanisms at This is assuming that
Strengthened level of effective reports mechanisms high degree of targeted technical
institutional coordination annual) and at medium coordination as assistance, as
and regulatory mechanisms final report to degree of per: - a high level described under B.3
systems for be completed coordination. of inclusiveness and E.6 of the
climate- by CRDB of women, Funding Proposal,
responsive Bank’s M&E marginalized effectively targets
planning and Officer and groups, private and reaches
development CRDB Bank sector, and public appropriate private
staff. sector sector and public
stakeholders; ii) a sector agencies and
high frequency of that said
meetings and organizations and
rate of agencies have high
implementation of degrees of interest
decisions; iii) and participation (as
number of senior currently expressed),
decision-makers creating long-lasting,
in public and institutionalized, and
private sector system change.
participating
actively as per
per B.3 and E.6
relate to the
implementation of
the following:
i. Providing
customer
capacity building
on adaptation
technologies and
business
development
ii. Conducting
tailored technical
assistance for the
integration of
climate risk
assessments
within a CRDB
Bank extension
service
programme
iii. Support and
capacity building
for the Tanzania

--- Table 1 on Page 62 ---
 | E.4. Fund-level outcomes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and corresponding
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected outcome. Add
rows as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected
Outcomes |  | Indicator |  | Means of |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  |  |  | Assumptions | 
 |  |  |  | Verification |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | (MoV) |  |  |  | Mid-term |  |  | Final |  |  | 
A5.0
Strengthened
institutional
and regulatory
systems for
climate-
responsive
planning and
development |  | A5.2 Number and
level of effective
coordination
mechanisms | Progress
reports
annual) and
final report to
be completed
by CRDB
Bank’s M&E
Officer and
CRDB Bank
staff. | Progress |  | 0 | 3
mechanisms
at medium
degree of
coordination. | 3 |  |  | 6 mechanisms at |  | This is assuming that
targeted technical
assistance, as
described under B.3
and E.6 of the
Funding Proposal,
effectively targets
and reaches
appropriate private
sector and public
sector agencies and
that said
organizations and
agencies have high
degrees of interest
and participation (as
currently expressed),
creating long-lasting,
institutionalized, and
system change. | 
 |  |  |  | reports |  |  |  | mechanisms |  |  | high degree of |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | annual) and |  |  |  | at medium |  |  | coordination as |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | final report to |  |  |  | degree of |  |  | per: - a high level |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | be completed |  |  |  | coordination. |  |  | of inclusiveness |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | by CRDB |  |  |  |  |  |  | of women, |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Bank’s M&E |  |  |  |  |  |  | marginalized |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Officer and |  |  |  |  |  |  | groups, private |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | CRDB Bank |  |  |  |  |  |  | sector, and public |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | staff. |  |  |  |  |  |  | sector |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | stakeholders; ii) a |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | high frequency of |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | meetings and |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | rate of |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation of |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | decisions; iii) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | number of senior |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | decision-makers |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | in public and |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | private sector |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | participating |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | actively as per |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | per B.3 and E.6 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | relate to the |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation of |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the following: |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | i. Providing |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | customer |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capacity building |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | on adaptation |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | technologies and |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | business |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | development |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ii. Conducting |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | tailored technical |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | assistance for the |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | integration of |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | climate risk |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | assessments |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | within a CRDB |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Bank extension |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | service |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | programme |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | iii. Support and |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capacity building |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | for the Tanzania |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 62 ---
Expected
Outcomes

--- Table 3 on Page 62 ---
A5.0
Strengthened
institutional
and regulatory
systems for
climate-
responsive
planning and
development

--- Table 4 on Page 62 ---
A5.2 Number and
evel of effective
oordination
mechanisms

--- Table 5 on Page 62 ---
This is assuming that
targeted technical
assistance, as
described under B.3
and E.6 of the
Funding Proposal,
effectively targets
and reaches
appropriate private
sector and public
sector agencies and
that said
organizations and
agencies have high
degrees of interest
and participation (as
currently expressed),
creating long-lasting,
institutionalized, and
system change.

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 78
E
Meteorological
Authority on
monitoring and
communication
for the
establishment of
the new
parametric
insurance
programme
iv. Support and
capacity building
for the Tanzania
Insurance
Regulatory
Authority on
monitoring, policy
development, and
oversight for
development of
parametric
insurance
products
v. Integrating
climate
information in
decision-making
within Tanzania’s
Financial Sector
Deepening Trust
(FSDT) to
enhance climate
risk
mainstreaming
within the
financial sector
vi. Strengthened
collaboration,
communication,
and
implementation of
Tanzania’s
National Climate
Change
Strategy).
A6.0 A6.1 Use of climate Progress 0 1 mechanism 2 mechanisms at This is assuming that
Increased information reports at medium high degre e of targeted technical
generation products/services in (annual) and degree of coordination (the assistance, as
and use of decision-making in final report to coordination. number and level described under B.3
climate climate sensitive be completed of effective and E.6 of the
information in sectors measured by CRDB coordination Funding Proposal,
decision- by # of downloads/ Bank’s M&E mechanisms, per effectively targets
making users of the online Officer and B.3 and E.6 and reaches
interface, and/or # CRDB Bank relate to the appropriate private
of users actively staff. implementation of sector and public
using the new the following: sector agencies and
AARDS i. Developing an that said
desegregated by # online interface organizations and
of men and women and climate risk agencies have high
user assessment tool degrees of interest
for CRDB Bank and participation (as
ii. Support the currently expressed),
Ministry of creating long-lasting,
Agriculture in the institutionalized, and
development and system change. It is
implementation of assumed that
the Agriculture necessary technology
Adaptation and data services will
Routine Data be available for
participating private

--- Table 1 on Page 63 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | Meteorological |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Authority on |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | monitoring and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | communication |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | for the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | establishment of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | the new |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | parametric |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | insurance |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | programme |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | iv. Support and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | capacity building |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | for the Tanzania |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Insurance |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Regulatory |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Authority on |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | monitoring, policy |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | development, and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | oversight for |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | development of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | parametric |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | insurance |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | products |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | v. Integrating |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | climate |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | information in |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | decision-making |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | within Tanzania’s |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Financial Sector |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Deepening Trust |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | (FSDT) to |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | enhance climate |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | risk |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | mainstreaming |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | within the |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | financial sector |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | vi. Strengthened |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | collaboration, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | communication, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | and |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | implementation of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Tanzania’s |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | National Climate |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Change |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Strategy). |  |  |  | 
A6.0
Increased
generation
and use of
climate
information in
decision-
making | A6.1 Use of climate
information
products/services in
decision-making in
climate sensitive
sectors measured
by # of downloads/
users of the online
interface, and/or #
of users actively
using the new
AARDS
desegregated by #
of men and women
user | Progress
reports
(annual) and
final report to
be completed
by CRDB
Bank’s M&E
Officer and
CRDB Bank
staff. | 0 | 1 mechanism
at medium
degree of
coordination. | 2 mechanisms at
high degre e of
coordination (the
number and level
of effective
coordination
mechanisms, per
B.3 and E.6
relate to the
implementation of
the following:
i. Developing an
online interface
and climate risk
assessment tool
for CRDB Bank
ii. Support the
Ministry of
Agriculture in the
development and
implementation of
the Agriculture
Adaptation
Routine Data | 2 mechanisms at |  |  | This is assuming that | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | high degre e of |  |  | targeted technical | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | coordination (the |  |  | assistance, as | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | number and level |  |  | described under B.3 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | of effective |  |  | and E.6 of the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | coordination |  |  | Funding Proposal, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | mechanisms, per |  |  | effectively targets | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | B.3 and E.6 |  |  | and reaches | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | relate to the |  |  | appropriate private | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | implementation of |  |  | sector and public | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | the following: |  |  | sector agencies and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | i. Developing an |  |  | that said | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | online interface |  |  | organizations and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | and climate risk |  |  | agencies have high | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | assessment tool |  |  | degrees of interest | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | for CRDB Bank |  |  | and participation (as | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | ii. Support the |  |  | currently expressed), | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Ministry of |  |  | creating long-lasting, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Agriculture in the |  |  | institutionalized, and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | development and |  |  | system change. It is | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | implementation of |  |  | assumed that | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | the Agriculture |  |  | necessary technology | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Adaptation |  |  | and data services will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Routine Data |  |  | be available for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | participating private | 

--- Table 2 on Page 63 ---
A6.0
Increased
generation
and use of
climate
information in
decision-
making

--- Table 3 on Page 63 ---
A6.1 Use of climate
nformation
products/services in
decision-making in
limate sensitive
ectors measured
by # of downloads/
users of the online
nterface, and/or #
of users actively
using the new
AARDS
desegregated by #
of men and women
user


--- Table 4 on Page 63 ---
Progress
reports
(annual) and
final report to
be completed
by CRDB
Bank’s M&E
Officer and
CRDB Bank
staff.

--- Table 5 on Page 63 ---
1 mechanism
at medium
degree of
coordination.

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 78
E
System and public sector
[AARDS]). organizations to
handle, maintain, and
integrate the
improved climate
information services.
A7.0 A7.1 Use by 0 males, 620,644 1,241,288 This is assuming that
Strengthened vulnerable females , households households all households
adaptive households, Progress businesses, or (including (including participating in
capacity and communities, reports public sector businesses) businesses) Activity 1.1 of
reduced businesses and (annual) and agencies using TACATDP will use
exposure to public-sector final report to fund-supported fund-supported tools,
climate risks services of Fund- be completed tools, instruments,
supported tools by CRDB instruments, strategies, and
instruments, Bank’s M&E strategies, and lending activities to
strategies and Officer and associated respond, strengthen
activities to respond CRDB Bank activities capacity, and reduce
to climate change staff. (including the exposure to climate
and variability integration of change, variability,
climate risk and risks.
analysis
technologies
and
techniques)to
respond to
climate change
and variability.
A8.0 A8.1 Number of Progress 0 males and 620,644 1,241,288 This is assuming that
Strengthened males and females reports (6 females households households all households
awareness of made aware of month and benefitting from participating in
climate threats climate threats and annual) and awareness Activity 1.1 and
and risk- related appropriate final report to outreach Component 2 of
reduction responses through be completed pertaining to TACATDP (ARA
processes access to climate by CRDB climate threats, lending participants
information Bank’s M&E climate risks, as well as technical
services. Officer and and appropriate assistance
CRDB Bank responses. beneficiaries) will
staff. have a strengthened
awareness of climate
threats and risk-
reduction processes,
as intended.
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing conditions,
progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as needed.
Target Assumptions
Expected
Indicator Means of Verification (MoV) Baseline
Results
Mid-term Final
Increase in A.1.1 # of CRDB loans Book 0 620,644 1,241,288 Assuming effective uptake
households households households households of the ARA loans by
benefiting from Impact assessment reports to be (currently of which targeted beneficiaries
loans provided conducted by independent observers CRDB (50% There are no ARA
for ARA (e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine credits 30 -35% are women and activities or loans currently
activities University of Agriculture). portfolio women 50% men) being conducted or offered
gender by CRDB Bank and all
balance lending activity will be
reference within the ARA scope.
Progress reports ( annual) and final
is 15-20%
report to be completed by CRDB Bank’s
of women)
M&E Officer and CRDB Bank staff.

--- Table 1 on Page 64 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | System
[AARDS]). |  | and public sector | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | organizations to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | handle, maintain, and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | integrate the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | improved climate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | information services. | 
A7.0
Strengthened
adaptive
capacity and
reduced
exposure to
climate risks
i | A7.1 Use by | Progress
reports
(annual) and
final report to
be completed
by CRDB
Bank’s M&E
Officer and
CRDB Bank
staff. |  | 0 males, |  | 620,644
households
(including
businesses) | 1,241,288
households
(including
businesses) | This is assuming that
all households
participating in
Activity 1.1 of
TACATDP will use
fund-supported tools,
instruments,
strategies, and
lending activities to
respond, strengthen
capacity, and reduce
exposure to climate
change, variability,
and risks. | This is assuming that | 
 | vulnerable |  |  | females , |  |  |  |  | all households | 
 | households, |  |  | businesses, or |  |  |  |  | participating in | 
 | communities, |  |  | public sector |  |  |  |  | Activity 1.1 of | 
 | businesses and |  |  | agencies using |  |  |  |  | TACATDP will use | 
 | public-sector |  |  | fund-supported |  |  |  |  | fund-supported tools, | 
 | services of Fund- |  |  | tools, |  |  |  |  | instruments, | 
 | supported tools |  |  | instruments, |  |  |  |  | strategies, and | 
 | nstruments, |  |  | strategies, and |  |  |  |  | lending activities to | 
 | strategies and |  |  | associated |  |  |  |  | respond, strengthen | 
 | activities to respond |  |  | activities |  |  |  |  | capacity, and reduce | 
 | to climate change |  |  | (including the |  |  |  |  | exposure to climate | 
 | and variability |  |  | integration of |  |  |  |  | change, variability, | 
 |  |  |  | climate risk |  |  |  |  | and risks. | 
 |  |  |  | analysis |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | technologies |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | and |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | techniques)to |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | respond to |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | climate change |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | and variability. |  |  |  |  |  | 
A8.0
Strengthened
awareness of
climate threats
and risk-
reduction
processes
i | A8.1 Number of | Progress
reports (6
month and
annual) and
final report to
be completed
by CRDB
Bank’s M&E
Officer and
CRDB Bank
staff. | 0 males and
females
benefitting from
awareness
outreach
pertaining to
climate threats,
climate risks,
and appropriate
responses. | 0 males and |  | 620,644
households | 1,241,288
households |  | This is assuming that | 
 | males and females |  |  | females |  |  |  |  | all households | 
 | made aware of |  |  | benefitting from |  |  |  |  | participating in | 
 | climate threats and |  |  | awareness |  |  |  |  | Activity 1.1 and | 
 | related appropriate |  |  | outreach |  |  |  |  | Component 2 of | 
 | responses through |  |  | pertaining to |  |  |  |  | TACATDP (ARA | 
 | access to climate |  |  | climate threats, |  |  |  |  | lending participants | 
 | nformation |  |  | climate risks, |  |  |  |  | as well as technical | 
 | services. |  |  | and appropriate |  |  |  |  | assistance | 
 |  |  |  | responses. |  |  |  |  | beneficiaries) will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | have a strengthened | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | awareness of climate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | threats and risk- | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | reduction processes, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | as intended. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 64 ---
System
[AARDS]).

--- Table 3 on Page 64 ---
A7.0
Strengthened
adaptive
capacity and
educed
exposure to
climate risks

--- Table 4 on Page 64 ---

Progress
reports
(annual) and
final report to
be completed
by CRDB
Bank’s M&E
Officer and
CRDB Bank
staff.

--- Table 5 on Page 64 ---
620,644
households
(including
businesses)

--- Table 6 on Page 64 ---
1,241,288
households
(including
businesses)

--- Table 7 on Page 64 ---
A8.0
Strengthened
awareness of
climate threats
and risk-
eduction
processes

--- Table 8 on Page 64 ---
Progress
reports (6
month and
annual) and
final report to
be completed
by CRDB
Bank’s M&E
Officer and
CRDB Bank
staff.

--- Table 9 on Page 64 ---
620,644
households

--- Table 10 on Page 64 ---
1,241,288
households

--- Table 11 on Page 64 ---
 | E.5. Project/programme performance indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing conditions,
progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected
Results |  | Indicator | Means of Verification (MoV) |  |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  |  |  |  | Assumptions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  |  | Final |  |  |  | 
Increase in
households
benefiting from
loans provided
for ARA
activities | Increase in | A.1.1 # of
households | I
(
r | CRDB loans Book |  | 0
(currently
CRDB
credits
portfolio
gender
balance
reference
is 15-20%
of women) | 620,644
households
of which
30 -35% are
women | 620,644 |  | 1,241,288
households
(50%
women and
50% men) | 1,241,288 |  | Assuming effective uptake
of the ARA loans by
targeted beneficiaries
There are no ARA
activities or loans currently
being conducted or offered
by CRDB Bank and all
lending activity will be
within the ARA scope. | Assuming effective uptake | 
 | households |  |  |  |  |  |  | households |  |  | households |  |  | of the ARA loans by | 
 | benefiting from |  |  | mpact assessment reports to be |  |  |  | of which |  |  |  |  |  | targeted beneficiaries | 
 | loans provided |  |  | conducted by independent observers |  |  |  |  |  |  | (50% |  |  | There are no ARA | 
 | for ARA |  |  | e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine |  |  |  | 30 -35% are |  |  | women and |  |  | activities or loans currently | 
 | activities |  |  | University of Agriculture). |  |  |  | women |  |  | 50% men) |  |  | being conducted or offered | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | by CRDB Bank and all | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | lending activity will be | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | within the ARA scope. | 
 |  |  |  | Progress reports ( annual) and final |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | eport to be completed by CRDB Bank’s |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | M&E Officer and CRDB Bank staff. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 12 on Page 64 ---
Expected
Results

--- Table 13 on Page 64 ---
A.1.1 # of
households

--- Table 14 on Page 64 ---
0
(currently
CRDB
credits
portfolio
gender
balance
reference
is 15-20%
of women)

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 78
E
Increase in A.1.1 Volume CRDB loans Book 0 US$ 488.5 US$ 977.13 Assuming effective uptake
volume of loans of loans million48 million of the ARA loans by
provided for provided for Impact assessment reports to be targeted beneficiaries
ARA activities ARA activities conducted by independent observers There are no ARA
(USD) (e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine activities or loans currently
University of Agriculture). being conducted or offered
by CRDB Bank and all
lending activity will be
within the ARA scope. The
Progress reports (annual) and final
target and baseline figures
report to be completed by CRDB Bank’s
were calculated per the
M&E Officer and CRDB Bank staff.
financial structure
submitted with Annex 3.
Increase in A1.2 Total Impact assessment reports to be 0 US$ 366.4 US$ 732.8 Assuming effective uptake
number and value of conducted by independent observers million million of the ARA loans by
value of assets assets (e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine targeted beneficiaries
guaranteed guaranteed University of Agriculture). There are no ARA-specific
(USD) guarantee activities
currently being conducted.
The target and baseline
Progress reports (6 month and annual)
figures were calculated per
and final report to be completed by
the financial structure
CRDB Bank’s M&E Officer and CRDB
submitted with Annex 3.
Bank staff.
Increase in A1.1 Volume Impact assessment reports to be 0 US$ 466.5 US$ 933.1 Assuming effective uptake
volume of of funds conducted by independent observers million million of the ARA loans by
finance provided to (e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine targeted beneficiaries
extended to smallholders’ University of Agriculture). There are no ARA
smallholder farmers (USD activities or loans currently
farmers and % of the being conducted or offered
loan portfolio) to smallholder farmers by
Progress reports (6 month and annual)
CRDB Bank and 95.5% of
and final report to be completed by
all TACATDP ARA lending
CRDB Bank’s M&E Officer and CRDB
activity will be for
Bank staff.
smallholder farmers.
Increase in A.1.1 Impact assessment reports to be 0 US$ 21.9 US$ 43.9 Assuming effective uptake
volume of loans Increase in conducted by independent observers million million of the ARA loans by
provided, volume of (e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine targeted beneficiaries
disaggregated loans University of Agriculture). There are no ARA
by type, asset provided, activities or loans currently
and category of disaggregate being conducted or offered
beneficiary d by type, by CRDB Bank and 4.5%
Progress reports (6 month and annual)
asset and of all TACATDP ARA
and final report to be completed by
category of lending activity will be for
CRDB Bank’s M&E Officer and CRDB
beneficiary non-smallholder farmers.
Bank staff.
Increase in land A.2.2.1 ha of CRDB clients profiles and household 0 1,200,000 ha 2,500,000 Assuming availability of
area under land under surveys ha locally adapted technology
improved improved
climate climate
sensitive sensitive
management, management,
such as net disaggregate
shading and d by
windbreaking, technology/pr
precision actices
irrigation,
shifting, micro-
harvesting and
soil covering
disaggregated
by technology
type and
practices
48 Please note some of these numbers may be revised per updates to the financial model (Annex 3)

--- Table 1 on Page 65 ---
Increase in
volume of loans
provided for
ARA activities |  |  | A.1.1 Volume
of loans
provided for
ARA activities
(USD) | CRDB loans Book
Impact assessment reports to be
conducted by independent observers
(e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine
University of Agriculture).
Progress reports (annual) and final
report to be completed by CRDB Bank’s
M&E Officer and CRDB Bank staff. |  |  | 0 | US$ 488.5
million48 | US$ 977.13
million |  | Assuming effective uptake | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | of the ARA loans by | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | targeted beneficiaries | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | There are no ARA | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | activities or loans currently | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | being conducted or offered | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | by CRDB Bank and all | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | lending activity will be | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | within the ARA scope. The | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | target and baseline figures | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | were calculated per the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | financial structure | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | submitted with Annex 3. | 
Increase in
number and
value of assets
guaranteed |  |  | A1.2 Total
value of
assets
guaranteed
(USD) |  | Impact assessment reports to be |  | 0 | US$ 366.4
million | US$ 732.8
million | Assuming effective uptake
of the ARA loans by
targeted beneficiaries
There are no ARA-specific
guarantee activities
currently being conducted.
The target and baseline
figures were calculated per
the financial structure
submitted with Annex 3. | Assuming effective uptake | 
 |  |  |  |  | conducted by independent observers |  |  |  |  |  | of the ARA loans by | 
 |  |  |  |  | (e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine |  |  |  |  |  | targeted beneficiaries | 
 |  |  |  |  | University of Agriculture). |  |  |  |  |  | There are no ARA-specific | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | guarantee activities | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | currently being conducted. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | The target and baseline | 
 |  |  |  |  | Progress reports (6 month and annual) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | figures were calculated per | 
 |  |  |  |  | and final report to be completed by |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the financial structure | 
 |  |  |  |  | CRDB Bank’s M&E Officer and CRDB |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | submitted with Annex 3. | 
 |  |  |  |  | Bank staff. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Increase in
volume of
finance
extended to
smallholder
farmers |  |  | A1.1 Volume
of funds
provided to
smallholders’
farmers (USD
and % of the
loan portfolio) | Impact assessment reports to be
conducted by independent observers
(e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine
University of Agriculture).
Progress reports (6 month and annual)
and final report to be completed by
CRDB Bank’s M&E Officer and CRDB
Bank staff. | Impact assessment reports to be |  | 0 | US$ 466.5
million | US$ 933.1
million |  | Assuming effective uptake | 
 |  |  |  |  | conducted by independent observers |  |  |  |  |  | of the ARA loans by | 
 |  |  |  |  | (e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine |  |  |  |  |  | targeted beneficiaries | 
 |  |  |  |  | University of Agriculture). |  |  |  |  |  | There are no ARA | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | activities or loans currently | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | being conducted or offered | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | to smallholder farmers by | 
 |  |  |  |  | Progress reports (6 month and annual) |  |  |  |  |  | CRDB Bank and 95.5% of | 
 |  |  |  |  | and final report to be completed by |  |  |  |  |  | all TACATDP ARA lending | 
 |  |  |  |  | CRDB Bank’s M&E Officer and CRDB |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | activity will be for | 
 |  |  |  |  | Bank staff. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | smallholder farmers. | 
Increase in
volume of loans
provided,
disaggregated
by type, asset
and category of
beneficiary |  |  | A.1.1
Increase in
volume of
loans
provided,
disaggregate
d by type,
asset and
category of
beneficiary |  | Impact assessment reports to be |  | 0 | US$ 21.9
million | US$ 43.9
million | Assuming effective uptake
of the ARA loans by
targeted beneficiaries
There are no ARA
activities or loans currently
being conducted or offered
by CRDB Bank and 4.5%
of all TACATDP ARA
lending activity will be for
non-smallholder farmers. | Assuming effective uptake | 
 |  |  |  |  | conducted by independent observers |  |  |  |  |  | of the ARA loans by | 
 |  |  |  |  | (e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine |  |  |  |  |  | targeted beneficiaries | 
 |  |  |  |  | University of Agriculture). |  |  |  |  |  | There are no ARA | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | activities or loans currently | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | being conducted or offered | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | by CRDB Bank and 4.5% | 
 |  |  |  |  | Progress reports (6 month and annual) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | of all TACATDP ARA | 
 |  |  |  |  | and final report to be completed by |  |  |  |  |  | lending activity will be for | 
 |  |  |  |  | CRDB Bank’s M&E Officer and CRDB |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | non-smallholder farmers. | 
 |  |  |  |  | Bank staff. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Increase in land |  | A.2.2.1 ha of
land under
improved
climate
sensitive
management,
disaggregate
d by
technology/pr
actices | CRDB clients profiles and household
surveys | CRDB clients profiles and household |  | 0 | 1,200,000 ha | 2,500,000
ha | Assuming availability of
locally adapted technology |  | 
 | area under |  |  |  | surveys |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | improved |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | climate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | sensitive |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | management, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | such as net |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | shading and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | windbreaking, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | precision |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | irrigation, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | shifting, micro- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | harvesting and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | soil covering |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | disaggregated |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | by technology |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | type and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | practices |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 65 ---
Increase in
volume of loans
provided for
ARA activities

--- Table 3 on Page 65 ---
A.1.1 Volume
of loans
provided for
ARA activities
USD)

--- Table 4 on Page 65 ---
CRDB loans Book
Impact assessment reports to be
conducted by independent observers
(e.g., Ministry of Agriculture, Sokoine
University of Agriculture).

Progress reports (annual) and final
report to be completed by CRDB Bank’s
M&E Officer and CRDB Bank staff.

--- Table 5 on Page 65 ---
US$ 488.5
million48

--- Table 6 on Page 65 ---
US$ 977.13
million

--- Table 7 on Page 65 ---
Increase in
number and
value of assets
guaranteed

--- Table 8 on Page 65 ---
A1.2 Total
alue of
assets
guaranteed
USD)

--- Table 9 on Page 65 ---
US$ 366.4
million

--- Table 10 on Page 65 ---
US$ 732.8
million

--- Table 11 on Page 65 ---
Increase in
volume of
finance
extended to
smallholder
farmers

--- Table 12 on Page 65 ---
A1.1 Volume
of funds
provided to
mallholders’
armers (USD
and % of the
oan portfolio)

--- Table 13 on Page 65 ---
US$ 466.5
million

--- Table 14 on Page 65 ---
US$ 933.1
million

--- Table 15 on Page 65 ---
Increase in
volume of loans
provided,
disaggregated
by type, asset
and category of
beneficiary

--- Table 16 on Page 65 ---
A.1.1
ncrease in
olume of
oans
provided,
disaggregate
d by type,
asset and
ategory of
beneficiary

--- Table 17 on Page 65 ---
US$ 21.9
million

--- Table 18 on Page 65 ---
US$ 43.9
million

--- Table 19 on Page 65 ---
A.2.2.1 ha of
and under
mproved
limate
ensitive
management,
disaggregate
d by
echnology/pr
actices

--- Table 20 on Page 65 ---
2,500,000
ha

--- Table 21 on Page 65 ---
Assuming availability of
ocally adapted technology


=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 78
E
Increase in the A.2.2 Number CRDB progress and financing reports 0 farmers 1,500,000 3,000, 000
number of of farmers are 35 – 50%
farmers (men receiving Quarterly reports from server/hosts and receiving 30% are are women
and women) climate app data on connections, downloads, impactful women
receiving information and users climate
improved through adaptation
climate CRDB app, and
information disaggregate resilience
d by gender informatio
n and 30%
of CRDB
transactio
ns using
banking
digital
services
E.6. Activities
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected
in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.
Activity Description Sub-activities Deliverables
Component 1: CRDB Adaptation credits through loan financing
Activity 1.1: A dedicated USD 170 • ARA lending facility financed and established by • One ARA lending facility
Establish and million Agriculture CRDB Bank • Approved Loan framework and
implement a Resilience and criteria
dedicated ARA Adaptation (ARA) lending • ARA loan framework and criteria established within • 1 Loan monitoring policy system
lending facility facility (consisting of USD CRDB Bank. • Loans provided to approximately
within CRDB 70 million in senior loans 840,000 households/borrowers
Bank from GCF blended with • ARA loan monitoring policy system incorporated
USD 100 million from within CRDB Bank.
CRDB Bank) will be
incorporated within CRDB
• Deliver loans
Bank. Terms and
conditions will be set to
extend loans to end-users
in the agriculture sector
(including smallholder
farmers through Savings
and Credit Cooperative
Societies in Tanzania
(SACCCOS), small- and
medium-sized
enterprises, and select
larger agriculture
corporates) to finance
adaptation and resilience
projects, improving
business and agricultural
productivity.
Activity 1.2: Establish a USD 10 • Guarantee agreement and grant provisions
Establish and million guarantee credit- implemented between CRDB Bank and GCF - 1 guarantee agreement signed
implement a enhancement facility to - One guarantee facility
dedicated ARA provide credit support to • Negotiations and stakeholder engagement by CRDB established
Guarantee Credit smallholder farmers and Bank and GCF with key stakeholders on
Facility small- and -medium sized establishment of guarantee facility
businesses engaged in
the agriculture or • Set guarantee agreement provisions between GCF
agribusiness sector in and borrowers
Tanzania to facilitate and
ease ARA and associated
borrowing activities. The
credit facility will be

--- Table 1 on Page 66 ---
Increase in the
number of
farmers (men
and women)
receiving
improved
climate
information | A.2.2 Number
of farmers
receiving
climate
information
through
CRDB app,
disaggregate
d by gender |  | CRDB progress and financing reports
Quarterly reports from server/hosts and
app data on connections, downloads,
and users |  |  | 0 farmers |  | 1,500,000
30% are
women | 3,000, 000
35 – 50%
are women |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | receiving |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | impactful |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | climate |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | adaptation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | resilience |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | informatio |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | n and 30% |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | of CRDB |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | transactio |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | ns using |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | banking |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | digital |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | services |  |  |  |  | 
E.6. Activities |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected
in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity |  | Description |  | Sub-activities |  |  |  |  |  | Deliverables | 
Component 1: CRDB Adaptation credits through loan financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 1.1:
Establish and
implement a
dedicated ARA
lending facility
within CRDB
Bank |  | A dedicated USD 170
million Agriculture
Resilience and
Adaptation (ARA) lending
facility (consisting of USD
70 million in senior loans
from GCF blended with
USD 100 million from
CRDB Bank) will be
incorporated within CRDB
Bank. Terms and
conditions will be set to
extend loans to end-users
in the agriculture sector
(including smallholder
farmers through Savings
and Credit Cooperative
Societies in Tanzania
(SACCCOS), small- and
medium-sized
enterprises, and select
larger agriculture
corporates) to finance
adaptation and resilience
projects, improving
business and agricultural
productivity. |  | • ARA lending facility financed and established by
CRDB Bank
• ARA loan framework and criteria established within
CRDB Bank.
• ARA loan monitoring policy system incorporated
within CRDB Bank.
• Deliver loans |  |  |  |  |  | • One ARA lending facility
• Approved Loan framework and
criteria
• 1 Loan monitoring policy system
• Loans provided to approximately
840,000 households/borrowers | 
Activity 1.2:
Establish and
implement a
dedicated ARA
Guarantee Credit
Facility |  | Establish a USD 10
million guarantee credit-
enhancement facility to
provide credit support to
smallholder farmers and
small- and -medium sized
businesses engaged in
the agriculture or
agribusiness sector in
Tanzania to facilitate and
ease ARA and associated
borrowing activities. The
credit facility will be |  | • Guarantee agreement and grant provisions
implemented between CRDB Bank and GCF
• Negotiations and stakeholder engagement by CRDB
Bank and GCF with key stakeholders on
establishment of guarantee facility
• Set guarantee agreement provisions between GCF
and borrowers |  |  |  |  |  | - 1 guarantee agreement signed
- One guarantee facility
established | 

--- Table 2 on Page 66 ---
Increase in the
number of
farmers (men
and women)
receiving
improved
climate
information

--- Table 3 on Page 66 ---
A.2.2 Number
f farmers
eceiving
limate
nformation
hrough
CRDB app,
isaggregate
by gender

--- Table 4 on Page 66 ---
CRDB progress and financing reports
Quarterly reports from server/hosts and
app data on connections, downloads,
and users

--- Table 5 on Page 66 ---
1,500,000
30% are
women

--- Table 6 on Page 66 ---
3,000, 000
35 – 50%
are women

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 78
E
operated and financed by
GCF with the partnership
of CRDB Bank as the
associated lender.
Activity 1.3: Promote the creation of Activity 1.3.1: Overseen by CRDB Bank and with • Market study on insurance and
Establishment of an innovative insurance coordination between CRDB Bank, its insurance affiliate, parametric insurance in Tanzania
an insurance scheme in Tanzania and other insurance companies, a market assessment • Engagements with stakeholders
scheme dedicated to ARA and will be conducted on the insurance market in Tanzania, as part of the market study and in
dedicated to ARA focused on smallholder with a particular focus on sensitivity to climate change support of the pilot programme
for smallholder farmers and small- and and climate variability. The market assessment will • Data analytics and technical
farmers medium-sized include input from market actors, including insurance studies supporting
implementation of a parametric
enterprises. providers and buyers, regulators, and key community
insurance pilot trial
Parametric/index stakeholders on the barriers and market demand for
• Negotiations and agreements
insurance products will be climate and weather resilient insurance products,
between CRDB Bank, its
piloted by CRDB Bank, its parametric/index insurance.
insurance affiliate, and other
insurance affiliate, and
insurance companies on
other insurance Results of the study will provide a framework for pricing implementation of the parametric
companies (including (as GCF grant funding will be partially used to support the insurance product
several local crop costs of insurance premiums for participating farmers at a
insurance providers cost-sharing rate to be determined according to the
currently operating within market study), key crops to be included in an initial pilot
the agriculture sector in phase, and relevant weather and climate milestones
Tanzania). A market
Activity 1.3.2: Using evidence-based metrics and inputs
study and initial pilot
from the market study, a pilot programme will trial a
launch will be conducted
parametric insurance product to smallholder farmers and
to assess the feasibility
small- and medium-sized enterprises as part of the ARA
and potential of the long-
lending program, offering a bundled financial product of
term parametric
loans and insurance with insurance premiums to be
insurance market.
partially covered by loan repayment and partially by GCF
(per above).
Component 2: Technical assistance (all enabling activities, managed by CRBD Bank)
Activity 2.1: Develop an online Activity 2.1.1: Develop and construct an online interface • Data research and collation to
Integration of interface for CRDB Bank to enable CRDB and other financial institutions and integrate within the online climate
climate risks and other interested cooperative banks to use impact assessment tools more risk assessment interface,
assessments in financial institutions to easily and readily to prioritize adaptation and resilience enabling financial institutions to
CRDB Bank utilize to access covering measures in their agriculture operations (lending, estimate farmers’ climate risk
lending rating (depending on location,
climate change modeling insurance products, etc.) and will be designed to help
operations crop type, and farming practices),
and climate change associated partners and involved institutions increase
through the providing recommendations on
variability, including their understanding of their climate risk exposures in their
development of technologies to improve
climate-crop modeling agriculture loan portfolio and credit products and the
an online productivity, and incorporating
and associated climate climate risk exposures faced by their clients.
interface and flexibility so that institutions may
training support risks. Such a tool will analyze rating change depending
for the CRDB unlock appropriate Activity 2.1.2: Develop training modules and “training of on altered resilience practices or
Bank to use, climate risk assessment trainers” to ensure that the online interface is properly be adopted resilience technologies.
maintain and and management within properly managed and optimally incorporated into
upgrade the tool financial institutions by institutions operations and decision-making. Training and • Production, and subsequent
overtime. mainstreaming resilient user manuals as well as the “training of trainers” will allow launch, of the software for the
decision-making for for institutions to continuously use the online interface online climate risk assessment
agriculture, democratizing and not be adversely impacted by personnel changes. interface for use by financial
decision-making through institutions
robust and available
climate data, and • Training documents, manuals,
and materials for users of the
promoting the expansion
online interface
and deployment of
innovative adaptation
•
15 training sessions (“training of
technologies. trainers”) for training leads of
CRDB staff and participating
institutions.
Activity 2.2: Enhance the capacity of Activity 2.2.1: Capacity building exercises and trainings • Training documents, manuals,
Customer end-users in Tanzania’s for farmers, end-users, and other key stakeholders and materia ls and knowledge
capacity building agriculture value-chain, involved in the crop production value chain to enhance products on the impacts and
on adaptation particularly smallholder ability to understand and plan in the face of climate adverse effects of climate change
technologies and farmers, small- and change and climate variability. and climate variability
business medium-sized • Tailored Training documents,
development enterprises, and other Activity 2.2.2: Capacity building exercises and trainings manuals, and materials and
agribusinesses to for farmers, end-users, and other key stakeholders to knowledge products on resilient

--- Table 1 on Page 67 ---
 | operated and financed by
GCF with the partnership
of CRDB Bank as the
associated lender. |  | 
Activity 1.3:
Establishment of
an insurance
scheme
dedicated to ARA
for smallholder
farmers | Promote the creation of
an innovative insurance
scheme in Tanzania
dedicated to ARA and
focused on smallholder
farmers and small- and
medium-sized
enterprises.
Parametric/index
insurance products will be
piloted by CRDB Bank, its
insurance affiliate, and
other insurance
companies (including
several local crop
insurance providers
currently operating within
the agriculture sector in
Tanzania). A market
study and initial pilot
launch will be conducted
to assess the feasibility
and potential of the long-
term parametric
insurance market. | Activity 1.3.1: Overseen by CRDB Bank and with
coordination between CRDB Bank, its insurance affiliate,
and other insurance companies, a market assessment
will be conducted on the insurance market in Tanzania,
with a particular focus on sensitivity to climate change
and climate variability. The market assessment will
include input from market actors, including insurance
providers and buyers, regulators, and key community
stakeholders on the barriers and market demand for
climate and weather resilient insurance products,
parametric/index insurance.
Results of the study will provide a framework for pricing
(as GCF grant funding will be partially used to support the
costs of insurance premiums for participating farmers at a
cost-sharing rate to be determined according to the
market study), key crops to be included in an initial pilot
phase, and relevant weather and climate milestones | • Market study on insurance and
parametric insurance in Tanzania
• Engagements with stakeholders
as part of the market study and in
support of the pilot programme
• Data analytics and technical
studies supporting
implementation of a parametric
insurance pilot trial
• Negotiations and agreements
between CRDB Bank, its
insurance affiliate, and other
insurance companies on
implementation of the parametric
insurance product
 |  | Activity 1.3.2: Using evidence-based metrics and inputs
from the market study, a pilot programme will trial a
parametric insurance product to smallholder farmers and
small- and medium-sized enterprises as part of the ARA
lending program, offering a bundled financial product of
loans and insurance with insurance premiums to be
partially covered by loan repayment and partially by GCF
(per above). | 
Component 2: Technical assistance (all enabling activities, managed by CRBD Bank) |  |  | 
Activity 2.1:
Integration of
climate risks
assessments in
CRDB Bank
lending
operations
through the
development of
an online
interface and
training support
for the CRDB
Bank to use,
maintain and
upgrade the tool
overtime. | Develop an online
interface for CRDB Bank
and other interested
financial institutions to
utilize to access covering
climate change modeling
and climate change
variability, including
climate-crop modeling
and associated climate
risks. Such a tool will
unlock appropriate
climate risk assessment
and management within
financial institutions by
mainstreaming resilient
decision-making for
agriculture, democratizing
decision-making through
robust and available
climate data, and
promoting the expansion
and deployment of
innovative adaptation
technologies. | Activity 2.1.1: Develop and construct an online interface
to enable CRDB and other financial institutions and
cooperative banks to use impact assessment tools more
easily and readily to prioritize adaptation and resilience
measures in their agriculture operations (lending,
insurance products, etc.) and will be designed to help
associated partners and involved institutions increase
their understanding of their climate risk exposures in their
agriculture loan portfolio and credit products and the
climate risk exposures faced by their clients. | • Data research and collation to
integrate within the online climate
risk assessment interface,
enabling financial institutions to
estimate farmers’ climate risk
rating (depending on location,
crop type, and farming practices),
providing recommendations on
technologies to improve
productivity, and incorporating
flexibility so that institutions may
analyze rating change depending
on altered resilience practices or
adopted resilience technologies.
• Production, and subsequent
launch, of the software for the
online climate risk assessment
interface for use by financial
institutions
• Training documents, manuals,
and materials for users of the
online interface
•
15 training sessions (“training of
trainers”) for training leads of
CRDB staff and participating
institutions.
 |  | Activity 2.1.2: Develop training modules and “training of
trainers” to ensure that the online interface is properly be
properly managed and optimally incorporated into
institutions operations and decision-making. Training and
user manuals as well as the “training of trainers” will allow
for institutions to continuously use the online interface
and not be adversely impacted by personnel changes. | 
Activity 2.2:
Customer
capacity building
on adaptation
technologies and
business
development | Enhance the capacity of
end-users in Tanzania’s
agriculture value-chain,
particularly smallholder
farmers, small- and
medium-sized
enterprises, and other
agribusinesses to | Activity 2.2.1: Capacity building exercises and trainings
for farmers, end-users, and other key stakeholders
involved in the crop production value chain to enhance
ability to understand and plan in the face of climate
change and climate variability. | • Training documents, manuals,
and materia ls and knowledge
products on the impacts and
adverse effects of climate change
and climate variability
• Tailored Training documents,
manuals, and materials and
knowledge products on resilient
 |  | Activity 2.2.2: Capacity building exercises and trainings
for farmers, end-users, and other key stakeholders to | 

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 78
E
strengthen the sector’s integrate, operate, and maintain resilient and adaptation agriculture practices, adaptation
actors’ conceptualization, technologies within regular agribusiness and agriculture technologies, and best practices.
design, planning, and operations (including enhancing knowledge of investment • 20 trainings and workshops for
execution of adaptation potential in local agriculture technology sector). farmers, end-users, and key
technologies, farming stakeholders involved in the crop
practices, and new Activity 2.2.3: Business development support with new production value chain to
business ventures. and potential investors to enhance funding potential for enhance ability to understand
and plan in the face of climate
local adaptive agribusiness and agriculture technology
change and climate variability.
interventions.
• Investor seminar with new and
prospective agriculture investors
and local agriculture technology
firms
Activity 2.3: Support for the integration Activity 2.3.1: Capacity building exercises and trainings • Training documents, manuals,
Technical and fully embedded for CRDB Bank staff on integrating climate risk and materials and knowledge
assistance for climate risk assessments assessments within an extension service programme products for CRDB Bank staff on
the integration of within a CRDB Bank integrating climate risk
climate risk extension service assessments within an extension
assessments in service programme
programme.
extension Activity 2.3.2: Support for operationalizing the updated • 20 trainings and workshops for
service new extension service programme for both internal and CRDB Bank staff on integrating
programme external audiences (organizational support within CRDB climate risk assessments within
Bank, marketing and outreach to community leaders and an extension service programme
key stakeholders). • Marketing material for CRDB
Bank to promote the extension
service programme
Activity 2.4: Providing capacity Activity 2.4.1: Engagement and capacity building • Training documents, manuals,
Capacity building building, knowledge- exercises for CRDB Bank, its insurance affiliate, and and materials and knowledge
for the sharing, and associated other insurance companies, including targeted training products on best practices in
establishment of support to CRDB Bank, and workshops with key personnel and staff, on parametric insurance product
the new the Government of incorporating climate change risk and climate variability management and rollout
parametric Tanzania, industry within insurance products and insurance operations. • 2 trainings and workshops for
insurance CRDB Bank, its insurance
representatives,
programme community leaders and Activity 2.4.2: Engagement and capacity building affiliate, and other insurance
companies on climate risk and
associations, and end- exercises for CRDB Bank, its insurance affiliate, and
insurance products and designing
users on parametric other insurance companies, including targeted training
parametric insurance products
insurance products to and workshops with key personnel and staff, on best • 5 engagements with key
enhance farmers’ practices and tools to develop parametric insurance stakeholders and local
adaptation and long-term products for the agriculture sector, including support on representatives on incorporating
resilience. establishing insurance parameters, selecting target crops parametric insurance products
for protection, assessing current operations and capacity within agribusiness operations
levels, showcasing and highlighting best practices, and • 5 regulatory workshops for public
mapping opportunities to leverage existing partnerships and private stakeholders on
and existing institutional resources to maximize the strengthening insurance
programme’s success. regulatory framework
• Recommendation report on
Activity 2.4.3: Targeted trainings and expanded policy policies, regulations, and
and regulatory support for other relevant CRDB Bank outreach to enhance rollout of
personnel, Government of Tanzania regulatory officials parametric insurance products
and professionals, and key industry stakeholders to and programme within Tanzania
ensure that 1) Tanzania’s regulatory space is conducive
to the rollout and sustainability of parametric insurance, 2)
relevant stakeholders have the knowledge and capacity
to promote, oversee, and implement such a program, 3)
relevant bodies and agencies have the capacity to
appropriately integrate available data analytics into
product design for optimal impact, and 4) participating
institutions have the appropriate and adequate legal
framework and legal instruments in place to enable
parametric insurance products incorporation with lending
operations.
Activity 2.4.4: Extended capacity building, marketing, and
outreach to key community stakeholders and local
organizations to increase awareness of parametric
insurance products and to fill in any existing knowledge
gaps on integrating such financial mechanisms within
smallholder farmers’ and small- and medium-sized
agribusinesses’ existing financing frameworks and
operations.

--- Table 1 on Page 68 ---
 | strengthen the sector’s
actors’ conceptualization,
design, planning, and
execution of adaptation
technologies, farming
practices, and new
business ventures. | integrate, operate, and maintain resilient and adaptation
technologies within regular agribusiness and agriculture
operations (including enhancing knowledge of investment
potential in local agriculture technology sector). | agriculture practices, adaptation
technologies, and best practices.
• 20 trainings and workshops for
farmers, end-users, and key
stakeholders involved in the crop
production value chain to
enhance ability to understand
and plan in the face of climate
change and climate variability.
• Investor seminar with new and
prospective agriculture investors
and local agriculture technology
firms
 |  | Activity 2.2.3: Business development support with new
and potential investors to enhance funding potential for
local adaptive agribusiness and agriculture technology
interventions. | 
Activity 2.3:
Technical
assistance for
the integration of
climate risk
assessments in
extension
service
programme | Support for the integration
and fully embedded
climate risk assessments
within a CRDB Bank
extension service
programme. | Activity 2.3.1: Capacity building exercises and trainings
for CRDB Bank staff on integrating climate risk
assessments within an extension service programme | • Training documents, manuals,
and materials and knowledge
products for CRDB Bank staff on
integrating climate risk
assessments within an extension
service programme
• 20 trainings and workshops for
CRDB Bank staff on integrating
climate risk assessments within
an extension service programme
• Marketing material for CRDB
Bank to promote the extension
service programme
 |  | Activity 2.3.2: Support for operationalizing the updated
new extension service programme for both internal and
external audiences (organizational support within CRDB
Bank, marketing and outreach to community leaders and
key stakeholders). | 
Activity 2.4:
Capacity building
for the
establishment of
the new
parametric
insurance
programme | Providing capacity
building, knowledge-
sharing, and associated
support to CRDB Bank,
the Government of
Tanzania, industry
representatives,
community leaders and
associations, and end-
users on parametric
insurance products to
enhance farmers’
adaptation and long-term
resilience. | Activity 2.4.1: Engagement and capacity building
exercises for CRDB Bank, its insurance affiliate, and
other insurance companies, including targeted training
and workshops with key personnel and staff, on
incorporating climate change risk and climate variability
within insurance products and insurance operations. | • Training documents, manuals,
and materials and knowledge
products on best practices in
parametric insurance product
management and rollout
• 2 trainings and workshops for
CRDB Bank, its insurance
affiliate, and other insurance
companies on climate risk and
insurance products and designing
parametric insurance products
• 5 engagements with key
stakeholders and local
representatives on incorporating
parametric insurance products
within agribusiness operations
• 5 regulatory workshops for public
and private stakeholders on
strengthening insurance
regulatory framework
• Recommendation report on
policies, regulations, and
outreach to enhance rollout of
parametric insurance products
and programme within Tanzania
 |  | Activity 2.4.2: Engagement and capacity building
exercises for CRDB Bank, its insurance affiliate, and
other insurance companies, including targeted training
and workshops with key personnel and staff, on best
practices and tools to develop parametric insurance
products for the agriculture sector, including support on
establishing insurance parameters, selecting target crops
for protection, assessing current operations and capacity
levels, showcasing and highlighting best practices, and
mapping opportunities to leverage existing partnerships
and existing institutional resources to maximize the
programme’s success. | 
 |  | Activity 2.4.3: Targeted trainings and expanded policy
and regulatory support for other relevant CRDB Bank
personnel, Government of Tanzania regulatory officials
and professionals, and key industry stakeholders to
ensure that 1) Tanzania’s regulatory space is conducive
to the rollout and sustainability of parametric insurance, 2)
relevant stakeholders have the knowledge and capacity
to promote, oversee, and implement such a program, 3)
relevant bodies and agencies have the capacity to
appropriately integrate available data analytics into
product design for optimal impact, and 4) participating
institutions have the appropriate and adequate legal
framework and legal instruments in place to enable
parametric insurance products incorporation with lending
operations. | 
 |  | Activity 2.4.4: Extended capacity building, marketing, and
outreach to key community stakeholders and local
organizations to increase awareness of parametric
insurance products and to fill in any existing knowledge
gaps on integrating such financial mechanisms within
smallholder farmers’ and small- and medium-sized
agribusinesses’ existing financing frameworks and
operations. | 

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 78
E
Activity 2.4.5: Capacity building and training for financial
officers at CRDB Bank, its insurance affiliate, and other
insurance companies on managing and overseeing
parametric insurance products and properly extending an
ARA lending and parametric insurance product-bundling.
Activity 2.5: Supporting CRDB Bank Activity 2.5.1: Supporting researching, developing, • Training documents, manuals,
Dedicated legal and relevant Government drafting, and compiling legal documents to structure ARA and materials and knowledge
and financial TA of Tanzania agencies and lending and associated programming products on legal frameworks
including divisions with legal and and legal support for ARA lending
support for organizational capacity activities and implementing
sourcing parametric insurance
training to appropriately
programmes
conduct ARA outreach
• Facilitated workshops with key
and sourcing. Activity 2.5.2: Capacity building and technical training in
personnel and staffing from
conducting critical and advanced financial risk modeling
CRDB Bank and relevant
(both for lending operations as well as insurance related government agencies on legal
activities, such as pricing and forecasting) tools
• Targeted trainings with CRDB
Bank and associated financial
institutions on advanced financial
risk modeling and parametric
insurance considerations
• Production of legal framework to
facilitate ARA lending and
parametric insurance activities
Activity 2.6: Enhancing coordination Activity 2.6.1: Capacity building exercises with Tanzania’s • Targeted trainings with key
Support for the among Government of Division of Environment, Vice President’s Office (VPO) on personnel and staffing from the
implementation Tanzania national, leading the implementation of Tanzania’s National Division of Environment, VPO to
of Tanzania’s regional, and local Climate Change Strategy, including identifying priorities, enhance oversight and
National Climate divisions, ministries, and key public and private stakeholders, and organizing a implementation of Tanzania’s
Change Strategy National Climate Change
agencies, key financial multifaceted multisectoral engagement and
implementation Strategy
institutions, leading implementation approach.
• Facilitated workshops with key
industry actors, and key
stakeholders to support
public and private stakeholders to
advance planning and support for
the implementation of
Activity 2.6.2: Workshops and coordination exercises Tanzania’s National Climate
Tanzania’s recently
between Tanzania’s Division of Environment, VPO,
Change Strategy
adopted National Climate
national, regional, and local divisions, ministries, and
Change Strategy.
agencies, and private sector industry actors, and
community stakeholders on strategies to implement and
achieve the National Climate Change Strategy.
Activity 2.7: Developing and Activity 2.7.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between the • Training documents, manuals,
Policy implementing an AARDS Ministry of Agriculture, CRDB Bank, microfinance and materials and knowledge
interventions and (building upon Tanzania’s institutions MFIs, other local financial institutions, and products on enhancing
support for the existing ARDS and ARDS other relevant public agencies and divisions on mobilizing agriculture adaptation data
ministry of Web Portal) to enhance and enhancing private sector engagement for adaptation monitoring, collection, and
agriculture and dissemination for local, regional,
cross-governmental in the agriculture sector.
development of and national stakeholders
climate risk monitoring,
Agriculture assessment, and • Mapping opportunities for engagement • Trainings for personnel from
Adaptation management along with • Identifying policy and/or economic barriers LGAs and Ministry of Agriculture
Routine Data the policy interventions • Exploring regulatory changes to facilitate increased and regional- and local-level
System (AARDS) agencies on data collection and
and regulatory support to investment in adaptation and resilience dissemination practices, including
improve government Activity 2.7.2: Supporting local financial institutions and “training the trainers” at
capacity. local actors in Tanzania’s financial system to implement respective institutions and
policies and adapt operations to be in accordance with
ministries
the Paris Agreement statutes and regulations, providing • Trainings and capacity building
training, workshops, and knowledge products. exercises for key stakeholders on
mainstreaming climate risk
Activity 2.7.3: Coordinating dialogue and capacity assessment and management
development for key stakeholders (financial institutions, • Dialogues and workshops on
financial intermediaries, local leaders, agribusiness enhancing private sector
owners, smallholder farmers) on integrating climate investment and financial vested
assessment tools and technologies within agriculture interests in agriculture resilience
extension services. and adaptation.
• Operational manual for the
Activity 2.7.4: Support to the Ministry of Agriculture and AARDS to be followed by
regional- and local-level agencies on expanding the relevant government and private
ARDS programme to pilot an AARDS that will include partners
adaptation indicators, tracking capacity, indexing, and • Progress report on AARDS
filtering, including engagement with local stakeholders on launch and implementation

--- Table 1 on Page 69 ---
 |  | Activity 2.4.5: Capacity building and training for financial
officers at CRDB Bank, its insurance affiliate, and other
insurance companies on managing and overseeing
parametric insurance products and properly extending an
ARA lending and parametric insurance product-bundling. | 
Activity 2.5:
Dedicated legal
and financial TA
including
support for
sourcing | Supporting CRDB Bank
and relevant Government
of Tanzania agencies and
divisions with legal and
organizational capacity
training to appropriately
conduct ARA outreach
and sourcing. | Activity 2.5.1: Supporting researching, developing,
drafting, and compiling legal documents to structure ARA
lending and associated programming | • Training documents, manuals,
and materials and knowledge
products on legal frameworks
and legal support for ARA lending
activities and implementing
parametric insurance
programmes
• Facilitated workshops with key
personnel and staffing from
CRDB Bank and relevant
government agencies on legal
tools
• Targeted trainings with CRDB
Bank and associated financial
institutions on advanced financial
risk modeling and parametric
insurance considerations
• Production of legal framework to
facilitate ARA lending and
parametric insurance activities
 |  | Activity 2.5.2: Capacity building and technical training in
conducting critical and advanced financial risk modeling
(both for lending operations as well as insurance related
activities, such as pricing and forecasting) | 
Activity 2.6:
Support for the
implementation
of Tanzania’s
National Climate
Change Strategy
implementation | Enhancing coordination
among Government of
Tanzania national,
regional, and local
divisions, ministries, and
agencies, key financial
institutions, leading
industry actors, and key
stakeholders to support
the implementation of
Tanzania’s recently
adopted National Climate
Change Strategy. | Activity 2.6.1: Capacity building exercises with Tanzania’s
Division of Environment, Vice President’s Office (VPO) on
leading the implementation of Tanzania’s National
Climate Change Strategy, including identifying priorities,
key public and private stakeholders, and organizing a
multifaceted multisectoral engagement and
implementation approach. | • Targeted trainings with key
personnel and staffing from the
Division of Environment, VPO to
enhance oversight and
implementation of Tanzania’s
National Climate Change
Strategy
• Facilitated workshops with key
public and private stakeholders to
advance planning and support for
Tanzania’s National Climate
Change Strategy
 |  | Activity 2.6.2: Workshops and coordination exercises
between Tanzania’s Division of Environment, VPO,
national, regional, and local divisions, ministries, and
agencies, and private sector industry actors, and
community stakeholders on strategies to implement and
achieve the National Climate Change Strategy. | 
Activity 2.7:
Policy
interventions and
support for the
ministry of
agriculture and
development of
Agriculture
Adaptation
Routine Data
System (AARDS) | Developing and
implementing an AARDS
(building upon Tanzania’s
existing ARDS and ARDS
Web Portal) to enhance
cross-governmental
climate risk monitoring,
assessment, and
management along with
the policy interventions
and regulatory support to
improve government
capacity. | Activity 2.7.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between the
Ministry of Agriculture, CRDB Bank, microfinance
institutions MFIs, other local financial institutions, and
other relevant public agencies and divisions on mobilizing
and enhancing private sector engagement for adaptation
in the agriculture sector.
• Mapping opportunities for engagement
• Identifying policy and/or economic barriers
• Exploring regulatory changes to facilitate increased
investment in adaptation and resilience | • Training documents, manuals,
and materials and knowledge
products on enhancing
agriculture adaptation data
monitoring, collection, and
dissemination for local, regional,
and national stakeholders
• Trainings for personnel from
LGAs and Ministry of Agriculture
and regional- and local-level
agencies on data collection and
dissemination practices, including
“training the trainers” at
respective institutions and
ministries
• Trainings and capacity building
exercises for key stakeholders on
mainstreaming climate risk
assessment and management
• Dialogues and workshops on
enhancing private sector
investment and financial vested
interests in agriculture resilience
and adaptation.
• Operational manual for the
AARDS to be followed by
relevant government and private
partners
• Progress report on AARDS
launch and implementation
 |  | Activity 2.7.2: Supporting local financial institutions and
local actors in Tanzania’s financial system to implement
policies and adapt operations to be in accordance with
the Paris Agreement statutes and regulations, providing
training, workshops, and knowledge products. | 
 |  | Activity 2.7.3: Coordinating dialogue and capacity
development for key stakeholders (financial institutions,
financial intermediaries, local leaders, agribusiness
owners, smallholder farmers) on integrating climate
assessment tools and technologies within agriculture
extension services. | 
 |  | Activity 2.7.4: Support to the Ministry of Agriculture and
regional- and local-level agencies on expanding the
ARDS programme to pilot an AARDS that will include
adaptation indicators, tracking capacity, indexing, and
filtering, including engagement with local stakeholders on | 

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 78
E
project planning and monitoring and providing necessary • Recommendation report on tools
equipment upgrades. and mechanisms to mainstream
climate risk assessments and
Activity 2.7.5: Capacity building and training government considerations
agencies and personnel on institutionalizing the use of
the AARDS to maximize programmatic outputs and
operational efficiency as best practice, including
developing training manuals, “training the trainers,” and
other operational support.
Activity 2.7.6: Support for adaptation data collection at the
village/ward-level by agriculture extension service
officers, including with equipment upgrades, technical
support, and supervisory site visits.
Activity 2.7.7: Training and support for the submission of
appropriate and comprehensive data at the regional and
local level by villages and wards to Local Government
Authorities (LGAs).
Activity 2.7.8: Operationalizing the regular delivery
reporting from LGAs to national-level authorities delivered
on a monthly, quarterly, and annually to support
comprehensive data collection and analysis efforts.
Activity 2.8: Support to the Tanzania Activity 2.8.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between the • Training documents, manuals,
Support to the Meteorological Authority Tanzania Meteorological Authority, CRDB Bank, MFIs, and materials and knowledge
Tanzania to better integrate climate other local financial institutions, and key stakeholders in products on climate and weather
Meteorological information services for the agriculture value-chain on information gaps in monitoring services
Authority for agriculture and water agriculture and water resources monitoring and methods • Dialogues between the Tanzania
climate resources monitoring to establish best practices in information gathering and Meteorological Authority, CRDB
information Bank, and key stakeholders on
within its operations, dissemination.
services for information gaps, best practices
including the gathering,
agriculture and
analysis, and
in information gathering and
water resources dissemination, trainings on
dissemination of such
monitoring Activity 2.8.2: Support to the Tanzania Meteorological improving coordination between
information to relevant public and private actors.
Authority on informational gaps within the Authority’s
public and private • Technical trainings for staff and
current operations, identifying and addressing areas in
institutions and personnel from the Tanzania
which services could be better tailored towards
organizations and Meteorological Authority on
agriculture and water resources monitoring, developing
agriculture end-users improved monitoring methods
updated operational manuals and guiding frameworks.
(including smallholder and high-technology monitoring
farmers and farming equipment.
collectives) • Progress and recommendation
report on enhancing weather and
Activity 2.8.3: Technical training support to the Tanzania
climate information monitoring
Meteorological Authority on integrating upgraded
and sharing practices.
equipment to conduct modern and advanced agriculture
and water resources monitoring.
Activity 2.9: Provide support to the Activity 2.9.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between the • Training documents, manuals,
Support to the Tanzania Insurance Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority, CRDB Bank, and materials and knowledge
Tanzania Regulatory Authority on MFIs, other local financial institutions, and key products covering best practices
Insurance crop parametric/index stakeholders in the agriculture value-chain on private for parametric insurance
Regulatory insurance in Tanzania, sector engagement in parametric insurance products and oversight, regulatory frameworks,
Authority and policy guidance.
including capacity to critical actionable policy reforms needed to best facilitate
regarding
create a regulatory and the offering of such products.
parametric • Dialogues between the Tanzania
financial environment
insurance
conducive to developing a
Insurance Regulatory Authority,
CRDB Bank, and key
private index or
Activity 2.9.2: Coordinating ongoing dialogue and stakeholders on parametric
parametric insurance
facilitating the generation of knowledge products to insurance policies, frameworks
product. and regulations
support the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority and
• Technical trainings for staff and
local agencies monitor and oversee the parametric
personnel from the Tanzania
insurance market.
Insurance Regulatory Authority
on best practices in monitoring,
overseeing, and regulating
parametric insurance
Activity 2.9.3: Coordinating dialogue and capacity
• Regulatory and best practices
development for the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory
recommendation report
Authority, CRDB Bank, MFIs, other local financial
facilitating the introduction and
institutions, and relevant regional actors on best practices
uptake of parametric insurance

--- Table 1 on Page 70 ---
 |  | project planning and monitoring and providing necessary
equipment upgrades. | • Recommendation report on tools
and mechanisms to mainstream
climate risk assessments and
considerations
 |  | Activity 2.7.5: Capacity building and training government
agencies and personnel on institutionalizing the use of
the AARDS to maximize programmatic outputs and
operational efficiency as best practice, including
developing training manuals, “training the trainers,” and
other operational support. | 
 |  | Activity 2.7.6: Support for adaptation data collection at the
village/ward-level by agriculture extension service
officers, including with equipment upgrades, technical
support, and supervisory site visits. | 
 |  | Activity 2.7.7: Training and support for the submission of
appropriate and comprehensive data at the regional and
local level by villages and wards to Local Government
Authorities (LGAs). | 
 |  | Activity 2.7.8: Operationalizing the regular delivery
reporting from LGAs to national-level authorities delivered
on a monthly, quarterly, and annually to support
comprehensive data collection and analysis efforts. | 
Activity 2.8:
Support to the
Tanzania
Meteorological
Authority for
climate
information
services for
agriculture and
water resources
monitoring | Support to the Tanzania
Meteorological Authority
to better integrate climate
information services for
agriculture and water
resources monitoring
within its operations,
including the gathering,
analysis, and
dissemination of such
information to relevant
public and private
institutions and
organizations and
agriculture end-users
(including smallholder
farmers and farming
collectives) | Activity 2.8.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between the
Tanzania Meteorological Authority, CRDB Bank, MFIs,
other local financial institutions, and key stakeholders in
the agriculture value-chain on information gaps in
agriculture and water resources monitoring and methods
to establish best practices in information gathering and
dissemination. | • Training documents, manuals,
and materials and knowledge
products on climate and weather
monitoring services
• Dialogues between the Tanzania
Meteorological Authority, CRDB
Bank, and key stakeholders on
information gaps, best practices
in information gathering and
dissemination, trainings on
improving coordination between
public and private actors.
• Technical trainings for staff and
personnel from the Tanzania
Meteorological Authority on
improved monitoring methods
and high-technology monitoring
equipment.
• Progress and recommendation
report on enhancing weather and
climate information monitoring
and sharing practices.
 |  | Activity 2.8.2: Support to the Tanzania Meteorological
Authority on informational gaps within the Authority’s
current operations, identifying and addressing areas in
which services could be better tailored towards
agriculture and water resources monitoring, developing
updated operational manuals and guiding frameworks. | 
 |  | Activity 2.8.3: Technical training support to the Tanzania
Meteorological Authority on integrating upgraded
equipment to conduct modern and advanced agriculture
and water resources monitoring. | 
Activity 2.9:
Support to the
Tanzania
Insurance
Regulatory
Authority
regarding
parametric
insurance | Provide support to the
Tanzania Insurance
Regulatory Authority on
crop parametric/index
insurance in Tanzania,
including capacity to
create a regulatory and
financial environment
conducive to developing a
private index or
parametric insurance
product. | Activity 2.9.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between the
Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority, CRDB Bank,
MFIs, other local financial institutions, and key
stakeholders in the agriculture value-chain on private
sector engagement in parametric insurance products and
critical actionable policy reforms needed to best facilitate
the offering of such products. | • Training documents, manuals,
and materials and knowledge
products covering best practices
for parametric insurance
oversight, regulatory frameworks,
and policy guidance.
• Dialogues between the Tanzania
Insurance Regulatory Authority,
CRDB Bank, and key
stakeholders on parametric
insurance policies, frameworks
and regulations
• Technical trainings for staff and
personnel from the Tanzania
Insurance Regulatory Authority
on best practices in monitoring,
overseeing, and regulating
parametric insurance
• Regulatory and best practices
recommendation report
facilitating the introduction and
uptake of parametric insurance
 |  | Activity 2.9.2: Coordinating ongoing dialogue and
facilitating the generation of knowledge products to
support the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority and
local agencies monitor and oversee the parametric
insurance market. | 
 |  | Activity 2.9.3: Coordinating dialogue and capacity
development for the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory
Authority, CRDB Bank, MFIs, other local financial
institutions, and relevant regional actors on best practices | 

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 78
E
in the oversight, regulation, management, and products in the Tanzania
implementation of crop parametric insurance products. insurance market
Activity 2.10: Provide support for the Activity 2.10.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between • Training documents, manuals,
Support to the FSDT in the effective and FSDT, CRDB Bank, other local financial institutions, and and materials for FSDT on
Financial Sector sustainable integration of the Government of Tanzania on best practices for mainstreaming climate risk
Deepening Trust climate risks in the integrating climate risks into financing decision making. • Targeted trainings with FSDT on
(FSDT) for the organization’s agriculture operationalizing climate risk
integration of policies, investments Activity 2.10.1: Supporting FSDT operationalize climate considerations
climate risks into frameworks, and overall risk considerations throughout the organization, including • Facilitated workshops between
Tanzania’s financing operations. developing training manuals and guiding operation FSDT, CRDB Bank, other local
financial sector frameworks. financial institutions
• Progress report on best practices
for integrating climate risks into
financing decision making.
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
- Program-level monitoring, reporting, and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with CRDB Bank’s
internal evaluation policies and in accordance with the arrangement and policies agreed upon in Annex
11: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Plan.
- The primary responsibility for day-to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the TACATDP
Programme Manager. The TACATDP Programme Manager will develop annual and quarterly work plans
to ensure the efficient and optimal implementation of the Program, working in coordination with CRDB
Bank’s appropriate Managers and Executives. The TACATDP Programme Manager will inform CRDB
Bank’s management, the Vice President's Office as Tanzania's National Designated Authority (NDA), and
the appropriate GCF division on any delays or difficulties encountered during the Program’s launch and
implementation, including the implementation of the M&E plan. The TACATDP Programme Manager will
coordinate the aforementioned parties to ensure that appropriate support, interventions, and corrective
measures can be undertaken. The TACATDP Programme Manager will oversee all Programme staff
maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility, and accountability throughout the program’s
implementation, including with the monitoring, reporting, and evaluation of the Program’s results.
- CRDB Bank will support the TACATDP Programme Manager as needed, including with annual evaluation
and planning reviews. CRDB Bank has internal regulations and policies directing the entities’ operations
and behavior. In addition, CRDB Bank will coordinate with the NDA for any additional M&E, implementation
quality assurance, troubleshooting support, and oversight guidance as needed. The Program’s target
communities, beneficiaries, and participants, as well as key stakeholders such as the NDA will be involved
as much as possible in Program-level M&E.
- A project implementation report will be prepared for each year of programme implementation. The
TACATDP Programme Manager, CRDB Bank management, and the NDA, as appropriate, will provide
objective input to the annual GCF report. The TACATDP Programme Manager will ensure that the
indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually per the Monitoring and
Evaluation Plan included in Annex 11 well in advance of GCF reporting submission deadlines. Progress
against the gender action plan, stakeholder engagement, social and environmental safeguards updates,
challenges, and delays will also be monitored by the TACATDP Programme Manager and reported in the
annual GCF report.

--- Table 1 on Page 71 ---
 |  |  | in the oversight, regulation, management, and
implementation of crop parametric insurance products. | products in the Tanzania
insurance market | 
Activity 2.10:
Support to the
Financial Sector
Deepening Trust
(FSDT) for the
integration of
climate risks into
Tanzania’s
financial sector |  | Provide support for the
FSDT in the effective and
sustainable integration of
climate risks in the
organization’s agriculture
policies, investments
frameworks, and overall
financing operations. | Activity 2.10.1: Coordinating policy dialogue between
FSDT, CRDB Bank, other local financial institutions, and
the Government of Tanzania on best practices for
integrating climate risks into financing decision making. | • Training documents, manuals,
and materials for FSDT on
mainstreaming climate risk
• Targeted trainings with FSDT on
operationalizing climate risk
considerations
• Facilitated workshops between
FSDT, CRDB Bank, other local
financial institutions
• Progress report on best practices
for integrating climate risks into
financing decision making. | 
 |  |  | Activity 2.10.1: Supporting FSDT operationalize climate
risk considerations throughout the organization, including
developing training manuals and guiding operation
frameworks. |  | 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Program-level monitoring, reporting, and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with CRDB Bank’s |  |  |  | 
 | internal evaluation policies and in accordance with the arrangement and policies agreed upon in Annex |  |  |  | 
 | 11: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Plan. |  |  |  | 
 | - The primary responsibility for day-to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the TACATDP |  |  |  | 
 | Programme Manager. The TACATDP Programme Manager will develop annual and quarterly work plans |  |  |  | 
 | to ensure the efficient and optimal implementation of the Program, working in coordination with CRDB |  |  |  | 
 | Bank’s appropriate Managers and Executives. The TACATDP Programme Manager will inform CRDB |  |  |  | 
 | Bank’s management, the Vice President's Office as Tanzania's National Designated Authority (NDA), and |  |  |  | 
 | the appropriate GCF division on any delays or difficulties encountered during the Program’s launch and |  |  |  | 
 | implementation, including the implementation of the M&E plan. The TACATDP Programme Manager will |  |  |  | 
 | coordinate the aforementioned parties to ensure that appropriate support, interventions, and corrective |  |  |  | 
 | measures can be undertaken. The TACATDP Programme Manager will oversee all Programme staff |  |  |  | 
 | maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility, and accountability throughout the program’s |  |  |  | 
 | implementation, including with the monitoring, reporting, and evaluation of the Program’s results. |  |  |  | 
 | - CRDB Bank will support the TACATDP Programme Manager as needed, including with annual evaluation |  |  |  | 
 | and planning reviews. CRDB Bank has internal regulations and policies directing the entities’ operations |  |  |  | 
 | and behavior. In addition, CRDB Bank will coordinate with the NDA for any additional M&E, implementation |  |  |  | 
 | quality assurance, troubleshooting support, and oversight guidance as needed. The Program’s target |  |  |  | 
 | communities, beneficiaries, and participants, as well as key stakeholders such as the NDA will be involved |  |  |  | 
 | as much as possible in Program-level M&E. |  |  |  | 
 | - A project implementation report will be prepared for each year of programme implementation. The |  |  |  | 
 | TACATDP Programme Manager, CRDB Bank management, and the NDA, as appropriate, will provide |  |  |  | 
 | objective input to the annual GCF report. The TACATDP Programme Manager will ensure that the |  |  |  | 
 | indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually per the Monitoring and |  |  |  | 
 | Evaluation Plan included in Annex 11 well in advance of GCF reporting submission deadlines. Progress |  |  |  | 
 | against the gender action plan, stakeholder engagement, social and environmental safeguards updates, |  |  |  | 
 | challenges, and delays will also be monitored by the TACATDP Programme Manager and reported in the |  |  |  | 
 | annual GCF report. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 78
F
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing
(ML/TF), sanctions, prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from
being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as fraudulent, coercive,
collusive, and obstructive practices
Selected Risk Factor 1: Credit, liquidity and credit-worthiness risks
Category Probability Impact
Credit Medium Medium
Description
Credit risk: Credit risks are inherent to bank lending activities and are perceived to be higher for the
agriculture sector and the agricultural portfolio than other sectors and industries. Credit risk is associated
with the failure of the borrower to meet the obligations in accordance with agreed terms. It also relates to
the lower or non-existent credit profiles of many small agricultural firms and farmers, who then (in the
absence of a credit profile) may not be able to access credit. In the current context, elevated financing
and liquidity risks, coupled with economic risks from the coronavirus outbreak, weigh on the
creditworthiness of domestic institutions49.
Mitigation Measure(s)
In order to trigger market activities in the agricultural sector, this programme targets credit risks through
the deployment of blending, in particular through the guarantee credit-enhancement facility which aims at
de-risking banks’ lending. Furthermore, the provision of technical assistance to support the insurance
product will also serve to absorb some of the risk associated to loss of crops and subsequently loss of
income by farmers.
CRDB also has a robust credit risk management framework, which anticipates, monitors, and manages
potential risks to keep the business insulated at all times. In 2019, CRDB implemented a stringent Non-
Performing Loans (NPLs) containment strategy, which focused on streamlining loan origination,
modernizing credit processes, especially monitoring and collection. CRDB also invested in building the
capacity of teams to improve loan appraisal decisions to reduce default rates. Furthermore, in 2016,
CRDB Bank became the first bank in Tanzania to be rated among the top ten stable and safe to invest in
African banks by the global financial rating agency Moody's Investors Services. Moody's rated CRDB
Bank with a "B1 stable outlook", which is the highest rating acquired by a bank or financial institution in
sub-Saharan Africa.
Selected Risk Factor 2: Macro, micro and budgetary risks
Category Probability Impact
Credit Medium Medium
Description
Macroeconomic and budgetary risks: Tanzania has experienced strong growth in recent years, with
an average growth of 6.5% in the last decade, thanks to a high level of exports in natural resources,
developments in the tertiary sector, and the establishment of a liberalization programme (IMF). In 2019,
GDP growth reached 5.8%, driven by public investment in infrastructure and energy as well as by
household consumption. Tanzania continued to perform well economically against a background of
political stability in 2019. However, the impacts of COVID-19 caused GDP growth to drop to an expected
2.0% growth in 2020 (World Bank). At the micro-level, banks' credit portfolio may worsen on the back of
an expected rise in of non-performing loans amid a global recession due to COVID-19 and the
49 The Economist Intelligence Unit (2020). Tanzania: Overview.

--- Table 1 on Page 72 ---
 | RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  |  | 
 | F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  |  | 
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing
(ML/TF), sanctions, prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from
being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as fraudulent, coercive,
collusive, and obstructive practices |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 1: Credit, liquidity and credit-worthiness risks |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Credit |  | Medium | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Credit risk: Credit risks are inherent to bank lending activities and are perceived to be higher for the
agriculture sector and the agricultural portfolio than other sectors and industries. Credit risk is associated
with the failure of the borrower to meet the obligations in accordance with agreed terms. It also relates to
the lower or non-existent credit profiles of many small agricultural firms and farmers, who then (in the
absence of a credit profile) may not be able to access credit. In the current context, elevated financing
and liquidity risks, coupled with economic risks from the coronavirus outbreak, weigh on the
creditworthiness of domestic institutions49. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
In order to trigger market activities in the agricultural sector, this programme targets credit risks through
the deployment of blending, in particular through the guarantee credit-enhancement facility which aims at
de-risking banks’ lending. Furthermore, the provision of technical assistance to support the insurance
product will also serve to absorb some of the risk associated to loss of crops and subsequently loss of
income by farmers.
CRDB also has a robust credit risk management framework, which anticipates, monitors, and manages
potential risks to keep the business insulated at all times. In 2019, CRDB implemented a stringent Non-
Performing Loans (NPLs) containment strategy, which focused on streamlining loan origination,
modernizing credit processes, especially monitoring and collection. CRDB also invested in building the
capacity of teams to improve loan appraisal decisions to reduce default rates. Furthermore, in 2016,
CRDB Bank became the first bank in Tanzania to be rated among the top ten stable and safe to invest in
African banks by the global financial rating agency Moody's Investors Services. Moody's rated CRDB
Bank with a "B1 stable outlook", which is the highest rating acquired by a bank or financial institution in
sub-Saharan Africa. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2: Macro, micro and budgetary risks |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Credit |  | Medium | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Macroeconomic and budgetary risks: Tanzania has experienced strong growth in recent years, with
an average growth of 6.5% in the last decade, thanks to a high level of exports in natural resources,
developments in the tertiary sector, and the establishment of a liberalization programme (IMF). In 2019,
GDP growth reached 5.8%, driven by public investment in infrastructure and energy as well as by
household consumption. Tanzania continued to perform well economically against a background of
political stability in 2019. However, the impacts of COVID-19 caused GDP growth to drop to an expected
2.0% growth in 2020 (World Bank). At the micro-level, banks' credit portfolio may worsen on the back of
an expected rise in of non-performing loans amid a global recession due to COVID-19 and the |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 78
F
subsequent sharp domestic economic slowdown. The pandemic has put asset quality and bank capital
under pressure. Furthermore, the coronavirus pandemic has led to travel restrictions worldwide, with
negative implications for the Tanzanian tourism sector, aggravating an already wide current account
deficit.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The programme will continue to monitor the situation closely. The provision of concessional financing
alongside a guarantee, TA facility, and pilot insurance scheme will provide support for the end-
beneficiaries in an affordable manner, which should shield the implementation of the project from severe
impacts at the macro- and micro-levels. The budget proposal for the fiscal year 2021/22 presented by the
Ministry of Finance to the National Assembly includes a total of TZS 36.26 trillion (USD 15.6 billion) in the
financial year 2021/22, an increase of 4% from TZS 34.88 trillion (USD 15 billion) allocated in the 2020/21
budget.50
Selected Risk Factor 3 – Climate vulnerability risks
Category Probability Impact
Other Medium Low
Description
Climate-related and environmental risks: Tanzania is one of the countries that are most vulnerable to
climate change. The agriculture sector, and in particular the cropping system, is extremely sensitive to
climate change. Shocks related to weather and climate might affect farm productivity and thus the ability
of farmers to pay back loans, with national food production projected to decrease by 8-13% by 2050 due
to climate-related factors, leading to a value-loss of agricultural GDP over the coming five decades is
estimated at approximately USD 27 billion.
Mitigation Measure(s)
On the basis of the market studies and climate risks and vulnerability assessment (CRVA), this project
has the goal to integrate climate risk assessments and management into bank lending, including through
the use of state-of-the-art risks assessment tools for the identification of the optimum transformational
adaptation measures. These measures will directly deal with and mitigate the lack of available climate
risk and analysis data at the macro and micro level to support and direct climate investments, including
in the agricultural sector and in agricultural banking. Furthermore, the digitalization practices and the
provision of climate-resilient services for farmers and agribusinesses will enhance productivity and build
sustainability and resilience in the entire agricultural value chain.
Selected Risk Factor 4 - Procurement risks
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Low
Description
Procurement issues: Lack of compliance with procurement rules and / or limited capacity in
procurement by executing partners
Mitigation Measure(s)
All procurement for goods and services will be financed under the programme will be carried out in
accordance with CRDB Bank’s procurement policy and regulations. As required, and on a project-by-
project basis or component basis, CRDB Bank will support procurement processes and offer procurement
training for executing partners, as provided for in CRDB Bank’s AMA signed with the GCF.
Selected Risk Factor 5: Technical and technological risks
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Select
50 https://www.tanzaniainvest.com/economy/2021-2022-budget-proposal

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
subsequent sharp domestic economic slowdown. The pandemic has put asset quality and bank capital
under pressure. Furthermore, the coronavirus pandemic has led to travel restrictions worldwide, with
negative implications for the Tanzanian tourism sector, aggravating an already wide current account
deficit. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The programme will continue to monitor the situation closely. The provision of concessional financing
alongside a guarantee, TA facility, and pilot insurance scheme will provide support for the end-
beneficiaries in an affordable manner, which should shield the implementation of the project from severe
impacts at the macro- and micro-levels. The budget proposal for the fiscal year 2021/22 presented by the
Ministry of Finance to the National Assembly includes a total of TZS 36.26 trillion (USD 15.6 billion) in the
financial year 2021/22, an increase of 4% from TZS 34.88 trillion (USD 15 billion) allocated in the 2020/21
budget.50 |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 3 – Climate vulnerability risks |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Other | Medium | Low
Description |  | 
Climate-related and environmental risks: Tanzania is one of the countries that are most vulnerable to
climate change. The agriculture sector, and in particular the cropping system, is extremely sensitive to
climate change. Shocks related to weather and climate might affect farm productivity and thus the ability
of farmers to pay back loans, with national food production projected to decrease by 8-13% by 2050 due
to climate-related factors, leading to a value-loss of agricultural GDP over the coming five decades is
estimated at approximately USD 27 billion. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
On the basis of the market studies and climate risks and vulnerability assessment (CRVA), this project
has the goal to integrate climate risk assessments and management into bank lending, including through
the use of state-of-the-art risks assessment tools for the identification of the optimum transformational
adaptation measures. These measures will directly deal with and mitigate the lack of available climate
risk and analysis data at the macro and micro level to support and direct climate investments, including
in the agricultural sector and in agricultural banking. Furthermore, the digitalization practices and the
provision of climate-resilient services for farmers and agribusinesses will enhance productivity and build
sustainability and resilience in the entire agricultural value chain. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 4 - Procurement risks |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Low
Description |  | 
Procurement issues: Lack of compliance with procurement rules and / or limited capacity in
procurement by executing partners |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
All procurement for goods and services will be financed under the programme will be carried out in
accordance with CRDB Bank’s procurement policy and regulations. As required, and on a project-by-
project basis or component basis, CRDB Bank will support procurement processes and offer procurement
training for executing partners, as provided for in CRDB Bank’s AMA signed with the GCF. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 5: Technical and technological risks |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Select

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 78
F
Description
Some of the technologies needed to shift Tanzania’s agriculture towards climate resilience practices
require high up-front costs and are unaffordable for smallholder farmers and small agribusinesses.
Mitigation Measure(s)
A dedicated gap study on Technologies for Climate Adaptation Agriculture in Tanzania has been
conducted in preparation for this program. This included a comparative analysis between the technology
needs landscape. This outlines the barriers as well as the opportunities for technological advances in the
agricultural sector. The concessional loan component of this programme specifically targets this risk by
providing better conditions that can lower the overall costs of borrowing. In addition, some of the activities
in Component 2 directly tackle the issue of enhancing technological knowledge, e.g., through digitalization
and linking climate risk assessment to extension services. This will ensure that the target groups will
receive training and support, which, in turn, will support the long-term impacts of the measures.
Selected Risk Factor 6: Knowledge risks
Category Probability Impact
Other Low Medium
Description
Smallholder farmers may not have the capacity or the opportunity to access the relevant knowledge
(information, practices, social capital) that could support their taking-up of climate-smart practices.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The programme – through its TA in Component 2 – will provide the relevant Information for farmers, including
the integration of climate risk assessments in agricultural practices & technology prioritization; tools to
strengthening the capacity of agricultural research institutions to conduct basic and applied research; tools
and programs to strengthen knowledge, extension services and agricultural infrastructures to target climate
actions by farmers.
Selected Risk Factor 7: Risk of weak implementation from regulatory and supervisory bodies
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium Select
Description
Regulatory risk: Tanzania has (on paper) a well-structured regulatory environment and several key
improvements have been made in recent years to the overall regulatory and governance environment in
the country, particularly with important changes in some aspects of the regulatory framework in the
banking and in the insurance services sectors. Yet political interventions, weak capacity of management,
and corruption remain elements that can potentially hamper the fair and equitable implementation of
regulations, which could subsequently negatively impact and hamper the implementation of the
programme.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The programme is being developed and implemented in close cooperation with the National Designated
Authority, the Vice President's Office. Such close cooperation with authorities through the programme’s
design, planning, implementation, governance, reporting, and monitoring will allow for the programme to
work in close tandem with regulators and minimize and mitigate potential regulatory risks and barriers.
CRDB Bank Plc, as a leading Financial Services Provider in Tanzania, operates within the relatively highly
regulated sector in the country and is ultimately under the regulatory oversight and administration of the
Bank of Tanzania (BoT). The International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) has been adopted by
Tanzania and the BoT has incorporated the IFRS into its rules and regulations – as have other key and
relevant regulatory governance agencies and bodies such as the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory
Authority, the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange, and Capital Market and Securities Authority. CRDB Bank,

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
Description
Some of the technologies needed to shift Tanzania’s agriculture towards climate resilience practices
require high up-front costs and are unaffordable for smallholder farmers and small agribusinesses.
Mitigation Measure(s)
A dedicated gap study on Technologies for Climate Adaptation Agriculture in Tanzania has been
conducted in preparation for this program. This included a comparative analysis between the technology
needs landscape. This outlines the barriers as well as the opportunities for technological advances in the
agricultural sector. The concessional loan component of this programme specifically targets this risk by
providing better conditions that can lower the overall costs of borrowing. In addition, some of the activities
in Component 2 directly tackle the issue of enhancing technological knowledge, e.g., through digitalization
and linking climate risk assessment to extension services. This will ensure that the target groups will
receive training and support, which, in turn, will support the long-term impacts of the measures.

--- Table 2 on Page 74 ---
Selected Risk Factor 6: Knowledge risks |  |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability |  | Impact | 
Other |  | Low |  | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  |  | 
Smallholder farmers may not have the capacity or the opportunity to access the relevant knowledge
(information, practices, social capital) that could support their taking-up of climate-smart practices. |  |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  | 
The programme – through its TA in Component 2 – will provide the relevant Information for farmers, including
the integration of climate risk assessments in agricultural practices & technology prioritization; tools to
strengthening the capacity of agricultural research institutions to conduct basic and applied research; tools
and programs to strengthen knowledge, extension services and agricultural infrastructures to target climate
actions by farmers. |  |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 7: Risk of weak implementation from regulatory and supervisory bodies |  |  |  | 
 | Category | Probability | Impact |  | 
 | Governance | Medium | Select |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  | 
 | Regulatory risk: Tanzania has (on paper) a well-structured regulatory environment and several key
improvements have been made in recent years to the overall regulatory and governance environment in
the country, particularly with important changes in some aspects of the regulatory framework in the
banking and in the insurance services sectors. Yet political interventions, weak capacity of management,
and corruption remain elements that can potentially hamper the fair and equitable implementation of
regulations, which could subsequently negatively impact and hamper the implementation of the
programme. |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
 | The programme is being developed and implemented in close cooperation with the National Designated
Authority, the Vice President's Office. Such close cooperation with authorities through the programme’s
design, planning, implementation, governance, reporting, and monitoring will allow for the programme to
work in close tandem with regulators and minimize and mitigate potential regulatory risks and barriers.
CRDB Bank Plc, as a leading Financial Services Provider in Tanzania, operates within the relatively highly
regulated sector in the country and is ultimately under the regulatory oversight and administration of the
Bank of Tanzania (BoT). The International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) has been adopted by
Tanzania and the BoT has incorporated the IFRS into its rules and regulations – as have other key and
relevant regulatory governance agencies and bodies such as the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory
Authority, the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange, and Capital Market and Securities Authority. CRDB Bank, |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 78
F
BoT, and other key regulators’ adoption and compliance with IFRS standards (including IFRS 9, IFRS 7,
IFRS 10, and IFRS 17, among others) and practices mitigates potential corruption and inappropriate
interference into banking practices.
Liberalization of the banking sector was one of Tanzania’s major economic reforms during the early
1990’s, and in recent years BoT has made several regulatory changes to strengthen the banking sector,
including increasing periodic performance reviews of banks and introducing the Financial Consumer
Protection Regulations 2019 that were published in Government Notice No. 884 on 22 November 2019
for added disclosure and transparency, trainings and financial capacity; protection of consumers’ assets
and information, complaints handling and redress mechanisms, and enforcement of sanctions. BoT has
also emphasized the need for banks to take a more innovative approach and has encouraged innovative
and alternative financial products, similar the approach that this Programme takes.
In addition, the programme has been specifically designed to include extensive technical assistance (TA)
that will target and deal specifically with parts of the regulatory environment that have been identified as
high risk and that have hampered Tanzania’s agriculture development in target areas. Such regulatory
bodies intend to include the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority, Ministry of Agriculture, Division of
Environment, the Bank of Tanzania, The Business Registrations and Licensing Agency, Tanzania
Revenue Authority, and Tanzania Bureau of Standards, among others.
These mitigation measures and programme activities will not only contribute to the success of the
programme by mitigating the risk but will also enhance the capacity of these government agencies to
support the sustainable and transformative growth of Tanzania’s agriculture sector.
Selected Risk Factor 8: Risk associated to demand
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Low
Description
Demand risk: This risk refers to the possibility that interest from the market for climate resilient products
is smaller than estimated. Less demand could slow down the implementation of the program, and / or
achieve less impacts that forecast.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The program is undergoing additional market studies to further evidence the needs from the market.
Creating demand, increasing demand

--- Table 1 on Page 75 ---
Selected Risk Factor 8: Risk associated to demand |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Low
Description |  | 
Demand risk: This risk refers to the possibility that interest from the market for climate resilient products
is smaller than estimated. Less demand could slow down the implementation of the program, and / or
achieve less impacts that forecast. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The program is undergoing additional market studies to further evidence the needs from the market. |  | 

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 73 OF 78
G
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
At this stage of developing the TACATDP, with the exact location, size, and extent of the sub-projects are
unknown, it was deemed appropriate to prepare the ESMF to guide the implementation of the programme.
As the details of the sub-projects, sub-components, and sub-activities will be further finalized during the
programme implementation phase, the ESMF provides guidance on how environmental and social aspects
of the TACATDP shall be identified, assessed, and managed. The ESMF provides a framework to assist
CRDB Bank, programme partners, and other implementers in screening projects and proposals at the
planning stage and in incorporating measures to address adverse impacts. The ESMF was prepared in
accordance with applicable World Bank safeguard policies, the GCF Environmental and Social Policy, the
Tanzania Environmental Management Act, Cap 191, and Environmental Management (EIA and Audit)
(Amendment) Regulations, 2018. The process involved literature reviews, field visit studies, and public
consultations of relevant stakeholders, such as government officials at the Office of the Vice President
Division of Environment, Ministry of Agriculture, and the National Environment Management Council
(NEMC). Other stakeholders consulted are the Regional Administrative Secretaries for Dodoma, Manyara,
Mtwara, Njombe, Unguja West Urban, and South Pemba regions, as well as smallholder, medium-scale,
and large-scale farmers in the Dodoma, Manyara, Shinyanga, Mtwara, Njombe, Dar es Salaam, Unguja
West Urban, and South Pemba regions. The level of stakeholder engagement for this programme was
based on the extent of envisaged impacts (national, regional, local, area, or in-situ level), of which various
criteria were considered, such as ecological, social, and cumulative impacts. CRDB Bank is committed to
stakeholder engagement as an ongoing process and plans to continue its engagement efforts throughout
the programme's lifetime.
The TACATDP has been assigned Environmental Category B based on the provisions of the World Bank
Operational Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). Some of the negative impacts identified relate
to the management of construction work of storage for crops or water, installation of solar-based systems,
and production of bio and organic pesticides. Most of these impacts are of minor or low-intensity, site-
specific, and relatively straightforward to manage. Thus, no sub-project, sub-component, or sub-activity is
expected to fall under Category A according to the provided categorization. The general recommended
mitigation measures include effective waste management; best agricultural practice; best land and natural
resource management; proper farm management; good land use planning; sensitization and awareness;
and the proper handling and application of pesticides during the implementation of all programme
associated activities.
TACATDP is expected to have significant positive impact on Tanzania and the country’s most vulnerable
communities. These impacts include, but are not limited to, the improved capacity on adaptation to climate
change; improved soil health, reduced associated operation costs; lower GHG emissions; improved
availability and management of water resources; reduced post-harvest losses; higher agriculture production
yields and better-quality crops; reduced nutrient leaching; improved efficiency of inputs and outputs (in
terms of both quantity and quality); increased food production; raised incomes and livelihoods; and
improved quality of life. The key identified potential negative impacts include loss and disturbance of
biodiversity, negative impacts related to construction, contamination of soil and water resources, associated
public health hazards, the depletion of local water supplies, and soil erosion.
The ESMF will be implemented through the existing administrative and management structures at CRDB
Bank. The Sustainable Finance Unit (SFU) will be responsible for monitoring the environmental and social
screening process. The SFU will be strengthened through the provision of resources and training at
appropriate levels (i.e., national, regional, district, and branch) to build capacity for screening of sub-
projects. The screening process mechanism will enable CRDB Bank and programme beneficiaries to
simultaneously identify adverse impacts and address them by incorporating relevant mitigation measures
into sub-projects’ design before submission for review and subsequent approval. Identifying adverse
impacts will also help define the scope of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for
specific sub-projects if required. The screening exercise will guide the ESIA to determine if sub-project

--- Table 1 on Page 76 ---
 | GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS | 
 | G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) | 
At this stage of developing the TACATDP, with the exact location, size, and extent of the sub-projects are
unknown, it was deemed appropriate to prepare the ESMF to guide the implementation of the programme.
As the details of the sub-projects, sub-components, and sub-activities will be further finalized during the
programme implementation phase, the ESMF provides guidance on how environmental and social aspects
of the TACATDP shall be identified, assessed, and managed. The ESMF provides a framework to assist
CRDB Bank, programme partners, and other implementers in screening projects and proposals at the
planning stage and in incorporating measures to address adverse impacts. The ESMF was prepared in
accordance with applicable World Bank safeguard policies, the GCF Environmental and Social Policy, the
Tanzania Environmental Management Act, Cap 191, and Environmental Management (EIA and Audit)
(Amendment) Regulations, 2018. The process involved literature reviews, field visit studies, and public
consultations of relevant stakeholders, such as government officials at the Office of the Vice President
Division of Environment, Ministry of Agriculture, and the National Environment Management Council
(NEMC). Other stakeholders consulted are the Regional Administrative Secretaries for Dodoma, Manyara,
Mtwara, Njombe, Unguja West Urban, and South Pemba regions, as well as smallholder, medium-scale,
and large-scale farmers in the Dodoma, Manyara, Shinyanga, Mtwara, Njombe, Dar es Salaam, Unguja
West Urban, and South Pemba regions. The level of stakeholder engagement for this programme was
based on the extent of envisaged impacts (national, regional, local, area, or in-situ level), of which various
criteria were considered, such as ecological, social, and cumulative impacts. CRDB Bank is committed to
stakeholder engagement as an ongoing process and plans to continue its engagement efforts throughout
the programme's lifetime.
The TACATDP has been assigned Environmental Category B based on the provisions of the World Bank
Operational Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). Some of the negative impacts identified relate
to the management of construction work of storage for crops or water, installation of solar-based systems,
and production of bio and organic pesticides. Most of these impacts are of minor or low-intensity, site-
specific, and relatively straightforward to manage. Thus, no sub-project, sub-component, or sub-activity is
expected to fall under Category A according to the provided categorization. The general recommended
mitigation measures include effective waste management; best agricultural practice; best land and natural
resource management; proper farm management; good land use planning; sensitization and awareness;
and the proper handling and application of pesticides during the implementation of all programme
associated activities.
TACATDP is expected to have significant positive impact on Tanzania and the country’s most vulnerable
communities. These impacts include, but are not limited to, the improved capacity on adaptation to climate
change; improved soil health, reduced associated operation costs; lower GHG emissions; improved
availability and management of water resources; reduced post-harvest losses; higher agriculture production
yields and better-quality crops; reduced nutrient leaching; improved efficiency of inputs and outputs (in
terms of both quantity and quality); increased food production; raised incomes and livelihoods; and
improved quality of life. The key identified potential negative impacts include loss and disturbance of
biodiversity, negative impacts related to construction, contamination of soil and water resources, associated
public health hazards, the depletion of local water supplies, and soil erosion.
The ESMF will be implemented through the existing administrative and management structures at CRDB
Bank. The Sustainable Finance Unit (SFU) will be responsible for monitoring the environmental and social
screening process. The SFU will be strengthened through the provision of resources and training at
appropriate levels (i.e., national, regional, district, and branch) to build capacity for screening of sub-
projects. The screening process mechanism will enable CRDB Bank and programme beneficiaries to
simultaneously identify adverse impacts and address them by incorporating relevant mitigation measures
into sub-projects’ design before submission for review and subsequent approval. Identifying adverse
impacts will also help define the scope of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for
specific sub-projects if required. The screening exercise will guide the ESIA to determine if sub-project |  | 

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 74 OF 78
G
ativities will likely affect any community group described as indigenous people. In case there are indigenous
peoples in the selected project areas, the specific ESIA will address the concern in favor of the indigenous
people for programme sustainability to ensure their livelihood is considered, respected, and protected.
CRDB Bank shall identify the knowledge and skills necessary for implementing the ESMF and identify
training requirements for the relevant and appropriate personnel.
The ESMF provides the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), which will apply to all funded activities
under TACATDP. The GRM provides guidelines for managing and responding to various program-related
complaints received from affected individuals, organizations, and communities. The GRM will ensure that
grievances are recorded and considered fairly and appropriately.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
The Gender Analysis and Assessment for the Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Deployment Programme (TACATDP) provides a general framework to ensure the programme’s
implementation follows GCF Gender policy and all relevant gender policy frameworks in effect in Tanzania.
The “Gender institutional, legal and policy frameworks and programmes” provides an overview of the
institutional, legal and policy frameworks and programs for gender in Tanzania.
Tanzania has ratified both the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Agenda, among which SDG5
focuses on Gender Equality, and the long term 2063 Agenda promoting “full gender equality in all life-
spheres” among other goals. Tanzania has also ratified key international instruments driven toward the fight
for gender balancing and integration such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women (1979) and the Beijing Platform for Action (1995). Finally, the Lima Work Programme on
Gender (2014) provides general guidance on gender aspects at international level.
Specifically, on agriculture, the Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan (2014-19) provides recommendations of
key investment to strengthen knowledge and systems to target climate action through conducting a
comprehensive assessment on gender and climate change issues in the agriculture sector including:
- Climate change impacts on women and girls;
- Developing recommendations and guidelines for mainstreaming gender into Climate Change and
Adaptation related policies, strategies, programs, and budgets in respective areas of jurisdiction;
- Identifying best practices in Tanzania and other countries;
- Identifying gender-appropriate technologies for activities related to water management, climate-smart
agriculture, and postharvest processing and value addition;
- Capacity building and awareness on climate change for women farmers;
- Recommendations for increasing women’s access to financial and productive resources.
The Plan also recommends developing a gender and agriculture coordination mechanism between the
Ministry of Agriculture Food Security and Cooperatives’ gender desk, gender committee and Environment
Management Unit. The Environment Management Unit would work with the gender desk to mainstream
gender in Climate Change and Adaptation in each stage of project, program, policy cycles. The gender
committee would meet quarterly to evaluate progress for gender mainstreaming in Climate Change and
Adaptation related policies, strategies, programs and budgets.
Tanzania needs to align climate actions with the three main frameworks driving gender equality under the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Beijing Platform
for Action, and the Sustainable Development Goals -- each of which have already been ratified by the
Government of Tanzania.
An analysis of the gender-related barriers and challenges in Tanzania provides the core assessment and
analysis of gender aspects that should be considered in the implementation of the TACATDP. Women in

--- Table 1 on Page 77 ---
ativities will likely affect any community group described as indigenous people. In case there are indigenous
peoples in the selected project areas, the specific ESIA will address the concern in favor of the indigenous
people for programme sustainability to ensure their livelihood is considered, respected, and protected.
CRDB Bank shall identify the knowledge and skills necessary for implementing the ESMF and identify
training requirements for the relevant and appropriate personnel.
The ESMF provides the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), which will apply to all funded activities
under TACATDP. The GRM provides guidelines for managing and responding to various program-related
complaints received from affected individuals, organizations, and communities. The GRM will ensure that
grievances are recorded and considered fairly and appropriately. |  | 
 | G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
The Gender Analysis and Assessment for the Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Deployment Programme (TACATDP) provides a general framework to ensure the programme’s
implementation follows GCF Gender policy and all relevant gender policy frameworks in effect in Tanzania.
The “Gender institutional, legal and policy frameworks and programmes” provides an overview of the
institutional, legal and policy frameworks and programs for gender in Tanzania.
Tanzania has ratified both the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Agenda, among which SDG5
focuses on Gender Equality, and the long term 2063 Agenda promoting “full gender equality in all life-
spheres” among other goals. Tanzania has also ratified key international instruments driven toward the fight
for gender balancing and integration such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women (1979) and the Beijing Platform for Action (1995). Finally, the Lima Work Programme on
Gender (2014) provides general guidance on gender aspects at international level.
Specifically, on agriculture, the Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan (2014-19) provides recommendations of
key investment to strengthen knowledge and systems to target climate action through conducting a
comprehensive assessment on gender and climate change issues in the agriculture sector including:
- Climate change impacts on women and girls;
- Developing recommendations and guidelines for mainstreaming gender into Climate Change and
Adaptation related policies, strategies, programs, and budgets in respective areas of jurisdiction;
- Identifying best practices in Tanzania and other countries;
- Identifying gender-appropriate technologies for activities related to water management, climate-smart
agriculture, and postharvest processing and value addition;
- Capacity building and awareness on climate change for women farmers;
- Recommendations for increasing women’s access to financial and productive resources.
The Plan also recommends developing a gender and agriculture coordination mechanism between the
Ministry of Agriculture Food Security and Cooperatives’ gender desk, gender committee and Environment
Management Unit. The Environment Management Unit would work with the gender desk to mainstream
gender in Climate Change and Adaptation in each stage of project, program, policy cycles. The gender
committee would meet quarterly to evaluate progress for gender mainstreaming in Climate Change and
Adaptation related policies, strategies, programs and budgets.
Tanzania needs to align climate actions with the three main frameworks driving gender equality under the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Beijing Platform
for Action, and the Sustainable Development Goals -- each of which have already been ratified by the
Government of Tanzania.
An analysis of the gender-related barriers and challenges in Tanzania provides the core assessment and
analysis of gender aspects that should be considered in the implementation of the TACATDP. Women in |  | 

=== PAGE 78 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 75 OF 78
G
Tanzania suffer from inequalities in most of the aspects of their lives, especially regarding income generation,
years of schooling and access to employment. In climate, there are challenges related to women’s further
integration in climate change actions that include women’s poverty and inequalities in decision-making.
There is also a lack of a comprehensive database on women’s and men’s traditional knowledge and
mechanisms for addressing the impacts of environmental and climate change, limiting the integration of
traditional knowledge in climate change response. Specifically, in agriculture, women in Tanzania working
in the agriculture sector experience lower agricultural productivity (defined as the monetary value of output
per unit of land) and higher vulnerability than men for four main reasons: (i) land ownership barriers, (ii) labor
access unbalancing, (iii) technical and technological barriers, (iv) financial barriers.
The implementation of the TACATDP will learn from ongoing “Actions and projects to reduce gender
unbalance in Tanzania” and incorporate good practices from the actions and projects implemented,
ongoing, or in preparation to reduce the gender gap in Tanzania, including previous experience by CRDB.
CRDB Bank as an active stakeholder in the fight for gender equality. CRDB Bank is committed to fighting
gender inequalities and inequities in Tanzania. To that intent, it has developed its own Gender Policy, aligned
with Tanzania’s gender commitments. Moreover, the Bank implements deliberate initiative to advance
gender equality. For staff matters, the ratio of women is at 44% and men stands at 56%. CRDB has a plan
in place to continuously increase the number of women staffs, CRDB has a task force in place under the so
called "SHE INITIATIVE". This program aims at women empowerment, equal opportunity for all. Mentoring
women by sharing experience from various people who have dedicated outstanding performance in their
fields of work/expertise.
For customer women Access to Finance CRDB has established the CRDB Malkia (malkia is a Swahili word
meaning the Queen). This proposition aims at increasing the women inclusion through the existing Business
banking segments i.e., SME, MSE & Agribusiness in terms of loans. These existing segments have been
given special features like affordable interest rates compared to normal loans, minimal collateral
requirements with guarantees. CRDB works with other stakeholders to assist woman access markets by
paying some of the Exhibitions within and outside Tanzania for woman participation to facilitate access to
markets for their products. Below a summary of deliberate initiatives to empower women segment through
CRDB bank product and services offering;
1. CRDB normally offer loans at very affordable lending rates and minimum account opening balances
compared to all other loans categories with reduced collateral requirements
2. Capacity building - using own developed toolkit book women are trained in Business and financial
management
3. Exposed and offered practical training to best business practices and markets including better industrial
technologies locally and abroad to places like China canton fair, Italy, Uganda trade exhibitions, Malaysia,
Vietnam etc.
4. Established a mentorship center with Tanzania women apex Tanzania Women Chamber of Commerce.
Women are attached to women who are doing well in various avenues for knowledge transfer and also for
the new market connections
5. Bank has a women champion in every branch to serve women category and in all business, banking
needs to increase the number of women accessing finance avenues
6. Assist women to formalize their businesses through various legal and regulatory channels and also
training on how they can acquire collaterals that can be accepted across banks.
To ensure the TACATDP is implemented through a stronger gender lense, the gender action plan proposed
a framework to ensure implementation is gender sensitive programme by providing with a “Problem Tree
Analysis” developed for the “Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment
Programme” project in compliance with the Green Climate Fund’s requirements. The framework explains
which barriers and challenges, identified in section two, will be addressed by the project. It shows that gender
equality lies at the heart of this project, that will help remove barriers for women in agriculture.
As regards the adaptation credit (loan) deployment, the following outcomes will be generated for women:

=== PAGE 79 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 76 OF 78
G
• Further women’s economic integration and income generation by structuring the market and
providing support for food safety
• reducing women’s vulnerability and structuring their activity in larger plots.
• addressing the unequal access to technologies, techniques and financial solutions, leveling the field
between men and women.
This efforts will help achieve 50% of TACATDP resources accessed by woman by the end of the
programme (20 years), with a milestone of 30% to 35% midterm from a baseline of 15% using the share of
CRDB's credit to woman as of today as a proxy. For the technical assistance component, the TA will help
structure resilient and adaptation agriculture in Tanzania, reinforcing the sector and therefore providing
better business opportunities for both women and men. The TA will provide tools, training and support to
adopt climate resilient and adaptation methods, knowledge for which women are more in demand than
men, as seen in the barriers and challenges section.
CRDB will hire a gender expert through a competitive recruitment process to help achieve and ensure
proper reporting of all objectives stated above.
The full gender assessment and project-level gender action plan is provided as Annex 8.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Additional information on CRDB Bank’s procurement policy is available in CRDB Bank Plc Procurement
Policy and Procedures.
A detailed procurement plan is provided in Annex 10, and detailed information on the project’s financial
management, including the financial monitoring systems, financial accounting, auditing, and disbursement
structure and methods, is elaborated in section B.4.
All disbursements will be made in full compliance with standing CRDB Bank rules and regulations and in
accordance with GCF policies and CRDB Bank’s AMA with the organizations. For full transparency and in
line with best practices, grant resources will be kept in a separate account from the loan resources of the
programme, and CRDB Bank compliance officers will ensure such activity is carried out.
Auditing will be handled by a qualified, internationally recognized auditing firm, competitively selected by
CRDB Bank.
CRDB Bank has a Feedback & Complaints Handling Mechanism for customers to leave feedback and
complaints by telephone, email, or mail. These channels route to the Customer Experience Team at CRDB
Bank’s head office. Customers can also raise issues directly with bank staff/or relationship managers at
any CRDB branch. If customers are not satisfied after their initial conversation, they can escalate their
issues further as follows:
• Level 1: Takes 1-3 days and involves contacting the Call Centre team by phone or email.
• Level 2: Takes 4-10 days and involves emailing the Head of Customer Experience.
• Level 3: Takes 11-40 days and involves emailing the Director of Retail Banking or the Director of
Corporate Banking
CRDB Bank’s Board handles matters relating to internal corporate governance. There are more details
regarding these circumstances on pages 89-96 of CRDB Bank's 2019 Annual Report. In addition,
customers and employees can report corruption and other issues through an independent third-party
platform via phone and email, or they can fill out an anonymous form on CRDB Bank’s website.
CRDB has robust Know Your Customer (KYC) processes and Anti-Money Laundering (AML) policies and
guidelines that provide a solid capability to detect and deter irregular activities within the operations. In
January 2019, CRDB adopted the new International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) 16 on Leases.

--- Table 1 on Page 79 ---
• Further women’s economic integration and income generation by structuring the market and
providing support for food safety
• reducing women’s vulnerability and structuring their activity in larger plots.
• addressing the unequal access to technologies, techniques and financial solutions, leveling the field
between men and women.
This efforts will help achieve 50% of TACATDP resources accessed by woman by the end of the
programme (20 years), with a milestone of 30% to 35% midterm from a baseline of 15% using the share of
CRDB's credit to woman as of today as a proxy. For the technical assistance component, the TA will help
structure resilient and adaptation agriculture in Tanzania, reinforcing the sector and therefore providing
better business opportunities for both women and men. The TA will provide tools, training and support to
adopt climate resilient and adaptation methods, knowledge for which women are more in demand than
men, as seen in the barriers and challenges section.
CRDB will hire a gender expert through a competitive recruitment process to help achieve and ensure
proper reporting of all objectives stated above.
The full gender assessment and project-level gender action plan is provided as Annex 8. |  | 
 | G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | Additional information on CRDB Bank’s procurement policy is available in CRDB Bank Plc Procurement | 
 | Policy and Procedures. | 
 |  | 
 | A detailed procurement plan is provided in Annex 10, and detailed information on the project’s financial | 
 | management, including the financial monitoring systems, financial accounting, auditing, and disbursement | 
 | structure and methods, is elaborated in section B.4. | 
 |  | 
 | All disbursements will be made in full compliance with standing CRDB Bank rules and regulations and in | 
 | accordance with GCF policies and CRDB Bank’s AMA with the organizations. For full transparency and in | 
 | line with best practices, grant resources will be kept in a separate account from the loan resources of the | 
 | programme, and CRDB Bank compliance officers will ensure such activity is carried out. | 
 |  | 
 | Auditing will be handled by a qualified, internationally recognized auditing firm, competitively selected by | 
 | CRDB Bank. | 
 |  | 
 | CRDB Bank has a Feedback & Complaints Handling Mechanism for customers to leave feedback and | 
 | complaints by telephone, email, or mail. These channels route to the Customer Experience Team at CRDB | 
 | Bank’s head office. Customers can also raise issues directly with bank staff/or relationship managers at | 
 | any CRDB branch. If customers are not satisfied after their initial conversation, they can escalate their | 
 | issues further as follows: | 
 |  | 
 | • Level 1: Takes 1-3 days and involves contacting the Call Centre team by phone or email. | 
 | • Level 2: Takes 4-10 days and involves emailing the Head of Customer Experience. | 
 | • Level 3: Takes 11-40 days and involves emailing the Director of Retail Banking or the Director of | 
 | Corporate Banking | 
 |  | 
 | CRDB Bank’s Board handles matters relating to internal corporate governance. There are more details | 
 | regarding these circumstances on pages 89-96 of CRDB Bank's 2019 Annual Report. In addition, | 
 | customers and employees can report corruption and other issues through an independent third-party | 
 | platform via phone and email, or they can fill out an anonymous form on CRDB Bank’s website. | 
 |  | 
 | CRDB has robust Know Your Customer (KYC) processes and Anti-Money Laundering (AML) policies and | 
 | guidelines that provide a solid capability to detect and deter irregular activities within the operations. In | 
 | January 2019, CRDB adopted the new International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) 16 on Leases. | 

=== PAGE 80 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 77 OF 78
G
The changes introduced by CRDB comply with the new Central Bank regulation regarding Anti-Money
Laundering (AML) and Counter Financing of Terrorism (CFT). CRDB also has a risk management
framework to manage compliance risks such as current or prospective risk from earnings and capital
arising from violations or non-compliance with laws, rules, regulations, agreements, prescribed practices,
or ethical standards, as well as from the possibility of incorrect interpretation of effective laws or
regulations.
Furthermore, CRDB and individuals at CRDB are not subject to UN Security Council Sanctions.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and
programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in
confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the
document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.
No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be
☐
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
☒
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential
information.

--- Table 1 on Page 80 ---
 | The changes introduced by CRDB comply with the new Central Bank regulation regarding Anti-Money | 
 | Laundering (AML) and Counter Financing of Terrorism (CFT). CRDB also has a risk management | 
 | framework to manage compliance risks such as current or prospective risk from earnings and capital | 
 | arising from violations or non-compliance with laws, rules, regulations, agreements, prescribed practices, | 
 | or ethical standards, as well as from the possibility of incorrect interpretation of effective laws or | 
 | regulations. | 
 |  | 
 | Furthermore, CRDB and individuals at CRDB are not subject to UN Security Council Sanctions. | 
 |  | 
 | G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal | 
 | Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure | 
 | for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and | 
 | programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, | 
 | subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in | 
 | confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the | 
 | document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm. | 
 |  | 
 | Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. | 
 |  | 
 | No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be | 
 | ☐
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | ☒
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited | 
 | entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 |   full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with | 
 | an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the | 
 | accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and | 
 |   redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential | 
 | information. | 

=== PAGE 81 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 78 OF 78
H
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☒
Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
☒
Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☒
Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☒
Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☒
Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
☒
(ESS disclosure form provided)
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☐
Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
☐
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)
Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☒
Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided)
☒
Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☒
Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☒
Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☒
Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☒
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
☒
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☐
Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☐
Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐
Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
☐
project
Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
☐
financed by the entity
Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☐
Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)
☐
Annex x Other references
☐
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.

--- Table 1 on Page 81 ---
 | ANNEXES |  |  | 
H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  |  | 
 |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☒ |  | Annex 3 | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☒
☒ |  | Annex 6 | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☐
Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
☐
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) | 
☒ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
 |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☒
☒ |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  |  | 
 |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☐
☐ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☐ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project | 
☐ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity | 
☐ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment | 
☐ |  | Annex 21 | Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) | 
☐ |  | Annex x | Other references | 

=== PAGE 82 ===
Page 79

=== PAGE 83 ===
Page 80

=== PAGE 84 ===
Page 81
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Project or programme title
Deployment Programme (TACATDP)
Existence of subproject(s) to
be identified after GCF Board Yes
approval
Sector (public or private) Private
Accredited entity CRDB Bank Plc (CRDB)
Environmental and social
Category I-2
safeguards (ESS) category
Location – specific
location(s) of project or
United Republic of Tanzania
target country or location(s)
of programme
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on
N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
Other link(s) N/A
Remarks N/A
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on
N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
Other link(s) N/A
Remarks N/A
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on
Monday, June 7, 2021
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English and Swahili
Explanation on language English and Swahili are the official languages of Tanzania.
English:
https://crdbbank.co.tz/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/ENVIRONMENTAL-AND-
SOCIAL-MANAGEMENT-FRAMEWORK-FOR-
AGRICULTURE-CLIMATE-ADAPATION.pdf
Link to disclosure
Swahili:
https://crdbbank.co.tz/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/ESMF-MUHTASARI-WA-
KINA.pdf
Other link(s) https://crdbbank.co.tz/sustainability/
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
Remarks
2 programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social

--- Table 1 on Page 84 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  | 
Project or programme title |  |  | Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Deployment Programme (TACATDP) | 
 | Existence of subproject(s) to |  | Yes | 
 | be identified after GCF Board |  |  | 
 | approval |  |  | 
 | Sector (public or private) |  | Private | 
 | Accredited entity |  | CRDB Bank Plc (CRDB) | 
 | Environmental and social |  | Category I-2 | 
 | safeguards (ESS) category |  |  | 
 | Location – specific |  | United Republic of Tanzania | 
 | location(s) of project or |  |  | 
 | target country or location(s) |  |  | 
 | of programme |  |  | 
 | Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Other link(s) |  | N/A | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
 | Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Other link(s) |  | N/A | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
 | Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | Monday, June 7, 2021 | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | English and Swahili | 
 | Explanation on language |  | English and Swahili are the official languages of Tanzania. | 
Link to disclosure |  |  | English:
https://crdbbank.co.tz/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/ENVIRONMENTAL-AND-
SOCIAL-MANAGEMENT-FRAMEWORK-FOR-
AGRICULTURE-CLIMATE-ADAPATION.pdf
Swahili:
https://crdbbank.co.tz/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/ESMF-MUHTASARI-WA-
KINA.pdf | 
 | Other link(s) |  | https://crdbbank.co.tz/sustainability/ | 
Remarks |  |  | An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
2 programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social | 

=== PAGE 85 ===
Page 82
Management Framework” for Tanzania Agriculture Climate
Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme
(TACATDP).
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF), Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)
Description of
Resettlment Policy Framework (RPF) /Monday, June 7,
report/disclosure on
2021
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English and Swahili
Explanation on language English and Swahili are the official languages of Tanzania.
English:
https://crdbbank.co.tz/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/RESETTLEMENT-POLICY-
FRAMEWORK-FOR-AGRICULTURE-CLIMATE-
Link to disclosure ADAPTATION.pdf
Swahili:
https://crdbbank.co.tz/wp-
c ontent/uploads/2021/06/RPF-MUHTASARI-RASMI.pdf
Other link(s) https://crdbbank.co.tz/sustainability/
Links to the “Resettlement Policy Framework” for the
Remarks
Programme.
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
Date Monday, June 7, 2021
Hard copies of the disclosure were made available at CRDB
headquarters and branches throughout Tanzania.
Headquarters located at:
Azikiwe Street, CRDB Bank Headquarters, 3rd Floor
Place Dar es Salaam
United Republic of Tanzania
Branches located at:
https://crdbbank.co.tz/locator-for-atm-branch-wakala-
and-merchant/
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
Date of accredited entity’s
Friday, October 29, 2021
Board meeting
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, October 4, 2021
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.
________

--- Table 1 on Page 85 ---
 |  |  | Management Framework” for Tanzania Agriculture Climate
Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme
(TACATDP). | 
 | Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Environmental and Social Management Framework |  |  | 
 | (ESMF), Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), |  |  | 
 | Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Description of |  | Resettlment Policy Framework (RPF) /Monday, June 7,
2021 | 
 | report/disclosure on |  |  | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | English and Swahili | 
 | Explanation on language |  | English and Swahili are the official languages of Tanzania. | 
Link to disclosure |  |  | English:
https://crdbbank.co.tz/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/RESETTLEMENT-POLICY-
FRAMEWORK-FOR-AGRICULTURE-CLIMATE-
ADAPTATION.pdf
Swahili:
https://crdbbank.co.tz/wp-
c ontent/uploads/2021/06/RPF-MUHTASARI-RASMI.pdf | 
 | Other link(s) |  | https://crdbbank.co.tz/sustainability/ | 
Remarks |  |  | Links to the “Resettlement Policy Framework” for the
Programme. | 
 | Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
 | Date |  | Monday, June 7, 2021 | 
Place |  |  | Hard copies of the disclosure were made available at CRDB
headquarters and branches throughout Tanzania.
Headquarters located at:
Azikiwe Street, CRDB Bank Headquarters, 3rd Floor
Dar es Salaam
United Republic of Tanzania
Branches located at:
https://crdbbank.co.tz/locator-for-atm-branch-wakala-
and-merchant/ | 
 | Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered |  |  | 
 | Date of accredited entity’s |  | Friday, October 29, 2021 | 
 | Board meeting |  |  | 
 | Date of GCF’s Board meeting |  | Monday, October 4, 2021 | 

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 83
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP179
Proposal name: Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Programme (TACATDP)
Accredited entity: CRDB Bank Plc
Project/programme size: Medium
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
Scale: Medium
1 .1 Impact potential
1.
Country background: Agriculture forms the backbone of the economy of the United
Republic of Tanzania. It accounts for 27 per cent of the country’s gross domestic product (GDP)
1
and 67 per cent of jobs. Small-scale farmers still dominate the sector. Crop production is mainly
divided into cash and food crops. The priority crops, which are those that contribute to food
sovereignty and security objectives as per the Government of Tanzania, are cassava, potatoes,
bananas, pulses, wheat, rice, millet, sorghum and maize. Strategic crops, which are mainly for
export, are coffee, cotton, cashews, sisal, pyrethrum, tea, cloves, horticultural crops, oil seeds,
spices, sugar and flowers. On average, crop production contributes 71 per cent of agricultural
2
GDP and is growing at a rate of 4.6 per cent per annum. Food crop production increases at
about 2.8 per cent per annum, accounting for approximately 65 per cent of agricultural GDP,
while cash crops account for about 10 per cent. Food and cash crops account for about 70 per
cent of rural incomes. Considering these economic indicators, the sector is expected to continue
to play a central role for decades in the country’s socioeconomic development, particularly in
3
rural areas. However, this sector is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, climate
va riability and extreme weather events.
2.
Erratic rainfall patterns, drought, shifting weather patterns and increased disease
incidence will continue to threaten the sector’s productivity, and these have already caused a
decline in agricultural productivity. Relatively low growth has been observed since 2000, when
4
the GDP share dropped from 29 per cent in 2000 to 23 per cent in 2012. The World Bank has
attributed this poor agricultural productivity to climate-related risks that cause at least “USD
5
200 million in annual losses due to weather-related risks”. In 2019, an estimated 17 per cent of
the economic growth of the United Republic of Tanzania may have been lost. Based on the
climate change and economic modelling, potential agriculture losses due to climate change will
5.
impact national food production, leading to a “projected decrease by 8–13 per cent by 2050”
“The value-loss of agricultural GDP over the coming five decades is estimated at approximately
5
U SD 27 billion.”
3.
With agriculture playing an integral role in the lives of the country’s most marginalized
and vulnerable populations – where 80 to 90 per cent of agricultural land is held by smallholder
farmers and 98 per cent of economically active rural Tanzanian women are engaged in farming –
1
World Bank (2020). World Development Indicators.
2
United Republic of Tanzania (2019). Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase II.
3
Funding proposal, section B.1
4
United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
5
World Bank Group (2015). Tanzania: Agricultural Sector Risk Assessment.

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 84
the adverse effects of climate change will disproportionately harm these groups and hamper the
6
co untry’s sustainable development.
4.
Brief description of the programme: The proposed TACATDP seeks to transform the
Tanzanian agriculture sector via a climate-resilient and sustainable development pathway. It
plans to do this by enhancing the capacity of the agricultural finance sector to provide
innovative financial products and services that will de-risk agricultural finance transactions in
7
climate-smart agriculture (CSA). This will be accompanied by a technical assistance (TA)
component to develop climate parametric insurance, enhance capacity-building and
policymaking initiatives to transform the agriculture sector as well as de-risk the farmer and
entrepreneurial activities along the agri-production and post-production business value chain
(B VC).
5.
The components of the TACATDP are:
(a)
Project Component 1 focuses on the establishment of a set of financial facilities for
credit, guarantees and parametric insurance. This facility, which focuses on financing CSA
initiatives, is branded as the Agriculture Resilience & Adaptation Credit Facility (ARA Credit
Facility) and is managed under CRDB. The proposed ARA Credit Facility will be available to (i)
smallholder farm operators; (ii) agriculture marketing and cooperative societies (AMCOS)/; (iii)
medium-sized farm operators/agricultural micro, small and medium-sized enterprises
(MSMEs)/agroprocessors; and (iv) large farm operators (corporates). The Agriculture
Resilience & Adaptation Guarantee Facility (ARA Guarantee Facility), however, will primarily
cater to farmers and/or MSMEs to enable each meet the CRDB credit requirements. The ARA
parametric insurance will be made available to the most vulnerable customer farmers and
MS MEs as the case may be; and
(b)
Project Component 2 focuses on the provision of TA. It will provide capacity-building for
the CRDB, government regulatory agencies (e.g. agricultural, insurance, finance), various actors
(e.g. financial institutions (FIs), microfinance institutions (MFIs), centres of excellence) and the
targeted project beneficiaries (i.e. farmers, entrepreneurs, MSMEs, corporates) under Activities
1.3 and 2.1 to 2.5. Policy making initiatives will also be included under Activities 2.6 to 2.10. The
pr oposed activities under Component 2 are as follows:
(i)
Activity 2.1 – Develop an online interface for CRDB and other interested FIs covering
climate change modelling and climate change variability, including climate-crop
modelling and associated climate risks; this mainly targets the CRDB personnel;
(ii)
Activity 2.2 – Customer capacity-building on adaptation technologies and business
development; this mainly targets the stakeholder farmers, entrepreneurs, MSMEs and
corporates;
(iii)
Activity 2.3 – Support for integrating and fully embedding climate risk assessments
within a CRDB Bank extension service programme; this mainly targets the CRDB
personnel;
(iv)
Activity 2.4 – Capacity-building for the establishment of the new weather index
insurance programme; this mainly targets the insurance stakeholders and CRDB
personnel;
(v)
Activity 2.5 – Support for CRDB Bank and relevant government agencies and divisions,
including legal and organizational capacity training to conduct agriculture resilience and
adaptation outreach and sourcing; this mainly targets CRDB and relevant government
personnel;
6
United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
7
CSA - Climate-Smart Agriculture.

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 85
(vi)
Activity 2.6 – Support for the implementation of the United Republic of Tanzania’s
National Climate Change Strategy; this mainly targets the Tanzanian Division of
Environment, Vice President’s Office, national, regional and local divisions, ministries,
agencies, private sector industry actors and community stakeholders;
(vii)
Activity 2.7 – Policy interventions and support for the Ministry of Agriculture and the
development of the Agriculture Adaptation Data System; this mainly targets the Ministry
of Agriculture, CRDB, MFIs, FIs, the Government of Tanzania (including local government
authorities) and key stakeholders in agriculture;
(viii)
Activity 2.8 – Support to the Tanzania Meteorological Authority for climate information
services for agriculture and water resources monitoring; this mainly targets the
Tanzania Meteorological Authority, CRDB, MFIs, FIs and key stakeholders in the
agriculture B
–
VC working on information gaps in agriculture and water resources;
(ix)
Activity 2.9 Support to the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority regarding
weather index insurance; this mainly targets the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory
Authority, CRDB, MFIs, FIs and relevant key stakeholders in the agriculture BVC working
on the private sector;
(x)
Activity 2.10 - Support to the Financial Sector Deepening Trust for the integration of
climate risks into the United Republic of Tanzania’s financial sector; this mainly targets
Financial Sector Deepening Trust, local FIs, CRDB and relevant government
staAkedhaopltdaetriso;n impacts
1.1.1
6.
The TACATDP has 1,241,288 direct beneficiaries (1.2 per cent of the total population)
8
and an additional 4,903,056 indirect beneficiaries (4.67 per cent of the total population) over
the life of the 20 year project. Of these beneficiaries, 98.61 per cent are smallholder farmers
totalling 1,224,000, followed by medium-scale farmers (at 1.28 per cent, equal to 15,912
beneficiaries), then small and medium-sized entrepreneurs along the agricultural processing
chain (at 0.06 per cent, equal to 706 beneficiaries), service providers and asset financiers (0.04
per cent, equal to 538 beneficiaries) and large corporates (at 0.01 per cent, for 132
beneficiaries). Over the 20 year period, an annual average of 61,200 smallholder farmers will
have access to one-year loans; 796 medium-holder farmers will have access to two-year loans;
62 SMEs will have access to five-year loans; and 7 large corporates will have access to 10-year
loans. The one-year loans (having an average size of USD 1,750/farmer borrower for
smallholder farmers) and two-year loans (average of USD 20,000/medium-sized farmer) will be
made available to finance working capital and asset financing needs in support of CSA practices
and technology needs. Similarly, entrepreneurs along the agricultural BVC will have access to
five-year loans (average of USD 62,599 per agri-processor and USD 120,000 per service
provider and asset financier), and corporates will have access to ten-year loans (averaging USD
1.2 million). The provision of climate finance resources to implement CSA practices and/or
technology needs of these targeted stakeholders along the agricultural BVC enhances their
resilien ce. STahtei spfoatcetnotriya lc alidmapattaet iroant iiomnpaalcet. i s clear.
1.1.2
7.
“Climate variability and change are the most prominent drivers of agricultural
production. For instance, El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) explains up to 35 per cent of the
global variation on wheat, oil seed and coarse grain (Ferris, 1999). In their modelling study over
Tanzania, Rowhani et al. (2011 ) found that a 13 per cent decrease in maize production is
8
Funding proposal, Annex 24 – TACATDP Beneficiaries.

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 86
o
associated with a 2 C increase of seasonal mean temperature by 2050. Shemsanga et al. (2010)
noted that the current climate variability and occurrence of extreme weather and climate events
have affected beyond agriculture and brought major economic costs in Tanzania. This highlights
the need to understand the current and future climate hazards and risks in order to make
9
in formed future plans and decisions.”
8.
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) finds the climate rationale satisfactory.
Past climatological trend analyses are done using CHIRPS (Climate Hazards Group InfraRed
Precipitation) data, which incorporates station-specific rainfall data and therefore provides
ro bust local datasets for rainfall analyses.
9.
Monthly station-specific datasets from the Tanzania Meteorological Agency have been
employed for the validation of the projection model, and this is in addition to data from Climate
Research Unit (CRU), which provides a computer-assisted reanalysis dataset that is presented in
globally distributed geo-referenced grids. The validation process thereby takes into
consideration the validation of CRU datasets for their applicability in the United Republic of
Ta nzania, which makes the model intercomparison even more robust.
10.
Both the trend and projection analyses using model outputs capture seasonality and
spatial distributions as well as variability of rainfall and temperature. There is now evidence
that temperature is increasing and will continue to increase in the United Republic of Tanzania;
most especially, the rate of change will be higher in the mountainous region and in the north-
eastern parts of the country. The analyses also reveal that rainfall is changing, with a steady
decline of dry season rainfall in the target region. A combination of increasing surface
temperature and decrease in dry seasonal rainfall is expected to aggravate the occurrence of
droughts in the target region. Local agriculture must prepare well to address growing drought,
as top soil moisture loss is likely to increase significantly, leading to much aggravated droughts
in the near future. This has been particularly observed by analysing both Standardized
Precipitation Index (SPI) and Standardized Precipitation Evaporation Index (SPEI) data that are
derived from changing rainfall and temperature data at monthly scales over the target region. A
gradual decline in SPEI values beyond –1 clearly indicates that droughts will worsen in the near
future and it warrants immediate response measures to sustain agricultural production in the
tar get areas.
11.
TACATDP enables the private sector to invest in development, an activity often reserved
for non-profit development banks. The TACATDP de-risks both the financial transaction and the
target agriculture market looking to transition from traditional business-as-usual (BAU) to a
CSA ( and low-carbon) pathway of doing business. Furthermore, through a combination of
financial products (credit plus guarantee and/or insurance) and lower cost of finance from co-
blending with GCF concessional funds, the TACATDP also targets the enhanced resilience of the
climate-vulnerable farmers and MSME stakeholders in the climate-sensitive agriculture sector
via financial inclusion; the provision of access to finance and climate finance risk management
10
tools is a climate-resilience measure and therefore contributes to the adaptation impact
po tential.
12.
The funding proposal (annex 3) has presented a set of Technology Needs and Practices
Assessment, from which it identified and selected priority CSA initiatives that are eligible for
TACATDP financing support under ARA interventions. The 10 CSA (hereinafter labelled as ARA)
int erventions are as follows:
(a)
Rainwater harvesting and storage structures (RWHSS); pertaining to efficient nature-
based and artificial run-off reduction and drainage measures;
9
Funding proposal, Annex 22: Climate Impact Assessment.
10
Alliance for Financial Inclusion. 2019. Sharm El Sheikh Accord on Financial Inclusion, Climate Change & Green
Finance. Accessed on August 2021.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 87
(b)
Adapted crops (AC); these would include advanced modern undercover solutions
ad apted to specific crops and the local climate as well as crop shifting;
(c)
Compost manure (CM); CM would cover other proven ecosystem-based adaptation
(Eb A) solutions selected through defined quality standard criteria;
(d)
Zero-till technology (ZTT); ZTT and SP would cover other modern agriculture
ad aptation-based solutions applicable in the local context;
(e)
Inter-cropping (IC); IC would cover the modern agriculture adaptation-based solutions
ap plicable in the local context;
(f)
Drip/trickle irrigation (DI); DI would cover improved, precision irrigation systems;
(g)
Renewable energy solar pumps (RE/SP);
(h)
Land restoration/plantations (demi-lunes/agroforestry management); Demi-lunes
would cover micro harvesting-based methods (i.e. Zai, half-moon techniques) and nature-based
sh ading (agroforestry);
(i)
Storage facilities (SF); SF would pertain to metal silos and storage facilities for crop
pr otection; and
(j)
A system of rice intensification (SRI); SRI would focus on crop management
tec hnologies.
13.
The funding proposal has not indicated whether these identified CSA practices and
technology needs have already been carried out in the target project areas by the target farmer
beneficiaries and agricultural BVC stakeholders. Nonetheless, the adoption of new or
continuation of CSA best practices and technology applications are adaptation measures and will
always conRtriisbku ttoe taod aagprtiactuilotunr iem repsaiclite nce.
1.1.3
14.
Baseline assessment: The Market Study and Stakeholder Consultation Report provided a
limited baseline assessment. Missing in these assessments are the baseline conditions of the
target farmers’ prevailing situations (e.g. specific climate impacts or challenges affecting their
livelihoods or BVC; breakdown of the types of activities carried out by the smallholder farmers;
their needs and challenges relating to agricultural finance and aspirations (be they simple or
ambitious); identified climate adaptation and mitigation measures in response to specific
thr eats; and lessons learned from the failures and successes of these climate initiatives).
15.
Proxy baseline: The CRDB, however, offers a proxy to what a BAU or baseline situation is
based on its long track record and agricultural lending facilities; it has a 45 to 50 per cent
market share in the whole of the United Republic of Tanzania. This private sector perspective
offers another view of what the farmers’, MSMEs’ and corporates’ needs and challenges are with
regard to ensuring a sustainable agricultural livelihood. Mindful of the fact that CRDB customers
represent the creditworthy segment of the climate vulnerable farmers and MSMEs, existing
studies and anecdotal evidence from the CRDB Bank staff provide useful indicative baseline
conditions on the agricultural sector priorities, agri-finance needs, losses and damages due to
crops (which could impact debt servicing), and issues and challenges facing the agricultural BVC
fro m production, processing and markets.
16.
Adaptation impact potential based on the submitted documents is Medium.
Scale: Medium
1.2 Paradigm shift potential

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 88
17.
As a caveat relating to the assessment of the paradigm shift, TAP finds that the paradigm
shift is dependent on the full baseline assessment and market study of the agriculture sector, the
agri-finance subsector, the targeted vulnerable farmers and entrepreneurs, and the timely
delivery of the complete package of credit, guarantee and insurance products and services of
TA CATDP.
18.
The timely availability of the full array of ARA financial products and services as well as
how these are strategically packaged for farmer and MSME loans for CSA practices and
technology needs or sustainable climate-resilient (or low-carbon) agri-businesses will
determine the feasibility of a paradigm shift for farmers, MSMEs and the agriculture sector. As
per the funding proposal, the final design and details will still be determined pending the result
of the market study on the insurance. Not having this insurance facility will impact the finance
accessibility and affordability of most vulnerable farmers and MSMEs as they or their projects
wi ll not be creditworthy or bankable.
19.
Paradigm shift potential for the targeted stakeholders (i.e. farmers, entrepreneurs and
MSMEs) is Medium.The combination of the potential access to the ARA finance products and
services along with the TA on CSA practices and technology applications will at least enhance
their absorptive, adaptive or even transformative capacities along the agricultural BVC. As to the
degree of paradigm shift, the accredited entity (AE) needs to have a complete understanding of
the full baseline of the farmers and MSMEs in the targeted agro-ecological areas of the
TA CATDP.
20.
First of all, the bottom-up approach to determining the baseline conditions of the
farmers, entrepreneurs and MSMEs in the agricultural BVC is limited and mainly viewed from
the lenses of the private sector stakeholders engaged in the agri-finance. The current
assessment lacks specific localized issues, challenges and needs, which are perennially impacted
by climate change and variability and extreme weather events, and now further exacerbated by
the COVID-19 pandemic. A general description of what the farmers do and intend to do once
they receive the loans can be gleaned from the environmental and social management
11
framework (ESMF) document (Annex 6 ), but these are not elaborated for each of the targeted
areas. In general, farmers say that they will “continue with current farming activities such as
growing paddy, beans, avocado, tea, cloves, maize etc. on the same area and will use the loan for
improving irrigation infrastructures such as the installation of drip irrigation systems,
construction of elevated water storage tanks, drilling boreholes as well as expanding their
activities by acquiring additional land in the neighbourhood”. Essentially, they plan to maintain
their existing location, not expand, and continue their current BAU activities. Information such
as this is therefore needed in improving the design of the proposed TACATDP interventions to
en sure a paradigm shift.
21.
Similarly, a baseline assessment of the agriculture finance industry in each of the agro-
12
ecological zones is not available; only national or general assessments from the literature
13
reviews, from the perspective of the CRDB , and partners of the TACATDP project have been
presented. The funding proposal has not adequately presented the existing agriculture finance
systems from both the formal and informal sources in these target areas. The details in terms of
available agri-financial products and services (e.g. traditional, Islamic, private, formal and
informal); eligible financing purposes; interest rates; tenors; manner of payment of debt;
collateral and valuation of collateral; processes; fees and costs and other conditions; financing
gaps; needs; and challenges.
11
Funding proposal, Annex 7, Appendix 10, para. 2.
12
Funding proposal, Annex 2, citing Technical Workshop on Needs-Based Climate Finance for East Africa 19-20
February 2020 Zanzibar, United Republic of Tanzania.
13
Funding proposal, Annex 2.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 89
22.
However, as ARA finance products and services will be the first of their kind in the
finance sector in the United Republic of Tanzania, the success of TACATDP will depend on the
ability of CRBD to demonstrate the de-risking of the lending transactions in the agriculture
sector and the de-risking of the climate-sensitive agricultural activities, crops, BVCs and
markets. This success can trigger the replication of the CRDB climate operationalization best
practices under the TACATDP by other third party FIs as led by FSDT. This could lead to the
creation of new climate-linked financial products and services (similar to ARA) that could
strategically address the climate change risks and opportunities (e.g. carbon markets,
greenhouse gas mitigation), not just in the agricultural BVC but also in other allied industries
and sectors (e.g. manufacturing, transport, energy). The development and introduction of
parametric insurance or climate insurance also would jumpstart the initiatives on tailoring
various climate risk mitigation schemes to manage the risks to other food or strategic export
crops. The ARA Guarantee Facility, while also a contributory factor to the paradigm shift, should
14
be fully explored further during and at the end of the programme; going without it stymies the
three-pronged approach of the ARA suite of services at the end of the programme. Overall, the
pa radigm shift for the agri-financial sector is clear and rated high.
23.
The paradigm shift for the government is Medium. The success of TACATDP also
depends on the effective provision of TA on the targeted mainstreaming of climate in the
operations and decision-making process of the participating government agencies and divisions:
Ministry of Agriculture, the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority and the Tanzania
Meteorological Authority. This approach will enhance the capacity of each of the government
15
organizations to operationalize CSA plans and strategies, a process which has been stymied by
government budgetary and development funding constraints. The paradigm shift potential for
the government is in its ability to improve the policy and regulatory environment based on
actual bottom-up approaches with the private sector and agricultural stakeholders working on
the transformation of the agricultural BVC.
24.
The paradigm shift for the agriculture sector is Medium. Overall ,this paradigm shift will
clearly occur based on the efficiency and effectiveness of each of the above interventions
focusing on (i) the behavioural change of the farmers moving from traditional or BAU farming to
CSA; (ii) the provision of ARA finance and services to support CSA practices and technology
needs alongside capacity-building on climate and the use of climate information services for
crop production and investment decision-making; and (iii) government policy and regulatory
interventions along the agricultural BVC based on the bottom-up collaborative experience with
the pri vateR seepctloicra. bility for knowledge dissemination and behavioural change
1.2.1
25.
The project activities under Activities 1.3 (parametric insurance) and 2.1 (on the
establishment of an online interface and training support for the CRDB climate risks assessment
too l) are highly replicable amongst the FIs.
26.
The activities under Activity 2.2 (Customer capacity-building on adaptation technologies
and business development) will trigger the behavioral change to shift to CSA practices and use
climate -frieRnisdkly t toe cphanroaldoiggym in s ahgifrti culture.
1.2.2
14
AE response to TAP questions.
15
Tanzania’s National Climate Change Strategy, Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014-2019, Development Vision
2025, Agricultural Environmental Action Plan (2011–2017), Five-Year Development Plan, Agriculture Sector
Development Program and Tanzania Agriculture and Food Security Investment Plan (TAFSIP).

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 90
27.
The risk to achieving the paradigm shift relates to the degree of shift that will occur.
could be from increasing absortpive capacities, or enhancement of adaptive to transformative
capacities. This is due to the limited baseline data and information on the targeted stakeholders,
crops, critical resources, built infrastructures and investments (agriculture financing sector,
MSME BVC) in agriculture crop production and BVC; there is a need to ascertain the baseline
level of farming and lending activities in the project areas, for example, to be able to compare
the farming and lending shift due to the TACATDP interventions. While the AE has uniquely
presented a credible sampling of the baseline market given its 45 to 50 per cent agriculture
market share, the AE, as it moves forward, still needs to present updated and expanded
evidence-based information on the market, and stakeholder consultation amongst farmers.
These would validate the market needs as they relate to (i) the terms and conditions of the
proposed financial products and serivces relating to credit, guarantees and parametric
insurance; (ii) the choice of CSA crops, inputs, technologies and practices; (iii) the
documentation requirements needed in processing loans, insurance and payouts between
farmers and CRDB or other FIs; and (iv) how the COVID-19 pandemic will exacerbate the
cli mate impact on the present and future sustainability of the agriculture BVC.
28.
In view of the above discussions and balancing the overall impact potential and risks,
TAP finds that the paradigm shift potential is Medium on the basis of the available information.
Scale: High
1. 3 Sustainable development potential
29.
Sustainable development finance and financial inclusion: TACATDP offers an innovative
set of financial products and services which directly address climate-related risks, issues on
financial availability, affordability, and accessibility, and financial exclusion. TACATDP is also a
financial inclusion mechanism that targets poor vulnerable farmers and entrepreneurs along the
climate-sensitive agricultural BVC which have no or minimal banking experience. Thus, the
programme aims to protect them from the risk of onerous lending schemes or predatory loans
fro m informal sources.
16
30.
Economic co-benefits: TACATDP is a facility that will help jumpstart the grassroots
agriculture-based economy. The timely provision of the ARA facilities is expected to infuse
much-needed finance amongst the agriculture stakeholders that are suffering from the impacts
of climate change, which are now exacerbated by the economic lockdown due to COVID-19
containment measures. The ARA facilities’ array of flexible financing structures will help address
the funding needs for farmers’ CSA practices and technologies to improve yields and boost crop
sales; the indicative affordable or competitive rates will help offset the high cost of operations
(farm inputs, logistics); the flexible payment terms to match the farmers’ trading cycles will
en able them to ensure food on the table and stable livelihoods.
31.
Gender mainstreaming: The funding proposal has included a Gender Action Plan (GAP).
The GAP seeks to mainstream gender in the TACATDP from project design to implementation. A
minimum target of 40 to 50 per cent of the TACATDP beneficiaries are women. The GAP will
include the accessibility of the ARA facilities to women farmers or women-owned MSMEs (under
Component 1) and the participation of women in the TA capacity-building activities, workshops,
17
tra ining and consultations under Component 2.
32.
Environmental co-benefits: The funding proposal has included a safeguards package in
the preparation of the TACATDP and is in environment and social safeguards (ESS) Category B.
Among the frameworks prepared are the ESMF and the resettlement policy framework (RPF).
16
See FP Section D.3. Sustainable Development.
17
FP Annex 8: Gender Action Plan.

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 91
33.
The ESMF has flagged eight crops that have potential risks on the environment and
society. These crops include cashew, cocoa, coffee, cotton, maize, sesame seed, sugar cane and
wheat. The funding proposal needs to safeguard against the following risks: child labour (for
coffee), terrestial biodiversity (for cashews, maize, sesame seed, sugar cane, wheat), freshwater
biodiversity (for cocoa, coffee, maize, sugar cane) and protected or conservation areas (for
18
cotton, maize, sesame seeds, sugar cane). The ESMF contains an ESS report. As per the ESS
report, “The ESMF provides guidance on how environmental and social aspects of TACATDP
shall be identified, assessed and managed. It provides a framework to assist CRDB in screening
subprojects at the planning stage and institute measures to address adverse impacts. According
to the GCF Environmental and Social Policy requirement, the TACATDP has been assigned
Environmental Category B and CRDB will not fund any subproject which will fall under category
19
A o r which will cause involuntary resettlement.”
34.
The RPF is made available “to screen all subprojects for their potential land acquisition
impacts and provide all the necessary procedures to follow in mitigating and minimizing
20
involuntary resettlement associated with the proposed TACATDP.” It is assumed that the
“subprojects under the proposed TACATDP will be taking place on already owned farms, plots
or pieces of land and areas reserved for agriculture with no or little need of resettlement with
less significant for economic activities displacement.” However, in case the TACATDP
subprojects involve the “acquisition of land required for construction work of storage for crops
or water, installation of solar based systems, production of bio and organic pesticides or for
ex pansion of irrigation canals, the RPF is ready”.
35.
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): The TACATDP can be linked to other SDGs.
21
Among these are: No Poverty (SDG 1), Zero Hunger (SDG 2), Gender Equality (SDG 5),
Affordable and Clean Energy (SDG 7), Decent Work and Economic Growth (SDG 8), Industry,
Innovatio. n and Infrastructure (SDG 9), Reduced Inequalities (SDG 10), Responsible
Consumption and Production (SDG 12), Life on Land (SDG 15) and Partnerships for the Goals
(SD G 17)
36.
Risk to sustainable development: The failure to monitor numerous smallholder farmer
act ivities may lead to environmental degradation or maladaptation.
37.
Overall, the sustainable development potential of the project is High.
Scale: Medium
1. 4 Needs of the recipient
38.
Needs of the country: As stated in the intended nationally determined contribution
(INDC) of the United Republic of Tanzania, the country needs to improve agriculture via
“increasing yields through inter alia climate-resilient agriculture”; “protecting smallholder
farmers against climate-related shocks including through crop insurance”; and “strengthening
22
knowledge, extension services and agricultural infrastructure to target climate action”.
However, the lack of a government budget means that it is not possible to fully implement these
plans and strategies (e.g. National Climate Change Strategy, Agriculture Climate Resilience
23
Plans). The TACATDP specifically addresses these issues, especially crop insurance and
increasing crop yields under Components 1 and 2, among others. TACATDP Components 1 and 2
addresses these.
18
FP Annex 6: ESMF – Appendix 8 - ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT REPORT FOR TANZANIA
COMMODITIES.
19
FP Annex 6: ESS Disclosure Report.
20
FP Annex 6: RPF.
21
Funding proposal, Annex 8: Gender.
22
Funding proposal, Section D.5: Country Ownership.
23
Funding proposal, Annex 7: CRDB Final Stakeholder Engagement Survey Report.

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 92
39.
Needs of the farmers, entrepreneurs and corporates: As per the funding proposal, the
farmers and corporates commonly need access to financial products to acquire technologies that
will increase their climate-adaptive and climate-resilient capacities. Corporates need financial
products to increase the competitiveness of farming businesses. Smallholder farmers, on the
other hand, need loans (which have flexible repayment schedules or grace periods, acceptable
collateral schemes, need for guarantors, or interest-free types for Muslims) that will help them
finance crop production (e.g. paddy, cloves, maize, avocado, tea and other crops) to meet market
demand. Farmers also need financing that supports small-scale rice processing mills and
improves irrigation infrastructures (e.g. drip irrigation systems, elevated water storage tanks,
boreholes) as these will help improve the yields, quality, and salability of their crops in the
24
ma rket. The TACATDP ARA suite of facilities address these needs under Component 1.
40.
Market needs from the CRDB perspective: Having a 45 to 50 per cent market share of the
agriculture finance sector, CRDB has an average portfolio of USD 219 million per year, and its
total portfolio increased 13 per cent during the period 2017 to 2020; this increase in agriculture
loan value shows a stable 0.61 per cent growth. Within the agriculture portfolio itself, one can
infer interesting changes that show an emerging trend; the percentage change of the loan
portfolio beginning in 2017 and ending in 2020 shows that corporate loans declined by 7.08 per
cent; SME loans increased by 67.47 per cent, and microfinance loans leapt by 4565.01 per cent.
Analysing the loans, the top crops (86 per cent of the loan portfolio) are tobacco, sugar, cotton,
coffee, hemp, avocado, cashew and rice. According to CRBD, it does see and project an increase
in demand from small farm holders and small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) loan growth
in the future. TACATDP addresses the financing needs of this market segment.
41.
Needs of the financing sector: The financing sector needs a system by which to de-risk
lending transactions with the farmers and entrepreneurs and de-risk the agricultural activities
their clients/borrowers participate in; the FI decision-makers need to understand how the
climate impacts the production, post-production and markets and what policy or regulatory
interventions are needed to address these. TACATDP squarely addresses these under
Co mponents 1 and 2.
42.
Considering the above, the TAP rates the needs of the recipient as Medium.
Scale: Medium
1. 5 Country ownership
43.
Alignment with national climate strategy and policies: The project is aligned with the
25 26
Tanzanian INDC (2015), which stresses the importance of adaptation and resilience in the
sectors of agriculture, water resources and livestock. Among the strategies for agriculture that
TACATDP will support are increasing yields through, inter alia, climate-resilient agriculture;
protecting smallholder farmers against climate-related shocks, including through crop
insurance; strengthening the capacity of agriculture research institutions to conduct basic and
applied research; strengthening knowledge, extension services and agricultural infrastructure to
target climate action; and upscaling the level of improvement of agricultural land and water
27
management. Other relevant laws, plans and strategies include the National Climate Change
28 29 30
Strategy, Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan 2014–2019, Development Vision 2025,
24
Funding proposal, Annex 7: CRDB Final Stakeholder Engagement Survey Report.
25
United Republic of Tanzania (2016). Tanzania: Intended Nationally Determined Contributions.
26
See Table B.1 of the funding proposal.
27
Funding proposal, Section D.5.
28
United Republic of Tanzania (2012). National Climate Change Strategy.
29
United Republic of Tanzania (2014). Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan, 2014–2019.
30
United Republic of Tanzania (1999). Tanzania Development Vision 2025.

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 93
31 32
Agricultural Environmental Action Plan (2011–2017), Five-Year Development Plan,
33
Agriculture Sector Develop
3
m
4
ent Program and Tanzania Agriculture and Food Security
Inv estment Plan (TAFSIP).
44.
Strong ownership and support amongst programme partners: Led by the CRDB, the
TACATDP has a very good set of partners that have expressed support for and commitment to
the programme; these partners have very close working relationships with and aspirations for
CR BD.
45.
CRDB is a credible private sector partner for GCF. As per the funding propsal market
study in Annex 2, it presently has 20 per cent of its portfolio lent to the agriculture sector, which
is equivalent to a 45 to 50 per cent market share of agriculture lending in the United Republic of
Tanzania. CRDB is currently the largest commercial bank since its inception in 1947 as the Land
Bank of Tanganyika. It was subsequently restructured into Tanzania Rural Development Bank,
35
and then CRDB. CRDB has a good track record in lending to the agriculture sector. As of
December 2020, 12.77 per cent of CRDB’s total loans come from agriculture loans and amount to
TZS 528,400,494,602.00; within the agriculture portfolio, corporate loans amount to 83.45 per
cent, SMEs loans amount to 16.05 per cent, and microfinance loans amount to 0.50 per cent. For
the period 2017 to 2020, the four-year average loan exposure in agriculture is at TZS
470,105,281,867; an average of 86.41 per cent comes from the corporate accounts, 13.35 per
cen t from SMEs, and 0.24 per cent from microfinance loans.
46.
CRDB is partnering with the National Insurance Corporation (NIC). NIC is a government-
owned insurance company in the United Republic of Tanzania, which has experience in piloting
parametric insurance schemes in the agriculture sector. CRDB is in the process of extending the
existing memorandum of understanding (MOU) with NIC covering traditional insurance to cover
pa rametric insurance as well.
47.
CRDB will use a guarantee from GCF in its loan portfolio and may also seek to involve
different guarantors such as Private Agriculture Sector Support (PASS), Tanzania Agriculture
Development Bank (TADB) and African Guarantee Fund (AGF), which also have significant
36
su ppressed demand. CRDB has obtained letters of interest from PASS and TADB.
48.
The charitable organization PASS has confirmed that the PASS Trust will and is ready to
fully participate in this TACATDP. CRDB has existing MOUs with PASS on guarantees to facilitate
37
CRDB bank lending to the agriculture sector. Established in 2000 and registered in 2007 as a
non-profit non-governmental organization (NGO) under the Trustees Incorporation Act (2002),
PASS is a guarantee facility to support growth and investments in commercial agriculture and
BVCs. The financial products and services offered by PASS include traditional guarantees,
38
po rtfolio guarantees and institutional guarantees.
39
49.
TADB has also issued a letter of support to CRDB for the TACATDP. TADB is a state-
owned agriculture development bank that supports the agriculture values chains in inputs,
production, warehousing, processing, distribution and marketing. It was established under the
Company Act (2002) in September 2012 to “lead capacity-building strategies and programs to
strengthen the agriculture financing value chain and support the Government of Tanzania
40
initiatives to shape and implement policies and agricultural and rural lending”. Its agricultural
31
United Republic of Tanzania (2020). Five Year Environmental Action Plan 2012-2017.
32
United Republic of Tanzania (2016). The Second Five Year Development Plan, 2016/17- 2020/21.
33
United Republic of Tanzania (2019). Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase II.
34
United Republic of Tanzania (2011). Tanzania Agriculture and Food Security Investment Plan (TAFSIP).
35
AE responses to TAP Questions Batch 1.
36
AE responses to TAP questions, batch 1.
37
Funding proposal, Annex 23, Letters of Support – PASS.
38
Private Agriculture Sector Support.
39
Funding proposal, Annex 23, Letter of Support – TADB.
40
Tanzania Agriculture Development Bank.

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 94
financial products and services include Asset Financing, Project Financing, Season Financing and
the Shareholder Farmers Credit Guarantee Scheme. (footnote 40).
50.
Sokoine University Graduates Entrepreneur Cooperative (SUGECO) is the TA partner for
41
capacity-building and technology research and development (R&D). SUGECO is a leading
centre of excellence in the United Republic of Tanzania, where it has a track record in R&D to
promote local manufacturing of key technologies as proposed under this programme. Among
the technologies that it has experience with are greenhouse structures, drip irrigation kits and
drying equipment. Several NGOs are involved in training programmes for smallholders for the
pr omotion of EbA adaptation practices.
51.
Ownership of farmer, farmer entrepreneurs, farmer-based organizations/communities,
women-led agri-based enterprises, agroprocessing MSMEs and other relevant stakeholders, civil
so ciety organizations, non-government organizations, cooperatives.
52.
The funding proposal contains some information but is rather limited in its coverage of
stakeholders. What has been provided so far is based on desk reviews of literature available on
limited data (see section 6.2), partial results of stakeholder consultations (see Annex 7,
Stakeholder Consultations, and section 2.2, Stakeholder Analysis and Mapping), and studies
(w hich were carried out pre-COVID-19; see section 6.1).
53.
In response to these issues, the AE has stated that “while Covid has limited extensive
intended fieldwork for the market study and stakeholder consultations [stakeholders contacted
though phone call and sending a mail checklist, and those who responded. Out of 7
representative regions of 7 agroecological zones, the physical visits were possible for regional
governments in 3 regions of Shinyanga (Lake zone; 5 districts ), Singida (Central zone; 6
districts ) and Morogoro (Eastern zone; 6 districts)], CRDB is confident that the work completed
to date combined with our existing portfolio of loans to borrowers in the agriculture sector,
including the target beneficiaries of the programme, provides sufficient evidence of excess
42
de mand for each of the financial products.”
54.
Risk to country ownership: The limited evidence-based and documented stakeholder
consultations with the targeted farmer beneficiaries in the country covering the target agro-
ecological regions and agricultural BVC introduce a risk to country ownership at the demand
and implementation level. The preliminary results of the CRDB stakeholder consultations need
to be expanded going forward. The consultations must cover the issues, challenges, needs and
wants, and must address the compounded challenges of climate change, COVID-19, sustainable
finance, CSA practices, technology needs, and policy and regulations relevant to the vulnerable
far mers.
55.
Overall, the above items led the TAP to assess that the country ownership for the project
is Medium.
Scale: Medium
1.6 EffOicvieernviceyw a nd effectiveness
1.6.1
56.
GCF will allocate USD 100 million for TACATDP; 70 per cent of this will be in the form of
credit, 20 per cent in grants, and 10 per cent as a guarantee. This will be matched by USD 100
million from CRDB, resulting in a GCF to private sector leverage ratio of 1 in terms of total
funding. However, this USD 100 million will only be used in the proposed ARA Credit Facility to
match the GCF USD 70 million loan, leading to a GCF to CRDB leverage ratio of 0.7.
41
Sokoine University Graduates Entrepreneur Cooperative.
42
AE Response to ITAP Questions Batch 1.

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 95
57.
Eighty-nine per cent will be used for Component 1 (USD 89.48 million of GCF total
funding), and this is broken down as follows: 70 per cent for the establishment the ARA Credit
Facility (USD 70 million of total funding); 10 per cent for the ARA Guarantee Facility (at USD 10
million of total funding); and 9 per cent for the ARA parametric insurance (at USD 9.48 million of
total funding). GCF grant finance will be used for Activity 1.3 (Establishment of an insurance
sch eme dedicated to ARA for smallholder farmers).
58.
The combination of financial products and services will be effective in de-risking the
financial transactions between CRDB and the agriculture-based borrowers. All creditworthy
stakeholders looking to fund short, medium or long-term viable investments in transformative
CSA activities can access the ARA Credit Facility that matches their needs in terms of rates and
tenors. Other transformative but financially risky CSA financing needs from vulnerable farmers
will be enhanced by the ARA Guarantee Facility and/or parametric insurance products. Thus,
the effectiveness of this ARA Facility to grant credit especially to the target vulnerable farmers
an d MSME entrepreneurs comes as a package and not as standalone facilities.
59.
The ARA Credit Facility will be handled by CRDB and through its nationwide, 260 branch
43
network, in collaboration with the Agriculture Marketing Cooperatives and Societies (AMCOS).
This will make it available to the targeted base of stakeholders mainly composed of small and
medium-sized farm holders (representing 73 per cent of total beneficiaries), SMEs (26 per cent)
44
and Corporates (1 per cent). In general, the ARA Credit Facility will offer short-term loans (6
months or 1 to 2 years) for CSA activities and technology needs of farmers; medium-term loans
(5 years); and long-term corporate loans (10 years) to finance infrastructure investments, agri-
processing, service providers and asset financing. CRDB will maintain its practice to structure
45
the loans with different tenors depending on business cash flow; these practices include
“tailored financial products to meet their needs such as aggregation and debt mutualization;
leasing contracts for cooperatives primarily through AMCOS, pay-as-you-buy options as well as
the promotion of low-cost and high quality locally manufactured technologies (e.g. net shading
46
and polyhouses).” The CRDB infrastructure will most likely be effective and efficient in
rea ching out to the targeted stakeholders under this programme.
60.
ARA parametric insurance: The ARA Insurance Facility will be developed and managed
by CRDB in partnership/collaboration with insurance companies. TAP requested clarification on
what entity will be handling the underwriting risk. CRDB stated that “CRDB will not underwrite
the insurance itself but will partner with a local insurance provider with expertise to manage
said risks. CRDB will explore, report, and account for these insurance risks when conducting the
47
insurance market studies and finalizing the scheme’s ultimate design.” CRDB will work closely
with insurance companies that have signed MOUs with them. These arrangements will help and
guide CRDB in the establishment of major design frameworks, terms and conditions of the
proposed parametric insurance (e.g. crop coverage, eligible farmers/policyholders, policy
premiums, manner of claims payment, selection of 8 eligible agro-ecological zones, etc). Among
the key design features that need to be addressed will be the need for client and portfolio
diversification as aligned with the CRDB credit policy, mitigation of risk of simultaneous payouts
to farmers that could be triggered by low yields due to the impacts of extreme climate events,
and sharing of confidential data and information with relevant government agencies in aid of
policy and regulatory initiatives. “Additionally, the insurance portfolio will be distributed to 8
selected agro-ecological zones in the United Republic of Tanzania to avoid concentration on a
single geographical area. The credit policy of the bank guides the diversification of its loan
portfolio into different sectors and subsectors to avoid the risk of over-concentration into single
43
Funding proposal, Section B.1, para. 3.
44
AE response to TAP Question 41b.
45
AE response to TAP Question 41b.
46
Funding proposal, Section B.3, para. 7.
47
AE response to TAP question 3 ii.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 96
sector or subsector.” (footnote 47). The insurance companies they will be working with include
the National Insurance Corporation (NIC). NIC is a government-owned insurance company
having experience in piloting parametric insurance schemes in the agriculture sector. CRDB is in
the process of extending the existing MOU with the NIC covering traditional insurance to cover
parametric insurance as well. This structure supports the effectiveness and efficiency of the ARA
pa rametric insurance scheme to be developed and implemented.
61.
ARA Guarantee Facility with GCF: As per the AE, the ARA Guarantee Facility will be
managed directly by GCF. CRDB will only coordinate with GCF on what accounts need to be
guaranteed to make the ARA Credit Facility accessible. This supports the effectiveness and
eff iciency of the ARA guarantee scheme for the target stakeholders.
62.
The TA component will specifically support the development and implementation of the
ARA facilities under Component 1 and in general the mainstreaming of CSA in the finance and
agricultural sectors. Seven per cent (USD 7.0345 million in grant funds) will be used to finance
five capacity-building and five policymaking initiatives under Component 2 (Policy
interventions and technical assistance to advance ARA in the United Republic of Tanzania).
These activities will also support the ARA activities under Component 1. Other cost items (at
USD 2.48 million, or 2.5 per cent of total funding) will cover safeguards and gender; the rest is
for project management (at USD 1.0 mill ion, or 2 per cent of total funding).
(b)
Economic and financial analysis:The funding proposal does not include projects at this
stage. In lieu of this, it has identified a set of eligible funding activities under the TACATDP for
which an economic and financial analysis has been conducted to determine eligible and possibly
via ble CSA activities.
63.
From an economic development perspective, the identified CSA interventions offer
significant benefits including the externalities. The top CSA interventions are demi-lunes (rank
#1), SF (rank #2), AC (rank #3), RWHSS (rank #4), SRI (rank #5); then 2 CSAs which have Cost
Benefit Ratios (CBR) between 1 and 2 are IC (rank #6) and DI (rank #7). Given the risky nature
of agriculture and the profiles of targeted borrowers amongst farmers and SMEs, the most
financially viable ARA interventions for CRBD are demi-lunes/AFM (internal rate of return (IRR)
of 106 per cent and Payback Period (PP) of 0.85), AC (IRR of 83 per cent, PP of 1.5), SF (IRR of
75 per cent, PP of 1.5), RWHSS (IRR of 44 per cent, PP of 1.5), IC and DI (IRR of 9.5 per cent, PP
of 3.25) and SRI (IRR of 6 per cent, PP of 4.2).
64.
Net present value drawbacks: The funding proposal analysis of the costs may not have
covered a more in depth analysis of the costs, especially those that have been impacted by
climate change and COVID-19 disruptions. Among such operating costs are land preparation,
personnel costs (labour), seed costs, fertilization costs, disease and pest control costs and other
co ntingency costs.
65.
Weak budget and implementation/procurement plans: The funding proposal’s budget
plan adds up but more details are needed on the programme’s target beneficiaries, intended
subactivities and alignment with the implementation plans and procurement strategies. These
items need to be improved upon to demonstrate complimentarity or support and thus provide
an impression of the efficiency and effectiveness of the funding proposal execution and delivery
of the intended outputs.
66.
Budget plan: As submitted, the funding proposal’s Annex 4 – Detailed Budget Plan does
not provide enough details on the budget items (e.g. components of the automated weather
stations (Activity 1.3-A7); number of target farmers and MSME beneficiaries per workshop per
year (Activity 2.2). In addition, some entries are missing (e.g. for computer-assisted survey
information collection CASIC) and some do not match (e.g. Activity 2.2 and K Budget figure and
budget note 2K). These need to be filled in to ensure the clarity of the budget plan overall. While
the funding proposal already has the details, these are not properly reflected in the budget

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 97
67.
Implementation plan: As submitted, the funding proposal (Annex 5: Implementation
Timetable) needs to provide adequately detailed timelines for the subactivities under
Co mponents 1 and 2; this raises the risk of poor implementation of the proposed activities.
68.
Procurement plan: As submitted, the funding proposal (Annex 10: Procurement Plan)
has presented procurement plans for consultancy assignments with selection methods and a
time schedule. Missing are budget items on equipment (i.e. AWS). This needs to be
syc hronizedwith the proposed activities.
69.
The budget plan details for Component 1 show that the suite of the CRBD ARA facilities
will all be launched in year 1.48 Similarly, the assumptions and financial analysis simulate the
first-year simultaneous launching of the credit, guarantee and insurance. However, the project
implementation plan (Annex 5) shows that the process is not simultaneous, but sequential. The
ARA Credit Facility establishment occurs during Q1 and Q2 in Year 1, the expansion of the ARA
Guarantee coverage to support the ARA Credit Facility (for farmers and MSMEs) takes place
during Q3 and Q4 of Year 1 and Q1 to Q4 of Year 2, and the establishment of ARA Parametric
Insurance takes place during Q1 to Q4 in Year 2. The tight procurement process for experts on
adaptation, parametric insurance, sustainable business devleopment and market studies will
take four months (almost two quarters) in Year 1. Similarly, the budget plan details for
Component 2 show that the planned activities (i.e. 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9 and 2.10)
are not consistent with the implementation plans. These factors will impact the expected results
un der E5 project performance indicators.
70.
The implementation of the ARA Parametric Insurance (e.g. area yield insurance for
maize) will be completed at the end of Year 2. However, the risk of delay in developing this
ins urance facility is also high given that the following activities need to be done first:
(a)
These include the assessment of eligible land in hectares to be covered per farmer;
(b)
Another is the installation of AWS in the target project areas, which also depends on the
nu mber of eligible hectares of land per AWS; and
(c)
Technical details on standards, compliance with regulatory permits and where and how
the AWS will be located, constructed, operated and maintained, and coordinated with National
Hy dromet Agencies are not available.
71.
Thus, the farmers and MSMEs looking to enhance their credit worthiness will only enjoy
this climate risk protection in Q1 of Year 3 at the earliest.Thus, the proposed parametric
insurance will only have an effective three-year period for implementation versus the five-year
pe riod claimed under the funding proposal. CRDB countered that it will be available in a year.49
72.
The Component 2 budget allocation schedule needs to match the implementation plan
(i.e. for activities 2.1 to 2.10), and this needs to be improved by adding a subactivity breakdown
into the implementation plan. It needs to show clear sequencing and/or logic on the delivery of
identified outputs and main activities that could support Component 1, for example. Activity 2.1,
which is the “development of an online interface and training support for the CRDB climate risks
assessment tool”, is slated to begin in Q1 of Year 3 versus the Year 1 schedule as per the budget
timeline. Activity 2.1 comes three years late and will miss out on an opportunity to support the
mainstreaming of climate change in the investment operations as the suite of ARA facilities is
launched in the beginning of Year 1 ( for the Credit and Guarantee Facilities) and Year 2 (for
insurance). The capacity-building component is also targeting Years 3 and 5 in contrast to the
budget plan’s yearly schedule of “CRDB and cooperative staff training on integration climate
risks and considerations within regular banking operations.” The budget plan also fails to detail
the scope of the capacity-buildi ng effort in terms of number of CRDB staff, branches, in the
48
Funding proposal, Annex 4: Detailed Budget Plan. Component 1.
49
TAP-AE Zoom meeting.

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 98
country. Activity 2.1 is supposed to cover the “Prioritization of risk-reducing and climate
adaptation investments, increase availability of climate data analytics, and capacity-building of
50
core agencies and institutions reduction.”
1. 7 Baseline assessments
73.
The baseline assessment of farmer and MSME stakeholders needs to be carried out
covering livelihoods, priority crops, farming practices from traditional to CSA (e.g. Zai
measures), technologies in use (e.g. smartphones for weather and news reports, solar-powered
instruments for argriculture use), ecosystem resources (e.g. water, soil), assets and investments
(e.g. land, farming equipment, inputs, crops in warehouses), built infrastructure (e.g. irrigation,
roads, power, cold storage facilities), issues, challenges, and needs in the agriculture production
and post-production BVC. The study needs to cover the impacts of climate change, COVID-19
and sustainable finance, the latter focusing on finance availability (e.g. finance credit/supplier
credit lines), accessibility (e.g. credit profile, loan processing, collateral requirements),
affordabilty (interest rates, loan tenors) and acceptability (e.g. Islamic finance vs. conventional
ba nking finance products).
74.
The baseline assessement of the agricultural finance subsector needs to be carried out
for the current agricultural finance market covering the various agri-finance related products
and services offered by formal sources (e.g. FIs, bank and non-bank FIs) and informal sources
(e.g. private money lenders, community loans, etc); evidence-based comparative baseline anlysis
of the financial products or services; interest rates for available tenors; eligible financing
activities, collateral, collateral valuation, guarantees, insurance, fees and costs, and regualtory
bo dies overseeing the particular FI or non-bank FIs, and relevant laws.
75.
Market study: A market study on the proposed financial products and services (i.e.
credits, guarantees and parametric insurance) needs to be completed as a whole. Study should
co ver demand and willingness to pay.
76.
Overall, based on the availabe information submitted and the need to further prepare
the funding proposal, the effectiveness and efficiency is rated as medium.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
Proposed Text on Conditions to the CRDB TACATDP FP
77.
Project is endorsed for approval with the following conditions to be included in the
(a) Conditions precedent to the execution of the FAA:
relevant funded activity agreement (FAA):
(i) Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the Fund, in a form and substance satisfactory to the
GCF Secretariat, of the revised and final version of the Programme’s budget,
implementation plan and procurement plan, which have been duly approved by the
Accredited Entity, and that shall include and address the contents referred to in
paragraphs (A), (B) and (C) below, respectively:
A. The final Programme’s budget shall include additional details specifically with respect
to: (1) the nature oCf eBligible expenditures (e.g., capacity building for CRDB on climate
mainstreaming); (2) targeted number of small farm holders (e.g. for the CSA/ARA
capacity building (“ ” ) activities) and beneficiaries per agro ecological zones; (3)
50
Funding proposal, Annex 4: Notes and Assumptions on 2A -2G for Activity 2.1.

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 99
number of CRDB personnel for ARA and climate mainstreaming per branch office; (4)
targeted number of government and/or private stakeholders participating in the
CSA/ARA CB and policy making activities under Component 2; (5) automatic weather
stations per area per region. Furthermore, given the unpredictable length of Covid 19
mobility restrictions, the final budget shall reduce or remove and reallocate as
appropriate the board and lodging and physical workshop related expenses (i.e.,
catering, transport, and venues) of CRDB, farmers, entrepreneurs, MSMES, corporates,
and private, non-profit and government stakeholders holders that participate in the CB
and policy-making activities (under Activities 1.3, and 2.1 to 2.10);
B. The final implementation plan shall (i) include sub-activities under the Activities of
Components 1 and 2; (ii) align the capacity building activities under Component 2 with
the release of grant funds during Year 1 of the Programme; and (iii) establish that the
guarantee and insurance facilities (Activities 1.2 and 1.3, respectively) will be launched
simultaneously to ensure high effectiveness.
C. The final procurement plan shall strategically align the procurement of experts (i.e.,
climate consultants) and technology (i.e., online platforms/apps, AWS) with final budget
and implementation plan referred in paragraphs (A) and (B) above.
(b) Conditions precedent to the first disbursement of GCF Reimbursable Funds in
relation to the GCF Loan to the Accredited Entity:
PIM
(i)
Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the Fund, in a form and substance satisfactory to the
GCF Secretariat, of the final version of the Programme Implementation Manual (“ ”),
which has been duly approved by the Accredited Entity, and that shall include the
contents referred to in paragraph (A) to (E) below:
A. An updated market study showing evidence based data and information on the following
items:
(i)
Conclusive mapping per project area of target farmer and agri communities and MSMEs
via farmer organizatioWnTs Por cooperative on agri BVC from production, post production,
distribution, and markets;
(ii)
Willingness To Pay (“ ”) for credit, guarantee and insurance products by specific
target farmer groups and agri BVC stakeholders;
(iii)
Baseline conditions of target Programme’s beneficiaries (i.e., farmer, entrepreneuer,
MSMEs, corporates) and challenges, and needs due to impacts of climate for each
targeted agro ecological regions;
(iv)
The current and projected impacts of Covid 19 on the agriculture crop production and
processing BVC, and markets; and
(v)
FI products and services catering to the agricultural sector identifying the financing gaps
and needs based on the different FI product designs, rates, tenors, collateral
requirements, eligible purposes, market coverage, etc.;
B. Term sheets for the ARA products (i.e. credit, guarantee, and insurance) to be financed
under Component 1, which shall contain the following details in a manner consistent
with the relevant key terms and conditions set out in the FAA for each of the referred
ARA products:
(i)
ARA Credit Facility term sheet per type of borrower type (including interest rate,
available tenors, collaterals, fees, payment schedule, eligible loan activities);
(ii)
ARA Parametric Insurance Facility term sheet (including risk cover, crop coverage,
eligible vulnerable farmers, enrolment fee, protection, index trigger, area yield, manner
of payment of claims (e.g. digital cash transfers), and others (e.g., use of proceeds - as
additional collateral to debt); and

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 100
(iii)
ARA Guarantee Facility term sheet (including fees, cover, conditions, description of how
complementary and/or innovative this guarantee facility will be when compared to
PASS’ or TADB’ guarantee products and services);
C. The operational guidelines and processes book for: (i) the ARA facilities under
51
Component 1; (ii) guidance framework for defining, distinguishing, and estimating
climate finance for CSA practices, technology needs and business from that of the BaU
agriculture activities along the production, processing BVC and markets; (iii) technology
systems and platforms for use and application of climate risk assessment tools per
52
project type, area, crops, facilities, infrastructure, and resources; (iv) monitoring and
reporting of farmer activities, crops, land under the ARA loans, guarantee facility and in
particular for the weather index crop insurance policies; and (v) AWS facilities per
project area.
AMCOS 53
D. List of legitimate / registered targeted Agriculture Marketing Cooperatives Societies
(“ ”) per agro-ecological regions, together with the legitimate prospective list of
farmer members, type of agriculture activities and crops planted or agri-businesses
54
engaged in , and breakdown of land leased or owned individually or communally per
target project area.
E. The final Eligibility Criteria for the Programme, including the identification of an array of
appropriate and specific CSA practices and technology needs disaggregated per region
per project area that addresses the specific context of vulnerabilities of the target
fCaorvmeenrasn. ts for inclusion in the FAA:
(c)
(i) The Accredited Entity shall specifically request and use the first disbursement of GCF
Non-Reimbursable Funds solely in support of the preparatory and training activities
(under Activities 1.3, and 2.1 to 2.5) in relation to the establishment and subsequent
IT
implementation of the lending facility and the insurance scheme
(ii) The Accredited Entity shall explore the use of alternative information technology (“ ”)
media options for a wider reach of Activities 1.3, and 2.1 to 2.10 (in particular under
Activity 2.2) for the targeted farmers and entrepreneurs, MSMEs and corporates.
(iii) The Accredited Entity shall ensure that implementation of Activity 1.1 (lending facility)
only starts after the preparatory and training activities (i.e., Activities 2.1 to 2.5) for
Activities 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 (credit, guarantee and insurance facilities , respectively) have
been concluded and such facilities (i.e., guarantee and insurance) are operationally
ready to start implementation;
(iv) The Accredited Entity shall approve the final version of the PIM only if, among others, it
includes the following content:
(a) The overall eligibility criteria for Programme, which shall include among others:
51
CRDB can look for guidance from the GCF, MDB Methodologies for Tracking Climate Finance and other
development agencies (i.e., FAO on CSA, WB, UNDP).
52
See as FP Annex 4 Budget item 2A- 2T
53
As Per FP Activity 1.3, “AMCOS are highly regulated by The Registrar of Cooperatives.”
54
As per FP Activity 1.3, “All members are engaged in Agriculture with similar crop or activities joining for better
production and better common market for their farm produce.”

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 101
1. the selection criteria of the targeted beneficiary organizations that will participate in the
relevant Activities of the Programme, as appropriate, including for agriculture marketing
cooperative societies (AMCOs) and/or MSME entrepreneurs;
2. a requirement for the targeted beneficiary organization to show proof (e.g. registered
members, area of coverage) on the number and profile of the farmers being represented
by the organization;
3. a requirement for the targeted beneficiary organizations to meet the ‘context of
55
vulnerability’ (as defined for the eight (8) agro-ecological project areas of the funding
proposal) which the proposed eligible interventions will address; and
4. the submission by the targeted beneficiary organizations of a written ‘statement of
intent’ showing the intent and ownership of the relevant beneficiaries to implement the
proposed activities being requested in order to address the specific vulnerability(ies)
and their commitment to participate in the eligible interventions until their finalization;
(b) The templates of the respective contractual agreements to be entered into with the final
beneficiaries of, or other counterparties involved in, the implementation of the Activities
of the Programme included in the table below, which shall at least include adequate
provisions to cover the following aspects:
1. the performance target indicators in respect of the specific activity(ies) to be carried out
under such relevant agreements; and
2. the specific provisions set out in the table below for the specific activity(ies) to be
carried out under such relevant agreements.
(v) The Accredited Entity shall ensure that no funds are disbursed to the targeted beneficiary
organizations, or other relevant counterparties, unless they have entered into the
relevant contractual agreements in accordance with the respective templates and other
requirements contained in the PIM;
(vi) The Accredited Entity shall deliver to the Fund, promptly upon its request, the copies of the
relevant contractual agreements that have been put in place, in accordance with the PIM,
with the targeted beneficiary organizations, or other relevant counterparties, for the
Activities of the Programme set out in the table below.
Table on legal agreements with final beneficiaries and other involved parties
Beneficiaries Key items to be included in the contractual
Activity/ies and/or CRDB’s agreements
Counterparties
•
1.3, 2.1, 2.3, CRDB • Availability of O&M services, including repairs and
2.7 retrofits of CSA Technology Parts and Services
Insurance Co
Transferability of licenses to GCF and CRDB (e.g., On line
partners
• interface, Agriculture Adaptation Routine Data System
IT system
(AARDS))
equipment co.
• Support for O&M of project assets by CRDB (e.g. AWS,
AWS supplier On-line interface, agri adaptation data system ).
CSA Technology • Minimum # of years of service required to stay at the
CRDB after training
supplier
Gender requirement
Local
Government
55
AE Response to ITAP Question #3

--- Table 1 on Page 104 ---
Activity/ie | Beneficiaries
s and/or CRDB’s
Counterparties | Key items to be included in the contractual
agreements
1.3, 2.1, 2.3
2.7 | , CRDB
Insurance Co
partners
IT system
equipment co.
AWS supplier
CSA Technology
supplier | •
• Availability of O&M services, including repairs and
retrofits of CSA Technology Parts and Services
Transferability of licenses to GCF and CRDB (e.g., On line
• interface, Agriculture Adaptation Routine Data System
(AARDS))
• Support for O&M of project assets by CRDB (e.g. AWS,
On-line interface, agri adaptation data system ).
• Minimum # of years of service required to stay at the
CRDB after training
Gender requirement

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 102
•
Authorities Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
(LGA), Ministry applications in their operations or sectors linking the
of Agriculture performance indicators
•
(MoA)
2.2 Smallholder Targeted beneficiary AMCO /Organization’s proof of
farmers and registry or membership, land, crops, farming activities,
entrepreneurs • of each of the 1,224,000 smallholder farmers in
Tanzania
Context of Vulnerability of the farmers per agro-
ecological region that can be addressed by best
• applicable CSA practices and technology applications,
• and parametric insurance
Gender requirement
• Assessment and identification, of CSA practices and
technology needs
Expected workshops/seminars/training outputs and its
applications in their operations or sectors linking the
•
performance indicators
2.4 CRDB • Minimum # of years of service required to stay at the
CRDB after training
NIC
Non confidentiality agreement on climate data and
Local Insurance
information on development and piloting of ARA
Company/ies
• parametric Insurance for policy and regulatory
initiatives
Development and sharing of climate services and
• information ought to be open access to the target
• beneficiaries and regulatory agencies;
Gender requirement
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their respective operations or sectors
•
linking the performance indicators
2.5 CRDB Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their respective operations or sectors
Government
linking the performance indicators
agencies and
•
divisions
2.6 LGA Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their respective operations or sectors
•
linking the performance indicators
2.7 LGA, MoA • Agreement on sharing information in support of
Agriculture Adaptation Routine Data System (AARDS)
FIs, MFIs
sharing climate information data and information
• between TMA , between and amongst agri BVC and
water resources stakeholders
• Establishing policies and protocols on information
sharing
Development and sharing of climate services and
• information ought to be open access to the target
beneficiaries and regulatory agencies;
Gender requirement

--- Table 1 on Page 105 ---
 | Authorities
(LGA), Ministry | •
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their operations or sectors linking the
2.2 | of Agriculture
(MoA)
Smallholder
farmers and
entrepreneurs | performance indicators
•
Targeted beneficiary AMCO /Organization’s proof of
registry or membership, land, crops, farming activities,
• of each of the 1,224,000 smallholder farmers in
Tanzania
Context of Vulnerability of the farmers per agro-
ecological region that can be addressed by best
• applicable CSA practices and technology applications,
• and parametric insurance
Gender requirement
• Assessment and identification, of CSA practices and
technology needs
Expected workshops/seminars/training outputs and its
2.4 | CRDB
NIC
Local Insurance
Company/ies | applications in their operations or sectors linking the
•
performance indicators
• Minimum # of years of service required to stay at the
CRDB after training
Non confidentiality agreement on climate data and
information on development and piloting of ARA
• parametric Insurance for policy and regulatory
initiatives
Development and sharing of climate services and
• information ought to be open access to the target
• beneficiaries and regulatory agencies;
Gender requirement
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
2.5 | CRDB
Government | applications in their respective operations or sectors
•
linking the performance indicators
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their respective operations or sectors
2.6 | agencies and
divisions
LGA | linking the performance indicators
•
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
2.7 | LGA, MoA
FIs, MFIs | applications in their respective operations or sectors
•
linking the performance indicators
• Agreement on sharing information in support of
Agriculture Adaptation Routine Data System (AARDS)
sharing climate information data and information
• between TMA , between and amongst agri BVC and
water resources stakeholders
• Establishing policies and protocols on information
sharing
Development and sharing of climate services and
• information ought to be open access to the target

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 103
•
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their operations or sectors linking the
•
performance indicators
2.8 Agreement on sharing climate information data and
Tanzania • information between TMA , between and amongst agri
BVC and water resources stakeholders
Meteorological
Development and sharing of climate services and
Authority
(TMA) • information ought to be open access to the target
beneficiaries and regulatory agencies;
• Establishing policies and protocols on information
sharing
• Minimum # of years of service required to stay at the
• TMA after training
Gender requirement
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their operations or sectors linking the
performance indicators
•
2.9 Tanzania Development and sharing of climate services and
Insurance • information ought to be open access to the target
Regulatory beneficiaries and regulatory agencies;
Authority • Establishing policies and protocols on information
sharing
Non confidentiality of on data and information on
Centers of
Excellence • development and piloting of ARA parametric Insurance
for policy and regulatory initiatives
• Minimum # of years of service required to stay at the
• TMA after training
Gender requirement
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their operations or sectors linking the
• sharing climate information data and
performance indicators
information between FSDT, FIs and TMA
2.10 FSDT Agreement on “
FIs • ”, between and
amongst agri BVC and water resources stakeholders
Development and sharing of climate services and
• information ought to be open access to the target
beneficiaries and regulatory agencies;
• Establishing policies and protocols on information
• sharing
Gender requirement
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their operations or sectors linking the
performance indicators

--- Table 1 on Page 106 ---
 |  | •
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
2.8 | Tanzania
Meteorological
Authority
(TMA) | applications in their operations or sectors linking the
•
performance indicators
Agreement on sharing climate information data and
• information between TMA , between and amongst agri
BVC and water resources stakeholders
Development and sharing of climate services and
• information ought to be open access to the target
beneficiaries and regulatory agencies;
• Establishing policies and protocols on information
sharing
• Minimum # of years of service required to stay at the
• TMA after training
Gender requirement
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their operations or sectors linking the
2.9 | Tanzania
Insurance
Regulatory
Authority
Centers of
Excellence | performance indicators
•
Development and sharing of climate services and
• information ought to be open access to the target
beneficiaries and regulatory agencies;
• Establishing policies and protocols on information
sharing
Non confidentiality of on data and information on
• development and piloting of ARA parametric Insurance
for policy and regulatory initiatives
• Minimum # of years of service required to stay at the
• TMA after training
Gender requirement
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
2.10 | FSDT
FIs | applications in their operations or sectors linking the
• sharing climate information data and
performance indicators
information between FSDT, FIs and TMA
Agreement on “
• ”, between and
amongst agri BVC and water resources stakeholders
Development and sharing of climate services and
• information ought to be open access to the target
beneficiaries and regulatory agencies;
• Establishing policies and protocols on information
• sharing
Gender requirement
Expected workshops/seminars outputs and its
applications in their operations or sectors linking the

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 104
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel assessment
findings
Proposal name: Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment
Formerly Tanzania’s “Cooperative and Rural Development
Programme (TACATDP)
Bank”,
CRDB Bank Plc,
Accredited entity:
Medium Category
Impact potential
We took note of the iTAP assessment finding on the Impact Potential scoring it as a “Medium”. The
programme will invest only in ‘fit for purpose’ adaptation and resilience measures to address climate
risks in the agriculture sector (cropping sector) in the face of current climate variability and future
climate change over the project’s operational life. Prioritized measures will ensure that beneficiary
farmer operators will not harm the resilience of the defined system they operate within. The project seeks
to invest only in ‘fit for purpose’ adaptation and resilience measures to address climate risks in the
agriculture sector (cropping sector) in the face of current climate variability and future climate change
over the project’s operational life. Prioritized measures will ensure that beneficiary farmer operators will
Paradigm shift potential
not harm the resilience of the defined system they operate within.
We took note of the iTAP assessment findings ranking this category as “Medium”. This proposal addresses
key barriers hampering the mobilization of climate investments at scale to support the adaptation of the
agriculture sector in Tanzania. In recent years, private sector agriculture operations and agribusinesses
have received relatively low investment due to perceived risks in the sector.
We believe TACATDP has an enorneous potential to transform the country's agricultural sector while
building its resilience to climatic variabilities and the adverse effects of climate change. The Pro gramme
will strengthen the financial and technical capacity of both the financial sector and of the farmers, a
Ssiutustaatiionna bwlhei dche vweillol pinm tuernnt spuoptpeonrtti alilvelihoods, health and the sustainability of the environment.
We appreciate that ITAP finds the sustainable development potential of the project is "High", as it intends
to address the grassroots agriculture-based economy. The timely provision of ARA Facilities should infuse
much-needed finance amongst the agriculture stakeholders suffering from climate change impacts.
Needs of the recipient
We appreciate ITAP rating this category as "Medium". However, there is a much-needed financing gap to
unlock the climate resilience of smallholder farmers and transform the adaptive capacity of Tanzania's
agriculture sector. CRDB is Tanzania's largest lender to the agriculture sector (45% of all credit to
agriculture borrowers) and therefore has a huge role to play and huge expectations from the market.
CRDB needs a system to de-risk the lending transactions and agriculture activities with farmers and
entrepreneurs.
We believe this programme will transform agriculture in Tanzania and ensure the country progressively
transitions to a more resilient system and people.

--- Table 1 on Page 107 ---
Impact potential
We took note of the iTAP assessment finding on the Impact Potential scoring it as a “Medium”. The
programme will invest only in ‘fit for purpose’ adaptation and resilience measures to address climate
risks in the agriculture sector (cropping sector) in the face of current climate variability and future
climate change over the project’s operational life. Prioritized measures will ensure that beneficiary
farmer operators will not harm the resilience of the defined system they operate within. The project seeks
to invest only in ‘fit for purpose’ adaptation and resilience measures to address climate risks in the
agriculture sector (cropping sector) in the face of current climate variability and future climate change
over the project’s operational life. Prioritized measures will ensure that beneficiary farmer operators will
Paradigm shift potential
not harm the resilience of the defined system they operate within.
We took note of the iTAP assessment findings ranking this category as “Medium”. This proposal addresses
key barriers hampering the mobilization of climate investments at scale to support the adaptation of the
agriculture sector in Tanzania. In recent years, private sector agriculture operations and agribusinesses
have received relatively low investment due to perceived risks in the sector.
We believe TACATDP has an enorneous potential to transform the country's agricultural sector while
building its resilience to climatic variabilities and the adverse effects of climate change. The Pro gramme
will strengthen the financial and technical capacity of both the financial sector and of the farmers, a
Ssiutustaatiionna bwlhei dche vweillol pinm tuernnt spuoptpeonrtti alilvelihoods, health and the sustainability of the environment.
We appreciate that ITAP finds the sustainable development potential of the project is "High", as it intends
to address the grassroots agriculture-based economy. The timely provision of ARA Facilities should infuse
much-needed finance amongst the agriculture stakeholders suffering from climate change impacts.
Needs of the recipient
We appreciate ITAP rating this category as "Medium". However, there is a much-needed financing gap to
unlock the climate resilience of smallholder farmers and transform the adaptive capacity of Tanzania's
agriculture sector. CRDB is Tanzania's largest lender to the agriculture sector (45% of all credit to
agriculture borrowers) and therefore has a huge role to play and huge expectations from the market.
CRDB needs a system to de-risk the lending transactions and agriculture activities with farmers and
entrepreneurs.
We believe this programme will transform agriculture in Tanzania and ensure the country progressively

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.11
Page 105
Country ownership
This programme has strong ownership and support amongst program partners, as indicated by ITAP.
Again, we appreciate ranking this category as ‘Medium”. CRDB has a comprehensive set of partners
ranging from public to the private sectors that have expressed their support and commitment for
TACATDP. We believe this programme has support at the highest level from all stakeholders in the
country.
Efficiency and effectiveness
We appreciate ITAP rating this category as “Medium”. We shall extend our market study on the proposed
financial products and services, i.e., credit, guarantee, and parametric insurance. The market study should
cover demand and willingness to pay to ensure that the combination of financial products and services
will de-risk the financial transactions between CRDB and the agriculture-based borrowers geared for
adaptation measures.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
CRDB agrees to implement the conditions presented by ITAP.

--- Table 1 on Page 108 ---
Country ownership
This programme has strong ownership and support amongst program partners, as indicated by ITAP.
Again, we appreciate ranking this category as ‘Medium”. CRDB has a comprehensive set of partners
ranging from public to the private sectors that have expressed their support and commitment for
TACATDP. We believe this programme has support at the highest level from all stakeholders in the
country.
Efficiency and effectiveness
We appreciate ITAP rating this category as “Medium”. We shall extend our market study on the proposed
financial products and services, i.e., credit, guarantee, and parametric insurance. The market study should
cover demand and willingness to pay to ensure that the combination of financial products and services
will de-risk the financial transactions between CRDB and the agriculture-based borrowers geared for
adaptation measures.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
CRDB agrees to implement the conditions presented by ITAP.

=== PAGE 109 ===
Page 106
Gender Analysis and Assessment
Prepared under the Project Preparation Facility (PPF) for the Tanzania Agriculture
Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme
CRDB Bank Plc
March 2021

=== PAGE 110 ===
Page 107
Contents
Summary ................................................................................................................................................................. 4
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................ 5
1. Gender institutional, legal and policy frameworks and programmes ............................................................ 6
1.1. Gender international frameworks and programmes ratified by Tanzania ............................. 6
1.1.1. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979) . 6
1.1.2. Fourth World Conference on Women - Beijing Platform for Action (1995) ................... 7
1.1.3. Lima Work Programme on Gender (2014) ...................................................................... 7
1.2. Gender national frameworks and programmes ...................................................................... 8
1.2.1. Women and Gender Development Policy (2000) ........................................................... 9
1.2.2. National Strategy for Gender Development (2008) ........................................................ 9
1.3. Gender aspects in other national frameworks and programmes and in agriculture ............ 12
1.3.1. Tanzania Development Vision 2025 (1999) ................................................................... 12
1.3.2. Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan 2014 – 2019 (2014)............................................... 13
1.3.3. National Five-Year Development Plan 2016/17 – 2020/21 (2016) ............................... 13
1.3.4. Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase Two (ASDP II, 2016) ................... 14
1.3.5. Climate Smart Agriculture Guideline (2017) ................................................................. 14
1.3.6. Gender in climate change plans, programmes and strategies ...................................... 15
2. Gender overview, barriers and challenges in Tanzania ................................................................................ 19
2.1. General gender overview, barriers and challenges in Tanzania ........................................... 19
2.1.1. Overview ........................................................................................................................ 19
2.1.2. Barriers and challenges ................................................................................................. 21
2.2. Focus on gender overview, barriers and challenges in the agriculture sector in Tanzania .. 23
2.2.1. Land ownership barriers ................................................................................................ 25
2.2.2. Labor access unbalancing .............................................................................................. 26
2.2.3. Technical and technological barriers ............................................................................. 27
2.2.4. Financial barriers ........................................................................................................... 27
3. Actions and projects to reduce gender unbalance in Tanzania.................................................................... 29
3.1. CRDB Bank gender actions and policies ................................................................................ 29
3.1.1. CRDB Gender Policy ....................................................................................................... 29
3.1.2. Malkia Account .............................................................................................................. 30
3.2. Other projects in agriculture ................................................................................................. 31
3.2.1 Policy Action for Climate Change Adaptation in East Africa ......................................... 31
3.2.2 Land tenure projects ..................................................................................................... 31
3.3 Other actions and projects to reduce gender unbalance...................................................... 31
4. Problem tree analysis ................................................................................................................................... 33
Bibliography .......................................................................................................................................................... 36

=== PAGE 111 ===
Page 108
Table of acronyms
ASDP II Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase Two
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
COP Conference of Parties
GCF Green Climate Fund
GDI Gender Development Index
GHG Greenhouse Gases
GII Gender Inequalities Index
HDI Human Development Index
ILFS Integrated Labour Force Survey
LGAs Local Government Authorities
LWPG Lima Work Programme on Gender
MCDGC Ministry of Community Development Gender and Children
MoHCDGEC Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children
NAPA National Adaptation Programme of Action
NC1 First National Communication
NC2 Second National Communication
NDC Nationally Determined Contribution
NGO Non-Governmental Organizations
PPF Project Preparation Facility
REDD Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
SDG Sustainable Development Goals
STEM Sciences, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
TACATDP Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USAID United States Agency for International Development

--- Table 1 on Page 111 ---
ASDP II | Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase Two
CEDAW | Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
COP | Conference of Parties
GCF | Green Climate Fund
GDI | Gender Development Index
GHG | Greenhouse Gases
GII | Gender Inequalities Index
HDI | Human Development Index
ILFS | Integrated Labour Force Survey
LGAs | Local Government Authorities
LWPG | Lima Work Programme on Gender
MCDGC | Ministry of Community Development Gender and Children
MoHCDGEC | Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children
NAPA | National Adaptation Programme of Action
NC1 | First National Communication
NC2 | Second National Communication
NDC | Nationally Determined Contribution
NGO | Non-Governmental Organizations
PPF | Project Preparation Facility
REDD | Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
SDG | Sustainable Development Goals
STEM | Sciences, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
TACATDP | Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme
UNFCCC | United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USAID | United States Agency for International Development

=== PAGE 112 ===
Page 109
Summary
This Gender Analysis and Assessment for the Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology
Deployment Programme (TACATDP) is divided into four sections:
1 - The first section “Gender institutional, legal and policy frameworks and programmes” provides an
overview of the institutional, legal and policy frameworks and programmes for gender in Tanzania. It
underlines the alignment of the country with international agreements and its efforts to integrate
gender considerations in national policies and sectorial policies (agriculture, climate change, gender,
etc.).
2 - The second section “Gender overview, barriers and challenges in Tanzania” provides the core
assessment and analysis of gender aspects in Tanzania. It highlights gender inequalities across sectors,
especially through the review of inequalities in employment. It further emphasizes on inequalities
faced by women working in agriculture around four main barriers:
(i) Access to land and land ownership;
(ii) Access to labor and time available for work;
(iii) Technical and technological barriers, and;
(iv) Financial barriers.
3 - The third section “Actions and projects to reduce gender unbalance in Tanzania” presents actions
and projects implemented, ongoing, or in preparation to reduce the gender gap in Tanzania. This
section promotes CRDB Bank as an active stakeholder in the fight for gender equality.
4 - The last section presents the “Problem Tree Analysis” developed for the “Tanzania Agriculture
Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme” project in compliance with the Green
Climate Fund’s requirements. This section explains which barriers and challenges (identified in section
two, however not yet addressed in the country) will be addressed by the project. It shows that gender
equality lies at the heart of this project, that will help remove barriers for women in agriculture.

=== PAGE 113 ===
Page 110
Introduction
This gender assessment was performed under the Project Preparation Facility (PPF) for Tanzania
Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme (TACATDP) and seeks to present
the issues, gaps and problems that should be addressed by gender-responsive project interventions.
This document provides a high-level overview of the gender situation and key gender matters in
Tanzania, more specifically gender issues relevant to the TACATDP.
The Green Climate Fund (GCF) has elaborated guidelines on Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate
Fund Projects with UN Women to support the integration of gender equality in climate change
interventions and climate finance. Gender mainstreaming is central to GCF objectives and guiding
principles, and a gender-sensitive approach is embedded in the GCF Governing Instrument and related
policies, which have been adopted since the Fund’s inception.
Gender responsive approaches are essential to encouraging a paradigm shift towards low-emission
and climate-resilient development pathways, including decisions and actions by women and men [1].
In accordance with the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan, the core elements of gender mainstreaming
required in GCF project design are a gender analysis, gendered actions and gender-sensitive
Monitoring and Evaluation. Gender aspects need to be mainstreamed at project identification level
with the involvement of men and women to discuss the project idea, and analyze their roles and
responsibilities, and at project proposal formulation stage by reflecting gender issues across proposed
activities and indicators, based on the collection of sex-disaggregated data, and with the support of
gender experts. Gender analysis is at the core of mainstreaming gender considerations in the project
cycle and helps reveal the significance of existing gender inequalities and gaps in relation to climate
change, and the potential contributions of women and men to climate action.
The following gender analysis and assessment is aligned with GCF requirements of:
- Identifying and analyzing gender issues relevant to the project;
- Reporting findings of country/regional gender diagnostics and undertaking project-specific
analysis;
- Reflecting the results of consultations on the project objectives or components with relevant
stakeholders – including women, girls, men and boys in the project area, gender advocates
and women’s civil society organizations, local and national authorities;
- Conducting a problem tree analysis to highlight how the project addresses the barriers and
challenges identified.

--- Table 1 on Page 113 ---
This gender assessment was performed under the Project Preparation Facility (PPF) for Tanzania
Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme (TACATDP) and seeks to present
the issues, gaps and problems that should be addressed by gender-responsive project interventions.

--- Table 2 on Page 113 ---
This document provides a high-level overview of the gender situation and key gender matters in
Tanzania, more specifically gender issues relevant to the TACATDP.

--- Table 3 on Page 113 ---
The Green Climate Fund (GCF) has elaborated guidelines on Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate
Fund Projects with UN Women to support the integration of gender equality in climate change
interventions and climate finance. Gender mainstreaming is central to GCF objectives and guiding
principles, and a gender-sensitive approach is embedded in the GCF Governing Instrument and related
policies, which have been adopted since the Fund’s inception.

--- Table 4 on Page 113 ---
Gender responsive approaches are essential to encouraging a paradigm shift towards low-emission
and climate-resilient development pathways, including decisions and actions by women and men [1].

--- Table 5 on Page 113 ---
In accordance with the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan, the core elements of gender mainstreaming
required in GCF project design are a gender analysis, gendered actions and gender-sensitive
Monitoring and Evaluation. Gender aspects need to be mainstreamed at project identification level
with the involvement of men and women to discuss the project idea, and analyze their roles and
responsibilities, and at project proposal formulation stage by reflecting gender issues across proposed
activities and indicators, based on the collection of sex-disaggregated data, and with the support of
gender experts. Gender analysis is at the core of mainstreaming gender considerations in the project
cycle and helps reveal the significance of existing gender inequalities and gaps in relation to climate
change, and the potential contributions of women and men to climate action.

=== PAGE 114 ===
Page 111
1. Gender institutional, legal and policy frameworks and programmes
1.1. Gender international frameworks and programmes ratified by Tanzania
Tanzania has ratified both the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Agenda, among which SDG5
focuses on Gender Equality, and the long term 2063 Agenda promoting “full gender equality in all life-
spheres” among other goals.
Tanzania has also ratified key international instruments driven toward the fight for gender balancing
and integration such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (1979) and the Beijing Platform for Action (1995). Finally, the Lima Work Programme on
Gender (2014) provides general guidance on gender aspects at international level.
The regulatory landscape is graphically represented in below chart:
1.1.1. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979)
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) has been
adopted in 1979 by the United Nations General Assembly and is often described as an international
bill of rights for women. Consisting of a preamble and 30 articles, it defines what constitutes

--- Table 1 on Page 114 ---
Tanzania has ratified both the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Agenda, among which SDG5
focuses on Gender Equality, and the long term 2063 Agenda promoting “full gender equality in all life-
spheres” among other goals.

--- Table 2 on Page 114 ---
Tanzania has also ratified key international instruments driven toward the fight for gender balancing
and integration such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (1979) and the Beijing Platform for Action (1995). Finally, the Lima Work Programme on
Gender (2014) provides general guidance on gender aspects at international level.

=== PAGE 115 ===
Page 112
discrimination against women and sets up an agenda for national action to end such discrimination.
Discrimination against women is stated as follows:
"...any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or
purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by women, irrespective
of their marital status, on a basis of equality of men and women, of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field" [2].
By accepting the Convention, Tanzania commits to undertake a series of measures to end
discrimination against women in all forms, including:
- To incorporate the principle of equality of men and women in their legal system, abolish all
discriminatory laws and adopt appropriate ones prohibiting discrimination against women;
- To establish tribunals and other public institutions to ensure the effective protection of women
against discrimination; and
- To ensure elimination of all acts of discrimination against women by persons, organizations or
enterprises.
Having ratified this Convention, Tanzania is legally bound to put its provisions into practice. It is also
committed to submit national reports, at least every four years, on measures it has taken to comply
with treaty obligations. Tanzania has submitted its last report in 2014 [3].
1.1.2. Fourth World Conference on Women - Beijing Platform for Action (1995)
The Beijing Platform for Action came out of the Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing in
1995. Among its statement, “The Platform for Action emphasizes that women share common concerns
that can be addressed only by working together and in partnership with men towards the common goal
of gender equality around the world. It respects and values the full diversity of women's situations and
conditions and recognizes that some women face particular barriers to their empowerment” [4].
The Beijing Platform sets strategic objectives and actions that have served as guidance for Tanzania to
establish its national strategies and plans, such as the 2008 National Strategy for Gender Development:
- Women and Poverty;
- Education and Training of Women;
- Women and Health;
- Violence against Women;
- Women and Armed Conflict;
- Women and the Economy;
- Women in Power and Decision-making;
- Institutional Mechanism for the Advancement of Women;
- Human Rights of Women;
- Women and the Media;
- Women and the Environment;
- The Girl-child.
1.1.3. Lima Work Programme on Gender (2014)
In 2014, the Conference of Parties (COP) established the first Lima Work Programme on Gender
(LWPG) [5] to advance gender balance and integrate gender considerations into the work of Parties
and the Secretariat in implementing the Convention and the Paris Agreement so as to achieve gender

--- Table 1 on Page 115 ---
By accepting the Convention, Tanzania commits to undertake a series of measures to end
discrimination against women in all forms, including:

--- Table 2 on Page 115 ---
Having ratified this Convention, Tanzania is legally bound to put its provisions into practice. It is also
committed to submit national reports, at least every four years, on measures it has taken to comply
with treaty obligations. Tanzania has

--- Table 3 on Page 115 ---
The Beijing Platform for Action came out of the Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing in
1995. Among its statement, “The Platform for Action emphasizes that women share common concerns
that can be addressed only by working together and in partnership with men towards the common goal
of gender equality around the world. It respects and values the full diversity of women's situations and
conditions and recognizes that some women face particular barriers to their empowerment” [4].

--- Table 4 on Page 115 ---
The Beijing Platform sets strategic objectives and actions that have served as guidance for Tanzania to
establish its national strategies and plans, such as the 2008 National Strategy for Gender Development:

--- Table 5 on Page 115 ---
Women and Poverty;
Education and Training of Women;
Women and Health;
Violence against Women;
Women and Armed Conflict;
Women and the Economy;
Women in Power and Decision-making;
Institutional Mechanism for the Advancement of Women;
Human Rights of Women;
Women and the Media;
Women and the Environment;
The Girl-child.

=== PAGE 116 ===
Page 113
responsive climate policy and action. COP22 (2016) decided on a three-year extension of the LWPG
and COP25 (2019) Parties agreed to a 5-year Enhanced Lima Work Programme on Gender and its
Gender Action Plan. The Enhanced Gender Action Plan sets out objectives and activities under five
priority areas, twenty activities and thirty-five outputs. They aim to advance knowledge and
understanding of gender-responsive climate action and its coherent mainstreaming. The five priority
areas are the following:
- Capacity-building, knowledge management and communication;
- Gender balance, participation and women’s leadership;
- Coherence;
- Gender-responsive implementation and means of implementation;
- Monitoring and reporting.
1.2. Gender national frameworks and programmes
The first integration of gender aspects in a ministry happened in 1992 with the creation of the Ministry
of Community Development, Women’s Affairs and Children, established as the national machinery
dealing with women affairs. The current Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly
and Children (MoHCDGEC) appeared in 2016. It is responsible for spearheading gender equality and
the empowerment of women.
The MoHCDGEC is a fully-fledged ministry with a mandate for overseeing the implementation of
Government policies and strategies as well as coordinating and monitoring implementation of these
polices for gender equality and women’s empowerment at different levels. The ministry lacks financial
and human resources despite improvements over the last years (creation of posts and increase in the
access to financial resources), preventing it from being fully operational and refraining it from properly
implementing established activities.
The MoHCDGEC is not the only structure fighting for gender balancing but remains the principle and
overarching one. Indeed, as stated in the National Strategy for Gender Development (2008), sector
ministries, central ministries, regional and district levels, the private sector, local communities and
development partners also play an important role [6], [7].
The Government of Tanzania has adopted policies that advance gender equality and youth inclusion in
a supportive enabling environment. In 2000 and 2004, the Government has amended the 1977
Constitution to increase women’s participation in the National Parliament and Local Authorities. The
Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania now contains Article 9 providing a juridical foundation
for gender equality in Tanzania, identifying people as being equal and free individuals enjoying
freedom, justice, fraternity and concord. It also stipulates that the State authority and all its Agencies
are obliged to direct their policies and programmes toward ensuring this outcome [8].
The Government also formulated the Women and Gender Development Policy (2000) and National
Strategy for Gender Development (2008) to further emphasize gender development and integration
and to align the country with international frameworks. Further than pure gender policies, the gender
dimension is also integrated in several national plans, programmes and strategies such as:
- The Tanzania Development Vision 2025 (1999);
- The Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan 2014 – 2019 (2014);
- The National Five-Year Development Plan 2016/17 – 2020/21 (2016);
- The Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase Two (ASDPII, 2016);
- The Climate Smart Agriculture Guideline (2017);

--- Table 1 on Page 116 ---
The Government of Tanzania has adopted policies that advance gender equality and youth inclusion in
a supportive enabling environment.

--- Table 2 on Page 116 ---
The Tanzania Development Vision 2025 (1999);
The Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan 2014 – 2019 (2014);
The National Five-Year Development Plan 2016/17 – 2020/21 (2016);
The Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase Two (ASDPII, 2016);
The Climate Smart Agriculture Guideline (2017);

=== PAGE 117 ===
Page 114
- Climate change plans, programmes and strategies, especially through the National Strategy on
Gender and Climate Change (2013).
1.2.1. Women and Gender Development Policy (2000)
The Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children has facilitated the
formulation of the Women and Gender Development Policy in 2000 aiming to ensure that the gender
perspective is mainstreamed into all policies, programmes and strategies. Gender focal points were
established in other ministries, independent government departments, regional and local authorities.
These focal points were in turn responsible for gender mainstreaming in their respective plans and
programmes.
Thanks to this policy, Tanzania has seen improvements in education, health and water sectors, and in
the economic empowerment and participation in decision-making of women.
1.2.2. National Strategy for Gender Development (2008)
This policy goes further in reinforcing gender integration in national strategies, programmes and plans
than the Women and Gender Development Policy of 2000 by highlighting major issues and exposing
remaining challenges. It provides guidance on interventions to be made, identifies roles of various
actors and stakeholders, suggests co-ordination mechanisms to facilitate the participation of the
various actors and aims for the a more focused and more result-oriented implementation of gender
policies than the previous policy.
Major challenges remaining on the way to gender equality and equity come from the patriarchal
system customs and traditions, leading to the following needs:
- Empowering both women and men equally on the basis of merit;
- Ensuring that macro and micro policies are gender sensitive;
- Ensuring that the Legal Framework is gender sensitive;
- Strengthening institutional mechanisms for gender development;
- Ensuring sustainable partnerships and collaboration;
- Ensuring that adequate resources are available to address gender inequalities;
- Providing adequate capacities for coordination, monitoring, evaluation, advocacy and follow-
up of implementation of policies, strategies, plans and programmes.
Therefore, the objectives of this strategy are to:
- Speed up progress implementation of Women and Gender Development Policy;
- Speed up implementation of national, regional and international commitments on gender
equality and empowerment of women;
- Integrate gender issues into macro and sectoral policies;
- Link up with collaborating partners and civil organizations;
- Enhance coordination, accountability, monitoring, evaluation and research.
To that intent, twenty areas of gender concern have been identified, each subdivided into objectives
(medium and long term development goals), strategies (means to achieve objectives), activities (tasks
to implement strategies), performance based indicators (measures of activities outputs), actors
(responsible persons or institutions, with the ministry as lead institution), and a timeframe.

--- Table 1 on Page 117 ---
Climate change plans, programmes and strategies, especially through the National Strategy on
Gender and Climate Change (2013).

=== PAGE 118 ===
Page 115
To that intent, the following twenty areas of gender concerns have been identified:
(i) Institutional framework policy statement objective;
(ii) Decision making and power policy statement objective;
(iii) Legal and human rights policy statement objective;
(iv) Education policy statement objective;
(v) Training policy statement objective;
(vi) Economic empowerment policy statement objective;
(vii) Employment policy statement objective;
(viii) General and reproductive health policy statement objective;
(ix) HIV/AIDS policy statement objective;
(x) Food security and nutrition policy statement objective;
(xi) Division of labor policy statement objective;
(xii) Information, education and communication policy statement objective;
(xiii) Appropriate technology policy statement objective;
(xiv) Environmental protection and conservation policy statement objective;
(xv) Access and ownership of resources policy statement objective;
(xvi) Gender mainstreaming policy statement objective;
(xvii) Gender/sex disaggregated data policy statement objective;
(xviii) Social security policy statement objective;
(xix) Community participation policy statement objective;
(xx) Customs and traditions policy statement objective.
Each of the above gender concerns is subdivided into objectives (medium and long term development
goals), strategies (means to achieve objectives), activities (tasks to implement strategies), performance
based indicators (measures of activities outputs), actors (responsible persons or institutions, with the
ministry as lead institution), and a timeframe.
Below is provided an example on the Institutional framework policy statement objective (for a detailed
presentation, please refer to the full strategy [6]):
Objectives Strategies Activities Performance Actors Timeframe
indicators
Capacity a Provide gender i Conduct Training Ministry of 2010
building of training/sensitization regular training reports and Community
Ministries, to Gender Focal to Gender number of Development
Departments Points and other Focal Points trainees. Gender and
and other actors on gender and other Children
Institutions analysis, gender stakeholders (MCDGC)
including policy, budgeting, on gender
Local mainstreaming, mainstreaming.
Government coordination and ii Call for a Report of the MCDGC, Non-
Authorities. networking. gender forum meeting. Governmental
to strategies on Modalities in Organizations
coordinating place. (NGOs), Local
and networking Government
modalities. Authorities
(LGAs)
iii Prepare gender Gender MCDGC,
guidelines and guideline in NGOs, LGAs

--- Table 1 on Page 118 ---
Objectives |  | Strategies |  | Activities |  | Performance |  | Actors | Timeframe
 |  |  |  |  |  | indicators |  |  | 
Capacity
building of
Ministries,
Departments
and other
Institutions
including
Local
Government
Authorities. | a | Provide gender
training/sensitization
to Gender Focal
Points and other
actors on gender
analysis, gender
policy, budgeting,
mainstreaming,
coordination and
networking. | i | Conduct
regular training
to Gender
Focal Points
and other
stakeholders
on gender
mainstreaming. | Training
reports and
number of
trainees. |  |  | Ministry of
Community
Development
Gender and
Children
(MCDGC) | 2010
 |  |  | ii | Call for a
gender forum
to strategies on
coordinating
and networking
modalities. | Report of the
meeting.
Modalities in
place. |  |  | MCDGC, Non-
Governmental
Organizations
(NGOs), Local
Government
Authorities
(LGAs) | 
 |  |  | iii | Prepare gender
guidelines and | Gender
guideline in |  |  | MCDGC,
NGOs, LGAs | 

--- Table 2 on Page 118 ---
Capacity
building of
Ministries,
Departments
and other
Institutions
including
Local
Government
Authorities.

=== PAGE 119 ===
Page 116
disseminate to place.
various actors. Number of
copies
disseminated.
b Promote exchange i Identify Identified list MCDGC,
of visits and study countries/areas of countries. NGOs, LGAs
tours among with good
different actors. practice in
gender.
ii Prepare Modalities MCDGC,
modalities for identified. NGOs, LGAs
exchange visits.
iii Carry out Travel MCDGC,
exchange visits. reports. NGOs, LGAs
c Strengthen links and i Prepare Modalities in MCDGC
networking within networking place.
the MCDGC. modalities.
ii Carryout needs Needs MCDGC
assessment. assessment
report.
Several actors are designated to implement this strategy , under the coordination of the Ministry of
Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children, itself responsible for (i) coordinating
the implementation of the strategy and work closely with other actors, (ii) providing professional
backstopping to other implementers of gender development, (iii) reporting implementation progress,
(iv) collecting and disseminating information programmes and (v) maintaining National Gender
Database.
The Ministry relies on the support of:
- Other ministries, such as:
• Sector ministries, responsible for sector policy guidance, supervision, coordination
implementation and monitoring activities, and
• Central ministries responsible for providing general guidelines on gender
advancement and budgeting.
- National level institutions completed with regional and district level ones responsible for
capacity building and collection and dissemination of gender disaggregated data;
- The private sector supporting private actors’ action with roles and responsibilities to build local
capacity, empower communities, participate in monitoring and evaluation, mobilize
community resources and enhance community participation;
- Communities playing a role in planning, implementing and monitoring community activities;
- Finally, external support will be sought with development partners making use of existing
systems and processes to provide financial, technical and other support services.
The mapping of above-mentioned stakeholders is represented below:

--- Table 1 on Page 119 ---
 |  |  |  | disseminate to
various actors. | place.
Number of
copies
disseminated. |  | 
 | b | Promote exchange
of visits and study
tours among
different actors. | i | Identify
countries/areas
with good
practice in
gender. | Identified list
of countries. | MCDGC,
NGOs, LGAs | 
 |  |  | ii | Prepare
modalities for
exchange visits. | Modalities
identified. | MCDGC,
NGOs, LGAs | 
 |  |  | iii | Carry out
exchange visits. | Travel
reports. | MCDGC,
NGOs, LGAs | 
 | c | Strengthen links and
networking within
the MCDGC. | i | Prepare
networking
modalities. | Modalities in
place. | MCDGC | 
 |  |  | ii | Carryout needs
assessment. | Needs
assessment
report. | MCDGC | 

=== PAGE 120 ===
Page 117
1.3. Gender aspects in other national frameworks and programmes and in
agriculture
1.3.1. Tanzania Development Vision 2025 (1999)
The National Development Vision 2025 [9] is the guide for economic and social development efforts in
Tanzania. The objective of this Development Vision is to awaken, co-ordinate and direct the people's
efforts, minds and Tanzania national resources towards core sectors to enable the country to attain its
development goals and withstand the expected intensive economic competition.
This document was prepared with several stakeholders among which women have played a key role,
both as final beneficiaries of the strategy and as stakeholders to be involved in its implementation.
Vision 2025 aims for five overarching goals: (i) High Quality Livelihood, (ii) Peace, Stability and Unity,
(iii) Good Governance, (iv) A Well Educated and Learning Society and (v) A strong and Competitive
economy.
Overall, Tanzania aims for a good quality of life for all, to address social issues such as education, health
and the environment and to increase the involvement of people in working for their own development.
Those results should be achieved for both women and men, and girls and boys explicitly.
Nevertheless, it only outlines one gender specific objective under the “High quality livelihood” section:
“Gender equality and the empowerment of women in all socio-economic and political relations and
cultures”. It shows that gender balancing remains a cross-cutting goal even though more emphasis
could be made.

=== PAGE 121 ===
Page 118
1.3.2. Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan 2014 – 2019 (2014)
The Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan [10] provides an overview of the agriculture sector in Tanzania
through its main development trends and the expected impact of climate change by 2050. Key
observations concerning gender aspects are that smallholder farming is predominant in the country
with women more likely to be smallholders than men. This puts women at higher risk to climate
change. Better mainstreaming of gender aspects could have significant benefits for the uptake of
climate smart agricultural practices as women have been found to often more rapidly adopt
laborsaving climate smart agriculture practices.
This Plan provides recommendations of key investment to strengthen knowledge and systems to target
climate action through conducting a comprehensive assessment on gender and climate change issues
in the agriculture sector including:
- Climate change impacts on women and girls;
- Developing recommendations and guidelines for mainstreaming gender into Climate Change
and Adaptation related policies, strategies, programs, and budgets in respective areas of
jurisdiction;
- Identifying best practices in Tanzania and other countries;
- Identifying gender-appropriate technologies for activities related to water management,
climate-smart agriculture, and postharvest processing and value addition;
- Capacity building and awareness on climate change for women farmers;
- Recommendations for increasing women’s access to financial and productive resources.
The Plan also recommends developing a gender and agriculture coordination mechanism between the
Ministry of Agriculture Food Security and Cooperatives’ gender desk, gender committee and
Environment Management Unit. The Environment Management Unit would work with the gender desk
to mainstream gender in Climate Change and Adaptation in each stage of project, programme, policy
cycles. The gender committee would meet quarterly to evaluate progress for gender mainstreaming
in Climate Change and Adaptation related policies, strategies, programs and budgets.
1.3.3. National Five-Year Development Plan 2016/17 – 2020/21 (2016)
This development plan aims at “Nurturing Industrialization for Economic Transformation and Human
Development” [11]. It revolves around four priority action areas:
(i) Interventions for growth and industrialization;
(ii) Interventions for fostering human development and social transformation;
(iii) Interventions for improving environment for enterprise development;
(iv) Interventions for getting implementation right.
The strategy is further anchored on three pillars:
(i) Industrialization as a champion of economic and technological transformation;
(ii) Competitiveness as an active process to move from comparative advantage to competitive
advantage;
(iii) Regional integration and geography as the context for industrial development and
economic prosperity.
Overall, the gender dimension is only briefly described and little implementation activities or policy
changes are formulated. Still, the strategy highlights that interventions to ensure gender balance are

=== PAGE 122 ===
Page 119
needed to unleash women’s potentials to contribute to the envisaged social economic transformation
and more importantly as a matter of human rights. In addition, it sets enhancing gender equity through
affirmative action in accordance with international commitments and existing policy and legal
frameworks as a key objective.
Most relevant to gender aspects integration in agriculture and climate change actions are the aim to
reach gender income parity and to integrate Gender in the monitoring and evaluation process via sex-
disaggregated data.
Finally, despite limited operational objectives, the strategy dedicates two axes of intervention to
gender issues in:
- The social protection axis through “Women and Girls’ Empowerment Programme”:
participation in economic activities, child marriages and early pregnancies addressed under
this intervention;
- The agricultural axis through “Women and youth empowerment through agriculture”:
indicating, titling and surveying the agricultural land, linking farmers with financial institutions,
and improving the use of technology addressed under this intervention.
1.3.4. Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase Two (ASDP II, 2016)
The Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase Two [12] provides the general guidance for
agriculture development in Tanzania. It sets as development objective to transform the agricultural
sector (crops, livestock & fisheries) towards higher productivity, commercialization level and
smallholder farmer income for improved livelihood, food security and nutrition. Beneficiaries of this
programme include a variety of agriculture stakeholders with special attention to women and youth.
The women’s role is highlighted through the first cross-cutting objective: “Promoting gender equity
and ensuring that women and other vulnerable groups have equitable access to resources”. Indeed,
the Programme indicates that gender mainstreaming needs to be strengthened to increase the
benefits obtained from rural labor and enhance value addition. In particular, it states that agribusiness
investment policy needs to enable all groups to be involved at the high-value end of the market chain.
The programme also recommends that gender imbalances need to be addressed at all levels of the
institutional framework and sets several outcome indicators on gender mainstreaming:
- Participation of women in decision making and implementation of the solutions in agriculture;
- Equal benefits for women from programmes;
- Deduced disparities in the access to benefits of major programmes;
- Provision capacity building for gender empowerment;
- Targeting of participative support programmes for women.
1.3.5. Climate Smart Agriculture Guideline (2017)
The National Climate Smart Agriculture Programme [13] aims to accelerate the uptake of climate smart
agriculture in Tanzania to increase productivity and climate resilience in the agriculture sector (crops,
livestock and fisheries) and in the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. It provides guidance for
adaptation and mitigation in building resilience of agricultural farming enterprises, improving and
increasing agricultural productivity and sustainability.
The guidance emphasizes on the mutual interactions between agriculture and climate change. Major
impacts of climate change on agriculture are the changes in rainfall for this rain fed agriculture, a

=== PAGE 123 ===
Page 120
general decline in agricultural productivity and in agro-diversity, the prevalence of crop pests and
diseases and the overall degradation of water and land resources. On the opposite, agriculture plays
an important role in climate change through deforestation and CO2 emissions due to land use change
and agriculture. In this context, Climate Smart Agriculture, defined as “Agriculture that sustainably
increases productivity, resilience (adaptation), reduces or removes Greenhouse Gases (GHGs)
(mitigation), and enhances achievement of national food security and development goals” appears
critical. It ensures sustainable agriculture, based upon integrated management of water, land and
ecosystems at landscape scale and includes techniques (mulching, intercropping, conservation
agriculture, pasture and manure management), and innovative practices, programmes, and policies,
(improved crop varieties, better weather forecasting, and risk insurance). It also emphasizes on agro-
ecological approaches to soil, nutrient, water and ecosystem management with explicit attention to
the importance of preserving genetic resources of crops and animals including wild relatives, critical in
developing resilience to shocks.
Given the norms and traditions in relation to the roles of women in agricultural production as well as
land tenure system, these technologies and practices face limitation when gender dimension is not
taken into consideration. The inadequacy of access for women to essential agriculture development
resources does not only increase hardships for women, but it places an extra burden on the entire
agriculture sector, the broader economy and society as a whole. Given the importance of gender in
Climate Smart Agriculture, a whole section is dedicated to its gender responsive approach, recognizing
the particular needs, priorities and realities of men and women for the design and implementation of
such actions.
The Gender responsive policy and practice recognize and address the specific needs and realities of
women and men, based on the social construction of gender roles. Gender transformative
interventions seek to transform gender roles and promote more gender-equitable relationships
between men and women. They challenge the underlying causes of gender inequality that is rooted in
broad political, economic, and socio-cultural structures. Because gender-transformative approaches
seek to change rigid gender roles and relations, such approaches often go beyond the individual level
to focus on interpersonal, social, structural, and institutional practices to address gender inequalities.
The guidance therefore formulated gender recommendations for each of the packages of technologies
and practices described in the guidance, through actions such as building women and girls capacities,
including gender considerations in the selection of solutions, proceeding to gender analysis of the
technologies and practices or ensuring women and girls can enhance their capacity to adapt to climate
change.
1.3.6. Gender in climate change plans, programmes and strategies
Tanzania, as a signatory of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
developed several climate national plans, programmes and strategies, among which the First National
Communication (2003), National Adaptation Plan of Action (2007), Second National Communication
(2014) and Intended Nationally Determined Communication (2018).
Those major climate change plans, programmes and strategies all identified agriculture as a key sector
to fight climate change, and for which to increase resilience to climate change. Nevertheless, despite
gender aspects being overlooked in those documents, Tanzania developed a complementary
document, the National Strategy on Gender and Climate Change (2013), to integrate gender aspects
in its climate actions, especially in agriculture.

=== PAGE 124 ===
Page 121
1.3.6.1. First National Communication (2003)
Tanzania designed its First National Communication (NC1) including technological and policy options
for mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions as well as assessment of vulnerability and adaptation to
climate change impacts. Tanzania assessed its greenhouse gas emissions and set its mitigation targets
in energy, industry, transport, forestry, land use and agriculture. The vulnerability analysis and
adaptation options covered water resources, crop production, grassland and livestock, coastal
resources and structures, forests, wildlife and biodiversity and health. Therefore, agriculture was a key
component of the national climate strategies both in mitigation and adaptation. Nevertheless, gender
aspects were overlooked in this communication, mostly being used for some background presentation
[14].
1.3.6.2. National Adaptation Programme of Action (2007)
Tanzania developed its National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) to enhance its ability to deal
with climate change and to assess its climate change related vulnerabilities in various economic
sectors. The NAPA preparation process involved looking at the effects of climate change as a threat
mainly to the agrarian population that still depends on subsistence agriculture for their daily livelihood.
Tanzania identified vulnerabilities in agriculture, water, health, forestry, wetlands, energy, coastal and
marine resources, wildlife, tourism, and industry. It has set agriculture, livestock, forestry, water,
coastal and marine resources, health, wildlife, industry, energy, wetlands, human settlements, tourism
and land use as adaptation priority sectors, and prioritizes project activities in those sectors.
Agriculture was highlighted as key sector to adapt to climate change. The only reference to gender
aspects other than contextual elements is found in the “Climate change adaptation through
participatory reforestation in Kilimanjaro mountain” project that aims to build stakeholders’ (among
which women) capacities on climate change adaptation and biodiversity conservation [15].
1.3.6.3. Second National Communication (2014)
The Second National Communication (NC2) further develops Tanzania climate overview, assessment
and planning, and builds on the learnings derived from NC1 implementation. Mitigation actions
focused on energy, waste management, transport, industry, agriculture, land use and forestry sectors.
Vulnerability assessments and adaptation measures were elaborated for water, health, agriculture,
livestock, forestry, wildlife, tourism, coastal and marine environments. Agriculture was identified as a
major sector for both climate mitigation and adaptation. Gender aspects were also overlooked in this
document, mostly being used for some background presentation [16].
1.3.6.4. Nationally Determined Communication (2018)
Tanzania designed its Nationally Determined Communication (NDC) to provide a concise and
structured presentation of its climate strategy to enhance adaptive capacity to climate change,
increase resilience of ecosystems and enhance the participation in climate change mitigation activities
to contribute to international efforts while ensuring sustainable development. Mitigation options were
developed for energy, transport, waste management, and forest sectors, while adaptation options
were set for agriculture, livestock, forestry, energy, coastal marine environment, fisheries, water
resources, tourism, human settlements and health sectors. Similarly to the National Communications
and to the National Adaptation Plan of Action, agriculture is at the center of the strategy, however
gender aspects are not mentioned at all this time [17].

=== PAGE 125 ===
Page 122
1.3.6.5. National Strategy on Gender and Climate Change (2013)
The National Strategy on Gender and Climate Change [18] outlines six thematic areas (agriculture,
water, health, energy, forests and integrated coastal management), addresses barriers faced by
women as agents for change, and identifies cross-cutting dimensions such as capacity building,
awareness and policy
The strategy is expected to guide national efforts for addressing the impacts of climate change on
gender inequalities as women suffer from historic disadvantages: their limited access and control over
decision-making, environmental and economic resources and their restricted rights. Indeed, gender
inequality can worsen the impacts of climate change while, taking steps to narrow the gender gap and
empower women can also reduce these impacts. Climate change and gender inequality are therefore
interlinked. By exacerbating inequality overall, climate change slows down progress towards gender
equality and henceforth impedes efforts to achieve wider goals such as poverty reduction and
sustainable development.
The disproportionate burden of climate change on women can be countered by their empowerment
and recognition. Women are powerful agents of change and their leadership is critical. Women can
enhance strategies related to integrated coastal management, forest, agriculture, water, health and
energy, for example. Incorporating a gender perspective successfully and effectively requires that men
and women understand the process of climate change and share information on counteracting its
negative impacts on an equal basis to both women and men. It is important that women have equal
access to knowledge, awareness, capacity building, resources and technology, which are prerequisites
in influencing climate change. Likewise, it is fundamental that women participate more actively in
decision-making and policy development at all levels. To this end, gender equality and women
empowerment underlie this strategy, as two globally recognized complementary principles.
For each priority sector, a situation analysis and a gender assessment are presented with examples of
actions, further declined in objectives and the related action steps, indicators of success and
responsible stakeholders. For the agriculture sector, seven objectives are set:
(i) Building and strengthening institutional understanding on gender, climate change and
agriculture;
(ii) Improving agriculture related infrastructures to adapt to the effects of climate change;
(iii) Enhancing local community participation of women and men in components of agricultural
sector activities;
(iv) Land tenure and customary law to incorporate women’s access and title to land;
(v) Strengthening early warning system in agriculture to facilitate weather forecasting;
(vi) Ensuring gender-responsive budget, and;
(vii) Enhancing participation of women and girl through formal and informal education in the
agricultural sector.
In addition, seven cross-cutting objectives have been set for capacity building, awareness and policy
change:
(i) Ensuring that gender responsive climate change criteria are fully integrated in relevant
national sector policies;
(ii) Enhancing the mainstreaming of gender and climate change in the implementation of
national development plans;
(iii) Developing a sustainable financing mechanism for climate change challenges including
gender projects;

=== PAGE 126 ===
Page 123
(iv) Strengthening the institutional framework for climate change governance and improved
coordination at all levels;
(v) Promoting legal and regulatory framework for gender and climate change with specific
emphasis in empowerment of women for accessing and controlling resources;
(vi) Building the institutional capacity to improve the understanding and supporting process
that mainstream gender and climate change in relevant government sectors, and;
(vii) Increasing women and men awareness on climate change and its impact on relevant
sectors.

=== PAGE 127 ===
Page 124
2. Gender overview, barriers and challenges in Tanzania
2.1. General gender overview, barriers and challenges in Tanzania
2.1.1. Overview
Women in Tanzania suffer from inequalities in most of the aspects of their lives, especially regarding
income generation, years of schooling and access to labor, as shown below [19]:
Human Development Index
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Female Male
The Human Development Index (HDI) is a summary measure of achievements in three key dimensions
of human development: a long and healthy life, access to knowledge and a decent standard of living.
As shown above, in addition to Tanzania lagging behind other countries (HDI of 0,737 worldwide),
women are particularly at risk. The gender gap has slightly narrowed over the years, but has remained
relatively constant since 2014, showing little improvement in women’s situation compared to men in
Tanzania despite several measures implemented by the government.
The major component explaining inequal HDIs between men and women is the difference in
generating income:
Estimated gross income (2017 PPP$)
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Female Male

--- Table 1 on Page 127 ---
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 127 ---
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 128 ===
Page 125
Indeed, the smaller gender gap for the HDI in 2013 and 2014 can be explained by the temporary
reduction of the income gap. Nevertheless, recent years have seen a faster increase of male incomes
than that of women, highlighting the improvements made in the country, but the lasting gender
inequalities. Those income inequalities are even more relevant when considering the sole agriculture
sector as explicated in the following sections.
An element partially explaining the improvement of incomes and of the population’s life conditions is
the increasing time spent at school.
Mean years of schooling
7
6.5
6
5.5
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Female Male
Once again, women lag behind men, but the gender gap is reducing over the years giving hope that
women’s overall situation will get better soon. More specifically, while men’s years of schooling have
recently stabilized, women’s have kept increasing, providing opportunities for Tanzania to close one
of the most important gender gaps, able to have a positive impact at all levels (professional
opportunities, literacy and participation in the political life, increased productivity…).
Finally, inequalities appear clearly when comparing employment rates and unemployment ratios
between men and women:
Labor force participation rate
95% 2
90% 1.5
85% 1
80% 0.5
75% 0
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Female Male Total unemployment rate (female to male ratio)

--- Table 1 on Page 128 ---
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 129 ===
Page 126
Female to male ratio has always remained higher than 1, and even higher than 1.5 since 2011, showing
a much larger likelihood for women to be unemployed than men. This can be further illustrated with
the evolution of labor force participations. Both men and women tend to be more at risk of
unemployment, as the participation rate decreased almost every year, for both men and women (only
exception being women in 2005). The decrease in participation rate has been stronger for women than
men on average, once again showing that women are more at risk of being unemployed than men.
Those observations are further explained and completed in the following sections.
2.1.2. Barriers and challenges
Gender inequalities are the major factors that have increased women’s vulnerability to climate change,
compared to men. Although governments in developing countries have endeavored to formulate
gender-responsive budgets, their implementation has been constrained by (i) lack of technical capacity
in gender, (ii) lack of skills and expertise in planning, monitoring, and evaluation of budgets among
those hired to implement Gender Responsive Budget initiatives, (iii) limited or no resources allocated
to gender activities, (iv) inadequate research and gender-disaggregated data, (v) negative cultural
practices, and (vi) presence of gender-blind sectoral policies especially those that influence local
development initiatives.
For Tanzania, annual budget guidelines are often vague, actor roles are not clear and more generally,
the importance of gender is downplayed by placing it among cross-cutting issues. Results show that
most national level policies in Tanzania recognize the need for gender equality by specifying issues of
concern, but fall short of reflecting clear strategies, actions, or means of addressing the issues
highlighted [20].
This situation leads to gender unbalancing towards women. Indeed, the Gender Development Index is
0.948 (GDI, measure of gender inequalities in three dimensions: health, education and command over
economic resources) and the Gender Inequalities Index is 0.556 (GII, gender-based disadvantage in
three dimensions: reproductive health, empowerment and the labor market) [19], [21]. Tanzania
belongs to Gender Development Index group 3 out of 5 (group 5 being the countries with highest
unbalance) and is ranked 140 for the Gender Inequalities Index. Both indexes show Tanzania has to
increase its efforts to reduce gender unbalance and provide similar opportunities to women.
To identify main barriers to gender equality and equity, Tanzania has developed a Country Gender
Profile (2016) [7], going through an in-depth assessment of eight priority sectors for the development
of gender balance. Synthetic presentations of the main observations are:
Priority Sector Main observations
Economy Despite a decline of women’s poverty incidence over the last years from 34.4% in
2007 down to 28.2% in 2012, women remain more struck by poverty than men
and their financial safety is more at risk. Women are the main workforce in
agriculture, an economic sector that is less dynamic than the overall economy
thus generating an intrinsic delay in women’s economic development. Overall,
while labor laws prohibit any kind of discrimination, the proportion of
unemployed women remains higher, youth unemployment rises for girls, women
are more likely to have vulnerable and low paying jobs, and less likely to own
enterprises than men. Challenges arise from inadequate gender mainstreaming
in the economy, especially due to inadequate policy, legislations and support
systems, as well as planning budgeting and monitoring through gender

--- Table 1 on Page 129 ---
Gender inequalities are the major factors that have increased women’s vulnerability to climate change,
compared to men. Although governments in developing countries have endeavored to formulate
gender-responsive budgets, their implementation has been constrained by (i) lack of technical capacity
in gender, (ii) lack of skills and expertise in planning, monitoring, and evaluation of budgets among
those hired to implement Gender Responsive Budget initiatives, (iii) limited or no resources allocated
to gender activities, (iv) inadequate research and gender-disaggregated data, (v) negative cultural
practices, and (vi) presence of gender-blind sectoral policies especially those that influence local
development initiatives.

--- Table 2 on Page 129 ---
For Tanzania, annual budget guidelines are often vague, actor roles are not clear and more generally,
the importance of gender is downplayed by placing it among cross-cutting issues. Results show that
most national level policies in Tanzania recognize the need for gender equality by specifying issues of
concern, but fall short of reflecting clear strategies, actions, or means of addressing the issues
highlighted [20]

--- Table 3 on Page 129 ---
To identify main barriers to gender equality and equity, Tanzania has developed a Country Gender
Profile (2016) [7], going through an in-depth assessment of eight priority sectors for the development
of gender balance. Synthetic presentations of the main observations are:

--- Table 4 on Page 129 ---
 | Priority Sector |  |  | Main observations | 
Economy | Economy |  |  | Despite a decline of women’s poverty incidence over the last years from 34.4% in | 
 |  |  |  | 2007 down to 28.2% in 2012, women remain more struck by poverty than men | 
 |  |  |  | and their financial safety is more at risk. Women are the main workforce in | 
 |  |  |  | agriculture, an economic sector that is less dynamic than the overall economy | 
 |  |  |  | thus generating an intrinsic delay in women’s economic development. Overall, | 
 |  |  |  | while labor laws prohibit any kind of discrimination, the proportion of | 
 |  |  |  | unemployed women remains higher, youth unemployment rises for girls, women | 
 |  |  |  | are more likely to have vulnerable and low paying jobs, and less likely to own | 
 |  |  |  | enterprises than men. Challenges arise from inadequate gender mainstreaming | 
 |  |  |  | in the economy, especially due to inadequate policy, legislations and support | 
 |  |  |  | systems, as well as planning budgeting and monitoring through gender | 

=== PAGE 130 ===
Page 127
disaggregated data. Therefore, Tanzania will need to set improved sectorial
economic frameworks, and develop strategies to mainstream and monitor
gender balancing improvement.
Healthcare The number of health facilities is rising, women have better access to health
insurance funds (National Health Insurance Fund and Community Health Fund)
and better follow-up of pregnancy/birth, reducing maternal mortality rates and
early child deaths. Still, food insecurity and HIV prevalence (6.2% for women
against 3.8% for men) are higher for women than for men. The main challenges
are the low budgeting, general structural issues faced by women (persistent
cultural issues, poverty, inadequate information and access to care, cultural
biases preventing women from diagnosis). Women also lack of a comprehensive
programme for reproductive and child health. Tanzania will need to develop
comprehensive health gender assessments and increase national budgeting for
healthcare. It will also need to reinforce awareness especially on HIV/AIDS and
other epidemies and invest in outreach services in regions and districts.
Education The girls-to-boys ratio is relatively balanced at pre-primary and primary school
but there is a much lower rate of girls to boys at secondary and higher education
levels. More specifically, there is a low representation of women in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) subjects. While literacy is
improving, female literacy still lags behind that of males. Main challenges for
female education remain the low retention and achievement rates leading to low
catchment at secondary and tertiary levels, and the low enrollment of girls in
STEM subjects. Policies and plans need to support an increase in the retention
and achievement rates, enhance the willingness of local communities to invest in
girls’ education, and provide a more enabling school environment to girls (e.g.
improved gender pedagogy, special incentives for female teachers to set them as
role models, support for female empowerment).
Politics Women have achieved an improved political representation, especially in the
Parliament with Tanzania being one of the countries with the highest share of
women in its Parliament (37% in 2015) thanks to temporary special measures
targeting 50-50 gender representation. Furthermore, several public entities are
headed by women as are some key political positions within the central
government. However, women are still under-represented in most of the political
bodies and at their top especially at local level where the decision-making process
remains male dominated. Challenges faced by women in Tanzania are mainly due
to the patriarchal ideology limiting women representation in politics, and to
inadequate awareness and enforcement of the 2010 Election Act, that constrains
women from enjoying the right to make a claim in the incidence of a violation
during the electoral process. Tanzania will need to institutionalize gender
sensitive voter education and civic education in grassroots leadership structures.
Violence and An increasing number of women are breaking down gender-based violence
abuse silence but this issue still remains highly prevalent, especially through genital
mutilation (14.6% of women), physical (1/3 of women) and sexual violence (1/10
women has experienced sexual intercourse against their will). Tanzania only
provides limited law enforcement and legal protection to women, slowing down
the removal of issues such as early marriage. Main challenges to be addressed by
Tanzania concern the inability for women to challenge harmful traditions and
shortcomings in enforcement of the law; and to rely on adequate resources.
Furthermore, several contradictions exist between different laws and cultural or
religious frameworks (especially the 1971 Marriage Act), and often times
customary and religious laws prevent women from accessing their legal rights

--- Table 1 on Page 130 ---
 |  | disaggregated data. Therefore, Tanzania will need to set improved sectorial | 
 |  | economic frameworks, and develop strategies to mainstream and monitor | 
 |  | gender balancing improvement. | 
Healthcare |  | The number of health facilities is rising, women have better access to health | 
 |  | insurance funds (National Health Insurance Fund and Community Health Fund) | 
 |  | and better follow-up of pregnancy/birth, reducing maternal mortality rates and | 
 |  | early child deaths. Still, food insecurity and HIV prevalence (6.2% for women | 
 |  | against 3.8% for men) are higher for women than for men. The main challenges | 
 |  | are the low budgeting, general structural issues faced by women (persistent | 
 |  | cultural issues, poverty, inadequate information and access to care, cultural | 
 |  | biases preventing women from diagnosis). Women also lack of a comprehensive | 
 |  | programme for reproductive and child health. Tanzania will need to develop | 
 |  | comprehensive health gender assessments and increase national budgeting for | 
 |  | healthcare. It will also need to reinforce awareness especially on HIV/AIDS and | 
 |  | other epidemies and invest in outreach services in regions and districts. | 
Education |  | The girls-to-boys ratio is relatively balanced at pre-primary and primary school | 
 |  | but there is a much lower rate of girls to boys at secondary and higher education | 
 |  | levels. More specifically, there is a low representation of women in Science, | 
 |  | Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) subjects. While literacy is | 
 |  | improving, female literacy still lags behind that of males. Main challenges for | 
 |  | female education remain the low retention and achievement rates leading to low | 
 |  | catchment at secondary and tertiary levels, and the low enrollment of girls in | 
 |  | STEM subjects. Policies and plans need to support an increase in the retention | 
 |  | and achievement rates, enhance the willingness of local communities to invest in | 
 |  | girls’ education, and provide a more enabling school environment to girls (e.g. | 
 |  | improved gender pedagogy, special incentives for female teachers to set them as | 
 |  | role models, support for female empowerment). | 
Politics |  | Women have achieved an improved political representation, especially in the | 
 |  | Parliament with Tanzania being one of the countries with the highest share of | 
 |  | women in its Parliament (37% in 2015) thanks to temporary special measures | 
 |  | targeting 50-50 gender representation. Furthermore, several public entities are | 
 |  | headed by women as are some key political positions within the central | 
 |  | government. However, women are still under-represented in most of the political | 
 |  | bodies and at their top especially at local level where the decision-making process | 
 |  | remains male dominated. Challenges faced by women in Tanzania are mainly due | 
 |  | to the patriarchal ideology limiting women representation in politics, and to | 
 |  | inadequate awareness and enforcement of the 2010 Election Act, that constrains | 
 |  | women from enjoying the right to make a claim in the incidence of a violation | 
 |  | during the electoral process. Tanzania will need to institutionalize gender | 
 |  | sensitive voter education and civic education in grassroots leadership structures. | 
Violence and
abuse |  | An increasing number of women are breaking down gender-based violence | 
 |  | silence but this issue still remains highly prevalent, especially through genital | 
 |  | mutilation (14.6% of women), physical (1/3 of women) and sexual violence (1/10 | 
 |  | women has experienced sexual intercourse against their will). Tanzania only | 
 |  | provides limited law enforcement and legal protection to women, slowing down | 
 |  | the removal of issues such as early marriage. Main challenges to be addressed by | 
 |  | Tanzania concern the inability for women to challenge harmful traditions and | 
 |  | shortcomings in enforcement of the law; and to rely on adequate resources. | 
 |  | Furthermore, several contradictions exist between different laws and cultural or | 
 |  | religious frameworks (especially the 1971 Marriage Act), and often times | 
 |  | customary and religious laws prevent women from accessing their legal rights | 

--- Table 2 on Page 130 ---
Violence and
abuse

=== PAGE 131 ===
Page 128
(access to and ownership and use of land among others). To solve those issues,
the country needs to improve coordination between the police, health facility,
and judiciary workers. It will need to also provide facilities such as shelters and
safe houses for victims, as well as medical treatment and counselling.
Rights and As a signatory of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
legal against Women, Tanzania is accelerating the integration of gender aspects in its
framework Constitution and at all levels. There is an increase in the number of women
accessing courts of laws, but a lot of work remains to be done to remove barriers
for women arising from statutory, customary and religious laws. Despite the 2014
updating of the Constitution further advancing gender equality, several barriers
remain to develop an adequate legal framework for women such as the low legal
literacy of populations and the slow legal updating processes (marriage, property,
inheritance, etc.). Also, the lack of gender disaggregated data does not allow to
monitor changes efficiently, while gender equality frameworks are not enough
used to inform policy, practice and planning. Tanzania will therefore need to
develop customized policies, mechanisms and procedures for collecting,
reporting and monitoring gender in legal sector institutions as early as possible.
Climate change Structures and policies are being set up to spearhead interventions and
coordinate activities related to climate change and gender integration (National
Climate Change Strategy and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation - REDD - strategy among others). Those structures and policies try to
mainstream gender in climate change, but women’s response to climate change
remains limited to informal, small level actions due to their limited capacity,
especially financial capacity. Challenges to further integrate women in climate
change actions include women’s poverty and the inequalities in decision. There is
also a lack of a comprehensive database on women’s and men’s traditional
knowledge and mechanisms for addressing the impacts of environmental and
climate change, limiting the integration of traditional knowledge in climate
change response. Tanzania needs to align climate actions with the three main
frameworks driving gender equality CEDAW, Beijing Platform for Action and
Sustainable Development Goals, each of those frameworks having already been
ratified by the country.
Information Women suffer from a lower access to communication media and tools and a
and lower representation on media, with the male image still being depicted more
communication positively than that of women. Additionally, the weak enforcement of laws and
pressures for profit maximization have given room for negative portrayals of
women. Major challenges are the inadequate integration of gender in the
implementation of information and communication related policies, the absence
of gender policy to guide for instance the editorial practices of the media, and the
unregulated distribution and dissemination of abusive information about women.
The country needs to develop linkages between media and gender-oriented
policies and to develop sex-disaggregated statistics.
2.2. Focus on gender overview, barriers and challenges in the agriculture sector in
Tanzania
Women in Tanzania working in the agriculture sector experience lower agricultural productivity
(defined as the monetary value of output per unit of land) and higher vulnerability than men for four
main reasons: (i) land ownership barriers, (ii) labor access unbalancing, (iii) technical and technological
barriers, (iv) financial barriers.

--- Table 1 on Page 131 ---
 |  | (access to and ownership and use of land among others). To solve those issues, | 
 |  | the country needs to improve coordination between the police, health facility, | 
 |  | and judiciary workers. It will need to also provide facilities such as shelters and | 
 |  | safe houses for victims, as well as medical treatment and counselling. | 
Rights and
legal
framework |  | As a signatory of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination | 
 |  | against Women, Tanzania is accelerating the integration of gender aspects in its | 
 |  | Constitution and at all levels. There is an increase in the number of women | 
 |  | accessing courts of laws, but a lot of work remains to be done to remove barriers | 
 |  | for women arising from statutory, customary and religious laws. Despite the 2014 | 
 |  | updating of the Constitution further advancing gender equality, several barriers | 
 |  | remain to develop an adequate legal framework for women such as the low legal | 
 |  | literacy of populations and the slow legal updating processes (marriage, property, | 
 |  | inheritance, etc.). Also, the lack of gender disaggregated data does not allow to | 
 |  | monitor changes efficiently, while gender equality frameworks are not enough | 
 |  | used to inform policy, practice and planning. Tanzania will therefore need to | 
 |  | develop customized policies, mechanisms and procedures for collecting, | 
 |  | reporting and monitoring gender in legal sector institutions as early as possible. | 
Climate change | Structures and policies are being set up to spearhead interventions and
coordinate activities related to climate change and gender integration (National
Climate Change Strategy and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation - REDD - strategy among others). Those structures and policies try to
mainstream gender in climate change, but women’s response to climate change
remains limited to informal, small level actions due to their limited capacity,
especially financial capacity. Challenges to further integrate women in climate
change actions include women’s poverty and the inequalities in decision. There is
also a lack of a comprehensive database on women’s and men’s traditional
knowledge and mechanisms for addressing the impacts of environmental and
climate change, limiting the integration of traditional knowledge in climate
change response. Tanzania needs to align climate actions with the three main
frameworks driving gender equality CEDAW, Beijing Platform for Action and
Sustainable Development Goals, each of those frameworks having already been
ratified by the country. |  | 
 |  |  | eeds to align climate actions with the three main
 |  | frameworks driving gender equality CEDAW, Beijing Platform for Action and | 
 |  | Sustainable Development Goals, each of those frameworks having already been | 
 |  | ratified by the country. | 
Information
and
communication |  | Women suffer from a lower access to communication media and tools and a | 
 |  | lower representation on media, with the male image still being depicted more | 
 |  | positively than that of women. Additionally, the weak enforcement of laws and | 
 |  | pressures for profit maximization have given room for negative portrayals of | 
 |  | women. Major challenges are the inadequate integration of gender in the | 
 |  | implementation of information and communication related policies, the absence | 
 |  | of gender policy to guide for instance the editorial practices of the media, and the | 
 |  | unregulated distribution and dissemination of abusive information about women. | 
 |  | The country needs to develop linkages between media and gender-oriented | 
 |  | policies and to develop sex-disaggregated statistics. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 131 ---
Rights and
legal
framework

--- Table 3 on Page 131 ---
 | (National
Climate Change Strategy and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest | 
Degradation - REDD - strategy among others). Those structures and policies try to | 
mainstream gender in climate change, but women’s response to climate change | 
remains limited to informal, small level actions due to their limited capacity, | 
especially financial capacity. Challenges to further | 

--- Table 4 on Page 131 ---
Information
and
communication

=== PAGE 132 ===
Page 129
In addition, gender differentiated farm activities suggest that women and men have different
experience and knowledge of the natural environment. Differences also exist with regard to owning
and controlling resources, in particular land. As a consequence, men are more likely than women to
be able to adapt to risks emerging from climate variability and the associated natural disasters [8].
Empowering women in agriculture appears to be of critical concern to fight climate change and adapt
agriculture to its adverse effects, all the more so as low agricultural productivity tends to reduce yields-
per-hectare and leads to more intense farming—resulting in overcultivation, soil erosion, and land
degradation [22].
The Integrated Labour Force Survey (ILFS, 2014) – Analytical report [23] provides preliminary general
insights on barriers faced by women in accessing jobs and more specifically in agriculture. Below is a
selection of interesting data from 2014 and the first insights they provide:
Indicators Women Men
Employment
Unemployed 1,389M 0,903M
Inactive population 28,9% 55,7%
because of attending school
Inactive population 20,3% 5,1%
because of household chores
Employed person 4,844M 2,070M
unpaid family helper in agriculture
Employed person 2,056M 4,890M
on own farm
Vulnerabilities
Vulnerable worker 88,7% 78,2%
Injured/ill from work in agriculture, forestry and fishing 83,2% 70,7%
Female headed households and housework
Mean time (minutes) spent per activities 195 342
Systems National Accounts (~income generating
activities)
Mean time (minutes) spent per activities 238 64
Extended SNA (~unpaid productive activities like
household/care activities)
Widowed 1,467M 0,210M
Divorced 1,181M 0,501M
Economic differences
Total monthly income
mean 165,920 278,748
median 83,500 150,000
Agricultural monthly income
mean 92,882 150,665
median 43,000 69,750
The data presented in the table above is analyzed in the following paragraphs:
Employment: Women are more likely than men to be unemployed. In addition to the financial
unbalance unemployment brings, it is to be noted that while women tend to be unemployed because
they have to handle housework, men tend to attend school when not employed. This major difference
further increases the unbalancing: prolonged school attendance leads to potential more attractive

--- Table 1 on Page 132 ---
 | Indicators |  |  | Women |  |  | Men | 
 | Employment |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Unemployed |  |  | 1,389M |  |  | 0,903M |  | 
Inactive population
because of attending school |  |  | 28,9% |  |  | 55,7% |  | 
Inactive population
because of household chores |  |  | 20,3% |  |  | 5,1% |  | 
Employed person
unpaid family helper in agriculture |  |  | 4,844M |  |  | 2,070M |  | 
Employed person
on own farm |  |  | 2,056M |  |  | 4,890M |  | 
 | Vulnerabilities |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Vulnerable worker |  |  | 88,7% |  |  | 78,2% |  | 
Injured/ill from work in agriculture, forestry and fishing |  |  | 83,2% |  |  | 70,7% |  | 
 | Female headed households and housework |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Mean time (minutes) spent per activities
Systems National Accounts (~income generating
activities) |  |  | 195 |  |  | 342 |  | 
Mean time (minutes) spent per activities
Extended SNA (~unpaid productive activities like
household/care activities) |  |  | 238 |  |  | 64 |  | 
Widowed |  |  | 1,467M |  |  | 0,210M |  | 
Divorced |  |  | 1,181M |  |  | 0,501M |  | 
 | Economic differences |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Total monthly income
mean
median |  |  | 165,920
83,500 |  |  | 278,748
150,000 |  | 
Agricultural monthly income
mean
median |  |  | 92,882
43,000 |  |  | 150,665
69,750 |  | 

=== PAGE 133 ===
Page 130
professional opportunities for men, while housework doesn’t generate any income for women.
Furthermore, when employed, women are more likely than men to be unpaid when working in farms
or not to own the farms in which they work. Agriculture holds a large share of Tanzania economy
(26.7% of the GDP [24]) and provides employment to the majority of the country, therefore the
unbalance severely hinders women’s economic development.
Vulnerabilities: When employed, women again have to face several challenges in addition to financial
ones. A very high percentage of them are vulnerable workers, and they tend to suffer from work
related injuries and illnesses more than men, especially in agriculture and related sectors.
Female headed households and housework: Women spend more time than men on housework, while
men spend more time on income generating activities further increasing economic unbalancing.
Women are also more likely to be widowed or divorced than men, leading to female headed
households (25.4% in 2017 [25]). As such, women are more likely to only rely on a single income
provider, contrary to male headed households where men can rely on women to provide income as
well. Indeed, on average, women headed households count 3.9 people against 4.9 for male headed
households [26]. This situation further puts women in risky financial positions.
Economic differences: Finally, women earn lower incomes than men across all sectors. Women
working in agriculture face a critical financial situation. Despite a slightly lower relative difference with
men, compared to the difference across all sectors, incomes in agriculture are much lower than in
other sectors, making women working in agriculture the lowest earning population.
Overall, the gender gap in agriculture is estimated to have an annual cost of $105 million (0.46% of
GDP. This highlights the large impact both unconditional (strict difference in the value of output per
hectare between male and female) and conditional (further comparison taking into account that
women tend to hold smaller plots than men, increasing the unbalance and the vulnerability to agro-
climatic conditions) gender balancing solutions could bring, with respectively an expected increase of
agricultural productivity of 16% or 30%. In addition, reducing the gender gap could increase annual
crop output by 2.1%, lift 80,000 people out of poverty and reduce the incidence of undernourishment
by 0.7% as women tend to spend more of their income on children’s health and education [22].
Below is a focus on the four main barriers highlighted at the beginning of the section [8], [27].
2.2.1. Land ownership barriers
Due to legal frameworks, customary and traditional land ownership norms, Tanzanian women face
several land ownership barriers. They hold only few and small plots, often of lower quality and
productivity and have limited room to enjoy the benefits of land they own.
Tanzania’s land reforms, such as the Land Act and the Village Land Act of 1999, have the aim of
eradicating gender inequalities in land ownership. Specifically, Section 3 (2) of the Village Land Act
stipulates: “the right of every adult woman to acquire, hold, use, deal with and transmit land by or
obtain land through the operations of a will, shall be to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the right of every adult man” [28]. Legally, women may hold, own and dispose of
property and have the same land rights as men. Indeed, laws provide for strong protections of women
landowners, recognize a wife‘s right to household land upon widowhood or divorce, prevent village
land councils from discriminating against women, and allocate to women a certain number of seats on
the councils, which administer occupancy rights and adjudicate land disputes in rural areas.

=== PAGE 134 ===
Page 131
Despite legal protection and reforms, customary land tenure norms, vesting control of property in men
continue to influence decisions and practices in rural areas while women‘s rights to land is reduced to
their roles as wives or daughters. By some estimates, 82% of land in Tanzania is administered under
customary land tenure. Women have usufruct rights through spouses or male family members but
cannot normally own or transfer land. Upon marriage, a couple is granted land, usually by the man‘s
family. Of that land, the man allocates small garden plots to his wife so she can cultivate food crops to
provide for household needs, which is a primary responsibility of women. However, this does not give
women secure property rights.
This situation translates into 73% of landholders being men, leaving only 27% of women landholders.
As owners, women tend to have smaller and fewer plots, average land of 0.6 hectares against 1
hectare, and to own less livestock than men. Women usually manage more fragile lands and their plots
are more likely to be affected by floods, landslides and the resulting soil degradation, against which
they cannot afford fertilizers due to limited income, and erosion. Women’s plots are largely rain-fed
and use less hired labor. While most of the plots are irrigated by flooding (71%) and buckets (18%),
considerable gender differences exist with regards to irrigation. Additionally, female landholders are
older on average than their male counterparts. 27% of male holders are aged 25 - 34 years against 19%
for female, and 25% of female holders are older than 55 against 15% for male. It suggests that women
are likely to access land at a later stage of their (productive) life. Finally, women cannot use the land
as collateral as their husband can sell it at any time. If they become widowed or divorced, their
husband‘s clan may take possession of the land as well as the rest of the household‘s material goods.
2.2.2. Labor access unbalancing
Women in Tanzania face several labor access constraints. They almost single handedly handle
housework and provide cash necessary for household needs. They are also often reduced to unpaid or
low paid productive activities and cannot rely on male labor the same way male land holders rely on
female productive labor.
Women's ability to work on their plots is constrained by social expectations as they perform significant
quantities of unpaid care and domestic work. Women are also expected to provide the cash necessary
to meet household maintenance needs and when cash is short this requires engaging in off-farm casual
waged labor or petty trading. Overall, this limits women's flexibility in their choices by reducing labor
availability for on-farm and off-farm work, reducing their opportunities to develop time consuming
climate-smart agricultural techniques and impacting cash and non-cash resources women are able to
generate. This may contribute to the adoption of unsustainable agricultural practices and increase
vulnerability to climatic variation.
Women often contribute unpaid labor on their husband's plots of land or are expected to work on it
before being able to work on their own plots. Women do not control the output of the work they
proceed for their husbands. Such labor forced by their husbands often comes hand in hand with
gender-based violence. Men often use gender-based violence to enforce labor allocation decisions
regarding the use of their wives' labor on their plots and to ensure the performance of unpaid care
and domestic work by women, and especially food preparation for men.
Finally, and of high impact, women farmers use less hired labor and are less able to access adequate
amounts of male family labor to work on their plots, affecting the total amount of labor used in farming
for female landholders. Overall, the inability to acquire adequate amounts of male family labor
generates 97.3% of the gender gap in agricultural productivity in Tanzania, around US$102 million. On
the opposite, women are hired more often as casual laborers than men and their mean wages are

=== PAGE 135 ===
Page 132
almost three times lower than those of men in agriculture. This might have consequences in terms of
productivity and profitability of women farming activities and of the time-burden overload as both
male and female farmers tend to use more female than male casual labor.
2.2.3. Technical and technological barriers
Women in Tanzania frequently have unequal access to key agricultural inputs such as land, labor,
knowledge such as the access to irrigation, pesticides, fertilizers and implements, and improved seeds
and crops.
92% of plots held by women are irrigated by flooding against 8% by bucket, as opposed to respectively
63% and 23% of men’s plots. Very few women benefit from mechanical irrigation systems such as
sprinklers, drip irrigation or water hoses for their own plots. Women use lower levels of advanced
agricultural technologies, notably pesticides, fertilizer and implements. Lower use of pesticides and
inorganic fertilizer by women is equivalent to potential gross gains in GDP of over $19.3 million. Their
access to agricultural implements is also significantly lower than that of men, explaining 8% of the
gender gap in agricultural productivity. Bringing lesser use of pesticides and inorganic fertilizer along
with poor quality tools and implements together also contribute to the gender gap in agricultural
productivity.
Where farmers do use improved seeds, men are more likely than women to use improved seeds,
creating a gender gap. Women farmers are particularly affected by the inadequate number of
agricultural extension service officers, which results in a lack of quality technical advice at the village
and household level. Access to productive resources such as land, modern inputs, technology,
education and financial services is a critical determinant to increase women’s agricultural productivity.
2.2.4. Financial barriers
Women in Tanzania face several financial barriers as they make lower incomes than men, tend to grow
food crops (also called priority crops) while men grow cash crops (also called strategic crops), and have
limited access to financial solutions such as credit, loans or guarantees.
Farm activities are the most important source of income for rural households and account for
approximately half of household incomes across all expenditure quintiles. Still, self-employed women
in agriculture earn significantly less than men, although there are significant regional variations. They
are more likely to be employed as casual farm labor and paid three times less than men for such work.
Despite their work on jointly operated plots being greater than that of their husbands, husbands
control which crops are produced on the jointly operated plot, decide when production is surplus to
household requirements, when and where crops will be disposed of, and retain control of the cash
generated.
There is also some evidence that women are more likely than men to spend earned income on their
family's needs (pay for clothing, health care, school fees and such as expenses for household
maintenance are considered to be the responsibility of a wife), while money earned by husbands is not
shared with their wives as they control the money and decide how to use it. Furthermore, men use
gender-based violence to take control of cash and non-cash resources generated by women, including
loans that women take from village savings and loan groups.
Men in Tanzania are largely responsible for cash crop farming and income-generating activities while
women take charge of food crops, help with cash crops, and provide the bulk of unpaid labor for

=== PAGE 136 ===
Page 133
household duties. Self-employed women in agriculture are more likely to use their land for subsistence
farming than for commercial farming. Due to unequal bargaining power within households, men are
more likely to influence the coping and adaptation strategies adopted within male-headed households
therefore favoring cash crops over food crops, increasing risks related to food security.
Few women can access credit and loans from banks and financial institutions as they lack formal
property rights necessary as collateral. Microcredit, though available, is limited and only 6% of
Tanzanians borrow from microcredit institutions. Group lending is an established practice in Tanzania,
but effective individual lending that would allow small enterprises to expand is underdeveloped
because of banking regulations.

=== PAGE 137 ===
Page 134
3. Actions and projects to reduce gender unbalance in Tanzania
3.1. CRDB Bank gender actions and policies
CRDB Bank is committed to fighting gender inequalities and inequities in Tanzania. To that intent, it
has developed its own Gender Policy, aligned with Tanzania’s gender commitments. By means of
implementation, CRDB has designed ad-hoc women-oriented products and solutions, such as the
Malkia Account.
3.1.1. CRDB Gender Policy
CRDB Bank has developed a Gender Policy in 2019 [29], based on the premise that Tanzania as a
country recognizes gender inequality as a major obstacle to socio-economic development of its people.
This policy outlines all gender-related aspects of CRDB Bank’s activities, defining gender as “social
attributes and opportunities associated with being male and female and the relationships between
women and men and girls and boys, as well as the relations between women and those between men.
These attributes, opportunities and relationships are socially constructed and are learned through
socialization processes.”
Internally, the policy implementation is under the responsibility of the Board of Directors and the
Senior Management and Directors’ (especially that of the Director of Risk and Compliance, and of the
Director of Human Resources), with support from Internal Audit and Lending Units teams. The policy
is applicable to all CRDB Bank’s staff, business units, departments, branches and subsidiaries, and to
other CRDB stakeholders (suppliers, implementing partners such as Tanzanian public and/or private
sector institution/firm/company or individuals).
CRDB Bank highlights that gender equality is both a development goal in itself and a precondition for
the achievement of other development outcomes. The bank has taken and continues to take various
measures to ensure gender equality and gender equity among all its employees and customers which
aims at achieving full and equal participation between women and men. The policy, aligned with CRDB
Bank’s internal policies and international and national agreements and policies applicable to Tanzania
and CRDB Bank, reaffirms CRDB Bank’s commitment to:
(i) Reduce gender disparities in leadership positions;
(ii) Transform gender relations;
(iii) Promote women’s empowerment;
(iv) Strengthen organisational structures and systems for gender equality by incorporating into
policies, plans, strategies and programmes;
(v) Redress gender gaps and inequalities between men and women;
(vi) Guide different bank’s business units on gender issues.
Most relevant to CRDB Bank’s action in climate and agriculture, the bank reminds that resource
shortages are gendered (worsening shortage and lack of access to water, energy and food sources, the
latter being highly gendered) and that climate change is hitting women and girls harder (women and
men do not experience the impacts of climate change and environmental degradation equally).
Women, will be more likely carrying additional work from unpredictable climate and worsening crop
failures. Women’s lack of access to land, finance and other resources increases their vulnerability to
climate change that acts as a magnifying glass (increased risks of gender inequalities in the access to
and control of resources and decision making power, of women poverty, of undermining women’s

=== PAGE 138 ===
Page 135
adaptive capabilities, and of preventing them from participating equally in solutions to climate
change).
To address climate change and agriculture challenges, CRDB Bank has adopted several commitments
and principles. The bank actively promotes gender issue within and outside the bank through the
delivery of financial services including loans and project/programs management. The bank
mainstreams gender in projects at all stages from identification to post evaluation. Indeed, CRDB
addresses gender considerations as part of the initial social assessment for all of its projects, including
program and sector loans. It is a pre-requisite for appraising and decision making. In addition, special
design features and strategies are built into projects to facilitate and encourage women’s involvement
and ensure tangible benefits to women. In implementing the provisions of this policy, the bank follows
six gender principles:
(i) Know them - Understand socio-economic and cultural contexts, gender norms and
perceptions;
(ii) Understand the needs and aspirations of women, men, boys and girls;
(iii) Understand the opportunities, and know where the levers for solutions lie;
(iv) Design with them - Develop appropriate, contextualised solutions and projects to ensure
all interventions are gender aware and could transform gender relations;
(v) Level the field - Use social and behaviour change communication and evidence-based
advocacy at household, community, and public policy levels to influence gender norms,
perceptions, and policies that perpetuate exclusion; and
(vi) Be accountable to them - Implement with clear roadmap for change, account for results
on sector, gender and generational outcomes, monitor progress and after-effects.
3.1.2. Malkia Account
CRDB Bank has created a bank account solution, the Malkia Account, tailored to women’s needs [30].
The Malkia Account is designed to help women meet their financial obligations and personal goals,
including in investment, education, business and healthcare by:
- Easing loaning conditions;
- Providing attractive loans: annual lending interest rate of 14% against 24% before Malkia
Accounts creation;
- Providing attractive interest rates on deposits: from 1.5% to 2.5%, depending on the amount
deposited;
- Providing special insurance products with discount [31].
CRDB Bank has also come up with a new scheme for women to access loans without collateral [32].
Overall, Malkia Account aims to help women boost their business. In addition to specific financial
products, women can also benefit from counseling from “Malkia Rafiki”, women experts providing
business advice and education on how to start their business [33]. More than 30,000 women have
already opened Malkia accounts showing its success [34].

=== PAGE 139 ===
Page 136
3.2. Other projects in agriculture
3.2.1 Policy Action for Climate Change Adaptation in East Africa
The “Policy Action for Climate Change Adaptation”, led by Climate Change, Agriculture, and Food
Security between 2014 and 2020, is a project seeking to inform and link policies and institutions from
national to local level for the development and adoption of climate-resilient food systems in Uganda
and Tanzania. Scientific communities and policy actors analyzed policy formulation and
implementation processes, trade-off analysis, future socio-economic and climate scenario
development, creating evidence-based gender awareness, and applied information economics to
better inform the implementation of climate-resilient policies, especially to integrate gender-
responsive climate-smart agricultural practices across multiple scales in the two countries (increased
appreciation of and actions towards including gender-sensitive policies and implementation).
Evidence was generated showing gender mainstreaming gaps in policy documents at national and sub-
national levels and gaps in gender budgeting at local government level. Almost half of the documents
reviewed in this project acknowledged the role of women as major actors in agriculture, but women
were portrayed as marginalized and vulnerable, with a disconnection in gender integration between
the national and district and lower levels of governance [35], [36].
3.2.2 Land tenure projects
Land tenure assistance projects, such as “Strengthening Women’s Land Tenure Rights in Matembo”,
led by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and DAI between 2015 and
2021, aim support women with land tenure issues by creating customary certificates of occupancy for
landholders to document land rights. Indeed, those rights are often denied to women as they are not
aware about them. Those certifications give more incentive to women to participate in agricultural
activities. Such ownerships spell greater security and independence for women, reduced conflict and
better use of resources for communities, and greater investment and agricultural productivity at
national scale. Thanks to those rights, women are granted equal stakes in couples’ properties and can
focus more on agricultural activities [37], [38], [39].
3.3 Other actions and projects to reduce gender unbalance
Women face several vulnerabilities in several sectors. Among other sectors where actions are
currently, or have recently been, implemented by international and local actors are:
- Education: projects such as “Waache Wasome - Let them Learn” led by the USAID and the
Bantwana Wolrd Education Initiative between 2016 and 2021, support highly vulnerable girls
who dropped out of school, to create a friendlier and more supportive environment for girls
at school and to provide alternative education pathways. Many girls face several barriers to
finishing their education among which poverty of their parents leading to investing more into
boys education, or gender-based violence, early marriage, pregnancy, and physical, sexual,
and emotional violence as estimated 44% of adolescent girls in Tanzania have given birth or
are pregnant before age 19, while by age 17, an estimated 58% of girls who are married have
dropped out [40], [41];
- Access to legal support: projects such as the common project led by USAID and Women in Law
and Development in Africa provide legal aid and gender-based violence services [42];

--- Table 1 on Page 139 ---
The “Policy Action for Climate Change Adaptation”, led by Climate Change, Agriculture, and Food
Security between 2014 and 2020, is a project seeking to inform and link policies and institutions from
national to local level for the development and adoption of climate-resilient food systems in Uganda
and Tanzania. Scientific communities and policy actors analyzed policy formulation and
implementation processes, trade-off analysis, future socio-economic and climate scenario
development, creating evidence-based gender awareness, and applied information economics to
better inform the implementation of climate-resilient policies, especially to integrate gender-
responsive climate-smart agricultural practices across multiple scales in the two countries (increased
appreciation of and actions towards including gender-sensitive policies and implementation).

--- Table 2 on Page 139 ---
Evidence was generated showing gender mainstreaming gaps in policy documents at national and sub-
national levels and gaps in gender budgeting at local government level. Almost half of the documents
reviewed in this project acknowledged the role of women as major actors in agriculture, but women
were portrayed as marginalized and vulnerable, with a disconnection in gender integration between
the national and district and lower levels of governance [35], [36].

--- Table 3 on Page 139 ---
Land tenure assistance projects, such as “Strengthening Women’s Land Tenure Rights in Matembo”,
led by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and DAI between 2015 and
2021, aim support women with land tenure issues by creating customary certificates of occupancy for
landholders to document land rights. Indeed, those rights are often denied to women as they are not
aware about them. Those certifications give more incentive to women to participate in agricultural
activities. Such ownerships spell greater security and independence for women, reduced conflict and
better use of resources for communities, and greater investment and agricultural productivity at
national scale. Thanks to those rights, women are granted equal stakes in couples’ properties and can
focus more on agricultural activities [37], [38], [39].

--- Table 4 on Page 139 ---
Women face several vulnerabilities in several sectors. Among other sectors where actions are
currently, or have recently been, implemented by international and local actors are:

--- Table 5 on Page 139 ---
Education: projects such as “Waache Wasome - Let them Learn” led by the USAID and the
Bantwana Wolrd Education Initiative between 2016 and 2021, support highly vulnerable girls
who dropped out of school, to create a friendlier and more supportive environment for girls
at school and to provide alternative education pathways. Many girls face several barriers to
finishing their education among which poverty of their parents leading to investing more into
boys education, or gender-based violence, early marriage, pregnancy, and physical, sexual,
and emotional violence as estimated 44% of adolescent girls in Tanzania have given birth or
are pregnant before age 19, while by age 17, an estimated 58% of girls who are married have
dropped out [40], [41];
Access to legal support: projects such as the common project led by USAID and Women in Law
and Development in Africa provide legal aid and gender-based violence services [42];

=== PAGE 140 ===
Page 137
- Reinforcement of the participation in the political life: projects such as “Wanawake
Wanaweza” led by the USAID and the UN Fund for Women between 2018 and 2022, increase
female participation in political parties and electoral processes. Several projects aimed to
counter closing civic and political space, bolster freedom of expression, improve the advocacy
and communication capabilities of local organizations, promote transparent and accountable
systems free from corruption, and strengthen human rights among vulnerable populations,
especially by increasing the diversity of both candidates and internal party decision-makers
[42], [43], [44];
- Access to health and protection against HIV: projects such as “Sauti” led by the USAID
between 2015 and 2020, raise awareness and create demand for medical services, to increase
family planning and HIV testing and counselling. Such projects especially focused on
vulnerable populations as nearly one in three girls experiences some form of sexual violence
before turning 18, while almost four in 10 women have experienced physical violence, and
one in five women over age 15 reports experiencing sexual violence in her lifetime. Therefore,
the UNAIDS 90-90-90 goals intended to let 90% of people infected with HIV to be aware of it,
90% of people diagnosed receiving sustained antiretroviral therapy, and 90 of people under
retroviral therapy to have viral suppression [45], [46];
- Access to water and sanitation: projects such as “Water Resources Integration Development
Initiative – WARIDI” led by the USAID and Tetra Tech between 2016 and 2021, improve access
to sanitation and hygiene [47], [48];
- Financial security: projects such as “Women’s Empowerment and Entrepreneurship
Initiative” led by the USAID, Dining for Women and African People & Wildlife between 2016
and 2017, develop economic activities, such as beehive entrepreneurship, to provide financial
independence to women and allow them to gain status and decision-making power above the
traditional household roles limitations. Several projects also aimed to train groups of
vulnerable people on business skills, financial management and gender issues, like effective
communications skills, contraceptive methods and gender-based violence to help women
take control of their finances and raise up their communities, and understand their health
risks and opportunities to build bright futures [49], [50], [51].

--- Table 1 on Page 140 ---
Reinforcement of the participation in the political life: projects such as “Wanawake
Wanaweza” led by the USAID and the UN Fund for Women between 2018 and 2022, increase
female participation in political parties and electoral processes. Several projects aimed to
counter closing civic and political space, bolster freedom of expression, improve the advocacy
and communication capabilities of local organizations, promote transparent and accountable
systems free from corruption, and strengthen human rights among vulnerable populations,
especially by increasing the diversity of both candidates and internal party decision-makers
[42], [43], [44];
Access to health and protection against HIV: projects such as “Sauti” led by the USAID
between 2015 and 2020, raise awareness and create demand for medical services, to increase
family planning and HIV testing and counselling. Such projects especially focused on
vulnerable populations as nearly one in three girls experiences some form of sexual violence
before turning 18, while almost four in 10 women have experienced physical violence, and
one in five women over age 15 reports experiencing sexual violence in her lifetime. Therefore,
the UNAIDS 90-90-90 goals intended to let 90% of people infected with HIV to be aware of it,
90% of people diagnosed receiving sustained antiretroviral therapy, and 90 of people under
retroviral therapy to have viral suppression [45], [46];
Access to water and sanitation: projects such as “Water Resources Integration Development
Initiative – WARIDI” led by the USAID and Tetra Tech between 2016 and 2021, improve access
to sanitation and hygiene [47], [48];
Financial security: projects such as “

--- Table 2 on Page 140 ---
 | develop economic activities, such as beehive entrepreneurship, to provide financial
independence to women and allow them to gain status and decision-making power above the | 
traditional household roles limitations. Several projects also aimed to train groups of | 
vulnerable people on business skills, financial management and gender issues, like effective | 
communications skills, contraceptive methods and gender-based violence to help women | 
take control of their finances and raise up their communities, and understand their health | 
risks and opportunities to build bright futures [49], [50], [51]. | 

=== PAGE 141 ===
Page 138
4. Problem tree analysis
Below is the problem tree analysis realized for the “Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme” project:

=== PAGE 142 ===
Page 139
The overall objective of the TACATDP is to support farmers with adaptation tools, knowledge, and
capacity to enable best adaptation options to current and future climatic contexts and agronomic
specificities. It will therefore intend to address several of the barriers and challenges specifically
identified for women, either directly or indirectly through the following major components:
- Adaptation credits:
(i) Promotion of long-term investment projects in agriculture to create a reliable market
for agricultural products, enhance food security and encourage climate resilient and
environmental ethical practices;
(ii) Increase of the financial inclusion of smallholders farmers and increasing their
productivity by making high cost technologies accessible and establishing service
delivery channels easing the access to financial services;
(iii) Introduction of simplified and affordable financial products with potential
considerations to insure crops;
(iv) Promotion of climate resilient agriculture to encourage organic farming practice and
reduce the utilization of uncertified seeds, industrial fertilizers and pesticides, and the
improper usage of water resources and labor intensity;
(v) Aggregation of smallholder farmers to intensify farming activities through large scale
environmental friendly infrastructures;
(vi) Support to the structuring of smallholders farming around climate resilient agriculture
practices, as well as additional support to promote saving accounts, health insurance
etc.
Output (i) will reinforce women’s economic integration and income generation by structuring the
market and providing support for food safety instead of food safety almost entirely relying on women
(barrier 2.2.4). Outputs (ii), (v) and (vi) will directly influence women as most of them are smallholders,
reducing their vulnerability and structuring their activity in larger plots (barrier 2.2.1). Outputs (iii) and
(iv) will address the unequal access to technologies, techniques and financial solutions, leveling the
field between men and women (barrier 2.2.3).
- Guarantee support: Structuration of a guarantee facility to support partial credit risk
guarantees for agriculture lending operations, due to specific challenges such as high credit
risks, elevated interest rates and request for collateral requirements which farmers cannot
afford. Women in agriculture being the most financially vulnerable populations, they will
highly benefit from such credit risk guarantees as CRDB Bank will be able to lend money for
projects it wouldn’t have been able to finance otherwise. Moreover, by alleviating collateral
requirements, CRDB Bank will remove the highest burden preventing women from accessing
financial solutions (barrier 2.2.4);
- Technical assistance: Implementation of technical assistance packages and policy
intervention in:
(i) Building institutions’ capacity to implement adaptation measures and adopt climate
resilient agriculture finance;
(ii) Designing and developing climate risks assessment tools to evaluate the viability of
business proposals;
(iii) Training farmers on climate resilient and adaptation solutions;
(iv) Supporting the extension of services in order to apply Good Agricultural Practices in
agriculture;
(v) Supporting policy interventions to attract private sector actors in agriculture resilience
and adaptation lending operations.

=== PAGE 143 ===
Page 140
Outputs (i) and (v) will help structure resilient and adaptation agriculture in Tanzania, reinforcing the
sector and therefore providing better business opportunities for both women and men (barrier 2.2.4).
Outputs (ii), (iii) and (iv) will provide tools, training and support to adopt climate resilient and
adaptation methods, knowledge for which women are more in demand than men, as seen in the
barriers and challenges section (barrier 2.2.3).

=== PAGE 144 ===
Page 141
Bibliography
[1] Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, Green Climate Fund, Aug 2017
https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/guidelines-gcf-toolkit-mainstreaming-
gender_0.pdf
[2] Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, United Nations, 1979
https://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/
[3] UN Treaty Body Database - Reporting Status for United Republic of Tanzania, United Nations Human
Rights Treaty Bodies
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/TreatyBodyExternal/Countries.aspx?CountryCode=TZA&La
ng=EN
[4] Fourth World Conference on Women - Beijing Platform for Action, United Nations, 1995
https://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/
[5] Enhanced Lima Work Programme on Gender, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, 2014
https://unfccc.int/topics/gender/workstreams/the-enhanced-lima-work-programme-on-
gender#:~:text=In%202014%20the%20COP%20established,responsive%20climate%20policy%20and
%20action
[6] National Strategy for Gender Development, United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Community
Development Gender and Children, 2008
https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=en&p_isn=94117
[7] Tanzania Country Gender Profile, United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Health, Community
Development, Gender, Elderly and Children, Oct 2016
https://data.em2030.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/TZ-Country-Gender-Profile-004.pdf
[8] What are the Factors Driving the Gender Gap in Agricultural Productivity in Tanzania?, A. Haroon
Akram-Lodhi, Immakulata Komba, April 2018
https://info.undp.org/docs/pdc/Documents/TZA/Final%20Report%20%20Gender%20Gap%20April%
202018.pdf
[9] The Tanzania Development Vision 2025, United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Finance and
Planning, 1999
http://www.mof.go.tz/mofdocs/overarch/vision2025.htm
[10] Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan 2014-2019 , United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of
Agriculture, Food Security and Cooperatives, Sep 2014
http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/tan152483.pdf
[11] National Five Year Development Plan 2016/17 - 2020/21, United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of
Finance and Planning, Jun 2016
http://www.tzdpg.or.tz/fileadmin/documents/external/national_development_frameworks/National
_Five_Year_Development_Plan__2016_17_%E2%80%93_2020_21_1_.pdf
[12] Agricultural Sector Development Programme Phase Two (ASDP II), United Republic of Tanzania
Ministry of Agriculture Food Security and Cooperatives, May 2016
http://www.tzdpg.or.tz/fileadmin/documents/external/national_development_frameworks/ASDP2_
Final_Document_20_May._2016__after_edit__1_.pdf
[13] Climate Smart Agriculture Guideline, United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Agriculture Food
Security and Cooperatives, May 2017
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323219095_Climate-Smart_Agriculture_Guideline
[14] Initial National Communication under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, United Republic of Tanzania Vice President's Office, Mar 2003
https://unfccc.int/documents/144911

=== PAGE 145 ===
Page 142
[15] National Adaptation Programme of Action, United Republic of Tanzania Vice President's Unit, Jan
2007
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/tza01.pdf
[16] Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, United Republic of Tanzania Vice President's Office, Sep 2014
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/tzanc2.pdf
[17] Nationally Determined Contributions, United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Environment,
Water and Climate Change, May 2018
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/The%20United%20Republic%20of%
20Tanzania%20First%20NDC/The%20United%20Republic%20of%20Tanzania%20First%20NDC.pdf
[18] National Strategy on Gender and Climate Change, United Republic of Tanzania Vice President's
Office, 2013
https://portals.iucn.org/union/sites/union/files/doc/tanzania_ccgap_original.pdf
[19] Human Development Reports - Tanzania, United Nations Development Programme
http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/TZA
[20] Gender in climate change, agriculture, and natural resource policies: insights from East Africa,
Edidah L. Ampaire, Mariola Acosta, Sofia Huyer, Ritah Kigonya, Perez Muchunguzi, Rebecca Muna &
Laurence Jassogne, May 2019
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584-019-02447-0
[21] Human Development Reports Technical notes, United Nations Development Programme
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr2020_technical_notes.pdf
[22] The cost of the gender gap in agricultural productivity in Malawi, Tanzania and Uganda, UN
Women, UNDP, UNEP, and the World Bank Group, Oct 2015
https://www.unwomen.org/-
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2015/costing%20gender%20gap_la
unch.pdf?la=en&vs=2608
[23] 2014 Integrated Labour Force Survey (ILFS) - Analytical Report, Tanzania National Bureau of
Statistics, 2014
https://www.nbs.go.tz/index.php/en/census-surveys/labour-statistics/141-the-2014-integrated-
labour-force-survey-ilfs-analytical-report
[24] FAO in Tanzania, Food and Agriculture Organization
http://www.fao.org/tanzania/fao-in-tanzania/tanzania-at-a-
glance/en/#:~:text=Agriculture%20accounts%20for%2026.7%20percent,majority%20of%20the%20n
ation's%20population.
[25] Female headed households (% of households with a female head) - Tanzania, The World Bank
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.HOU.FEMA.ZS?locations=TZ
[26] Household Budget Survey 2017 - 2018 Key Indicators Report, United Republic of Tanzania National
Bureau of Statistics, Jun 2019
https://www.nbs.go.tz/nbs/takwimu/hbs/2017_18_HBS_Key_Indicators_Report_Engl.pdf
[27] Gender and Agriculture in Tanzania, Evans School Policy Analysis and Research, Apr 2011
https://epar.evans.uw.edu/sites/default/files/UW_EPAR_Request_134_Gender%20and%20Ag_0410
2011_0.pdf
[28] Gender Inequality and Symbolic Violence in Women’s Access to Family Land in the Southern
Highlands of Tanzania, Justin Lusasi, Dismas Mwaseba, Nov 2020
https://www.mdpi.com/2073-445X/9/11/468
[29] CRDB Bank Gender Policy, CRDB Bank Plc, May 2019
[30] CRDB Bank empowering women SMEs, The Citizen
https://www.thecitizen.co.tz/tanzania/supplement/crdb-bank-empowering-women-smes-2703700
[31] CRDB Bank Malkia Account, CRDB Bank Plc
https://crdbbank.co.tz/malkia-account/
[32] CRDB scheme to boost women entrepreneurs, SME Finance Forum, Jun 2014
https://cdn.smefinanceforum.org/post/crdb-scheme-to-boost-women-entrepreneurs?page=5

=== PAGE 146 ===
Page 143
[33] CRDB offers big loan interest cut to women entrepreneurs, The Citizen, Jul 2020
https://www.thecitizen.co.tz/tanzania/news/business/crdb-offers-big-loan-interest-cut-to-women-
entrepreneurs-2712066
[34] Tanzania: Crdb Slashes Women Loan Interest to 14pc, AllAfrica, Jul 2020
https://allafrica.com/stories/202007030390.html
[35] Policy Action for Climate Change Adaptation in East Africa, Climate Change, Agriculture and Food
Security
https://ccafs.cgiar.org/research/projects/policy-action-climate-change-adaptation-east-
africa#.WIoyqn3RB4M
[36] Policy Action for Climate Change Adaptation. PROJECT SYNTHESIS REPORT, 2014-2020, Climate
Change, Agriculture and Food Security, Dec 2020
https://ccafs.cgiar.org/resources/publications/policy-action-climate-change-adaptation-project-
synthesis-report-2014
[37] Strengthening Women’s Land Tenure Rights in Matembo, USAID, Mar 2019
https://www.usaid.gov/tanzania/news/strengthening-women%E2%80%99s-land-tenure-rights-
matembo
[38] Land Rights Mark a New Frontier for Tanzania's Rural Women, USAID, Feb 2017
https://www.usaid.gov/results-data/success-stories/land-rights-mark-new-frontier-rural-women
[39] Tanzania—Feed the Future Tanzania Land Tenure Assistance (LTA), DAI
https://www.dai.com/our-work/projects/tanzania-feed-future-tanzania-land-tenure-assistance-lta
[40] Waache Wasome “Let them Learn”, Bantwana World Education Initiative
https://bantwana.org/project/waache-wasome/
[41] 'We are the future', USAID, Jul 2019
https://usaidpubs.exposure.co/we-are-the-future
[42] Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment, USAID, Jan 2021
https://www.usaid.gov/tanzania/our-work/gender-equality-and-women%E2%80%99s-
empowerment
[43] Democracy, Human Rights, and Governance, USAID, Jan 2021
https://www.usaid.gov/tanzania/democracy-human-rights-and-governance
[44] Wanawake Wanaweza, USAID, Sep 2019
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1860/UN_Women_Wanawake_Wanaweza_U
SAID_Draft_Factsheet_2019_2.pdf
[45] Sauti Project, USAID, Mar 2019
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1860/03.27.2019_Sauti.pdf
[46] 3 ways Tanzania addresses violence against women & children to help end HIV/AIDS, US Agency
for International Development, Nov 2019
https://medium.com/usaid-2030/3-ways-tanzania-addresses-violence-against-women-children-to-
help-end-hiv-aids-1b76313e58fe
[47] Water Management: Helping Women in Rural Tanzania Find Their Voice, USAID, Avr 2019
https://www.usaid.gov/tanzania/news/apr-10-2019-water-management-helping-women-rural-
tanzania-find-their-voice
[48] Water Resources Integration Development Initiative (WARIDI), USAID, Sep 2020
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/WARIDI_Fact_Sheet_Q4_2020.pdf
[49] Beekeeping Empowers Maasai Women in Northern Tanzania, USAID, Avr 2019
https://www.usaid.gov/results-data/success-stories/beekeeping-empowers-maasai-women-
northern-tanzania
[50] On International Women’s Day, We’re Celebrating Empowered, Independent Women!, Jhpiego,
Mar 2018
https://medium.com/@Jhpiego/on-international-womens-day-we-re-celebrating-empowered-
independent-women-662d3fd65ba1
[51] Women’s Empowerment and Entrepreneurship Initiative, African People & Wildlife, 2017
https://togetherwomenrise.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/AFRPW-FPR.pdf

=== PAGE 147 ===
Page 144
Gender Action Plan
I- Methodology
This Gender Action Plan has been developed along with a Gender Assessment as technical annexes for the
Tanzania Agriculture Climate Adaptation Technology Deployment Programme (TACATDP) Funding
Proposal developed by CRDB Bank and submitted to the Green Climate Fund. It is aligned with several of
the GCF’s objectives including with GCF own Gender Action Plan:
▪ Gender -balanced stakeholder consultations at all stages (at least 40%, with a target of 50% for all
consultations);
▪ Objective to promote gender equality in climate action (gender equality at all stages and solutions
tailored to gender specific context, such as more attractive loans or guarantees for women due to their
vulnerable situation);
▪ Women and men will report improvements in their quality of life;
▪ Reduction of the vulnerability of both women and men;
▪ Increase in the adaptive capacity of women and men to respond to the impacts of climate change;
▪ Prevention of economic losses increase in economic opportunities and mitigation of gender-related risks.
II- Objectives
The overall objective of the TACATDP is to support farmers with adaptation tools, knowledge, and capacity
to enable best adaptation options to current and future climatic contexts and agronomic specificities. The
TACATDP explicitly aims to integrate a strong gender lens, ensuring specific targets for women famers
groups and female agribusinesses. More specifically, it intends to provide financial and technical solutions
to farmers, especially women due to their high vulnerability to climate change in Tanzania. Several social
benefits are to be expected, such as an increase in the employment among vulnerable populations of women
and youth.
The TACATDP aims to achieve the following main gender focused results: (i) Equal access to agriculture
financing solutions (loans, guarantees and insurance) in terms of overall amount funded, number of
projects/farms funded, and type of farms funded; (ii) Sensitization of all agriculture value chain
stakeholders, policy makers and financial institutions to gender aspects in resilient agriculture solutions,
and equal opportunities for women and men farmers to adopt diversified, climate-resilient agricultural
options; (iii) Gender responsive and equal participation of women at all stages of the project, during its
design, implementation, and after full implementation (consultations, trainings, awareness raising, etc.);
and (iv) Integration of gender considerations in all the deliverables (parametric insurance, online interfaces,
new/updated policies, manuals, etc.) based on sex-disaggregated data.
Focusing on gender aspects, TACATDP offers balanced opportunities for women’s and men's active
participation. Through a network of microfinance partners and mobile banking facilities, the project will
apply methods and approaches to increase the engagement of small-scale female farm operators and
women-led agribusinesses. The project will make credit available to invest in enterprise expansion,
productivity-enhancing technologies, farm adaptation activities, and improved livelihood strategies. They
will be prioritized in capacity-building activities. It is expected that promoting the use of laborsaving
technologies will help ease the time burden on women; burden they face in their productive capacities. The

=== PAGE 148 ===
Page 145
project will also reduce the burden of unpaid work that often disproportionately falls on women and girls
in every region of the world. The project will further explore and implement an opportunity to address their
access to and control over resources and their decision-making ability over their work burden, opening
greater opportunity for other socio-economic perspectives, including girls' education and women’s
engagement in economic diversification and increase participation in social life. The project will focus on
balancing gender on 50/50 gender balance of potential beneficiaries during project execution.
Finally, all stakeholders involved in the project implementation will have to sign CRDB Gender Policy
upfront and will have to follow and enforce this policy through the whole project. This will ensure that
financial institutions are gender sensitive and that gender responsive actions are embedded in institutional
behaviors and practices, especially in the Technical Assistance and for capacity building components.
In addition, CRDB will put as eligibility criteria the signature of a “statement of non-exclusion criteria”
related to gender policy that will include a disposal for violence against women. If any allegation against a
farmer having received a financial facility from CRDB would occur, that facility will be suspended. In case
the financial facility beneficiary would be condemned by a court for any violence against women, the
financial facility will be stopped immediately with penalties.

=== PAGE 149 ===
Page 146
III- Gender Action Plan
Below is the Gender Action Plan prepared for the TACATDP project:
Activities Indicators and targets Costs* Responsibilities Timeline
Impact Statement: Financial solutions and products (loans, guarantees and insurance) and technical assistance to support development and
adoption of climate change adaptation technologies and solutions. These solutions will increase agriculture resilience in Tanzania, especially for
women which are the most vulnerable populations in Tanzania and do not have equal access to financing and technical solutions as men. They
will therefore promote gender equality in climate action and increase the adaptive capacity of both men and women. The programme will ensure
gender aspects integration at all levels, during the project implementation (consultations, training, awareness raising) and after project
implementation (gender informed deliverables such as policies, manuals and parametric insurance relying on sex-disaggregated data). Gender
balancing will be ensured for CRDB Bank personnel at all stages as well as for all other stakeholders involved in the programme. Finally, the
programme has already integrated gender aspects considerations since design phase, through the preparation of the project concept note and during
the design of activities for the Funding Proposal.
Output statement: At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of both amounts provided through financial support (loans, guarantees and insurance
schemes) and numbers of projects receiving those supports; at least 30% of medium and large farms loans dedicated to female owned farms; at
least 50 funded projects supporting effective adaptation to climate in the agriculture led by female farmers; at least 5 new technologies, practices
or livelihood diversification options, equally available to men and women; 80% of local financial institutions, financing agriculture activities,
sensitized to lending and guarantee providing to female farmers; at least 30% of local financial institutions providing guarantees to female farmers;
100% of female smallholder farmers aware of, and allowed access to insurance schemes; at least 80% of female smallholder farmers accessing
insurance schemes; at least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female stakeholders involved in all trainings, consultations and preparation of
deliverables; at least 40%, with a target of 50%, of the budget spent on activities ensuring gender equality; integration of gender specific aspects
(risks, impacts, considerations, parameters, etc), informed with sex-disaggregated data, in all the deliverables (online interface, extension service
and insurance parametric programmes, policy updating and technical support, etc.); at least 40%, with a target of 50%, of women owned
agribusinesses during capacity building and extension programme activities; creation of at least 10 climate agribusiness incubators providing
equal support to men and women; creation of at least 10 climate agribusiness incubators providing equal support to men and women; at least 30
women climate agribusiness entrepreneurs incubated; promotion of business successes for 10 women on the online interface; at least 40%, with
a 50% target, of CRDB Bank personnel trained through the different training activities being women.
Means of verification: Annual Performance Reports, Interim Evaluation, Completion Report, Final Evaluation.
* Costs are indicative of the overall amount dedicated to each activity and do not focus on gender specific considerations (amounts extracted from the Funding
Proposal)

--- Table 1 on Page 149 ---
Activities | Indicators and targets | Costs* | Responsibilities | Timeline
Impact Statement: Financial solutions and products (loans, guarantees and insurance) and technical assistance to support development and
adoption of climate change adaptation technologies and solutions. These solutions will increase agriculture resilience in Tanzania, especially for
women which are the most vulnerable populations in Tanzania and do not have equal access to financing and technical solutions as men. They
will therefore promote gender equality in climate action and increase the adaptive capacity of both men and women. The programme will ensure
gender aspects integration at all levels, during the project implementation (consultations, training, awareness raising) and after project
implementation (gender informed deliverables such as policies, manuals and parametric insurance relying on sex-disaggregated data). Gender
balancing will be ensured for CRDB Bank personnel at all stages as well as for all other stakeholders involved in the programme. Finally, the
programme has already integrated gender aspects considerations since design phase, through the preparation of the project concept note and during
the design of activities for the Funding Proposal.
Output statement: At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of both amounts provided through financial support (loans, guarantees and insurance
schemes) and numbers of projects receiving those supports; at least 30% of medium and large farms loans dedicated to female owned farms; at
least 50 funded projects supporting effective adaptation to climate in the agriculture led by female farmers; at least 5 new technologies, practices
or livelihood diversification options, equally available to men and women; 80% of local financial institutions, financing agriculture activities,
sensitized to lending and guarantee providing to female farmers; at least 30% of local financial institutions providing guarantees to female farmers;
100% of female smallholder farmers aware of, and allowed access to insurance schemes; at least 80% of female smallholder farmers accessing
insurance schemes; at least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female stakeholders involved in all trainings, consultations and preparation of
deliverables; at least 40%, with a target of 50%, of the budget spent on activities ensuring gender equality; integration of gender specific aspects
(risks, impacts, considerations, parameters, etc), informed with sex-disaggregated data, in all the deliverables (online interface, extension service
and insurance parametric programmes, policy updating and technical support, etc.); at least 40%, with a target of 50%, of women owned
agribusinesses during capacity building and extension programme activities; creation of at least 10 climate agribusiness incubators providing
equal support to men and women; creation of at least 10 climate agribusiness incubators providing equal support to men and women; at least 30
women climate agribusiness entrepreneurs incubated; promotion of business successes for 10 women on the online interface; at least 40%, with
a 50% target, of CRDB Bank personnel trained through the different training activities being women.
Means of verification: Annual Performance Reports, Interim Evaluation, Completion Report, Final Evaluation. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 150 ===
Page 147
Activities Indicators and targets Costs† Responsibilities Timeline
Component 1: Agriculture Resilience and Adaptation (ARA) Innovative Financial Products
Output statement: At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of both amounts provided through financial support (loans, guarantees and insurance
schemes) and numbers of projects receiving those supports; at least 30% of medium and large farms loans dedicated to female owned farms; at
least 50 funded projects supporting effective adaptation to climate in the agriculture led by female farmers; at least 5 new technologies, practices
or livelihood diversification options, equally available to men and women; 80% of local financial institutions, financing agriculture activities,
sensitized to lending and guarantee providing to female farmers; at least 30% of local financial institutions providing guarantees to female
farmers; 100% of female smallholder farmers aware of, and allowed access to insurance schemes; at least 80% of female smallholder farmers
accessing insurance schemes.
Activity 1.1: Establishment of ▪ Development of at least 1 women-dedicated credit line USD 85M CRDB Bank and Within first
a dedicated credit line for options integrating women-specific interests (baseline: (50% of the Implementing 6 months
CRDB ARA lending 0) USD 170M partners
operations ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of ARA credit overall
volume to support effective adaptation to climate in activity
agriculture dedicated to women (baseline: 0) amount)
▪ At least 10 000 women receiving ARA loans each year
(baseline: 0)
▪ At least 10 000 women benefitting from the adoption
of diversified, climate resilient technologies, practices
and livelihood options (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 30% of medium and large farms loans
dedicated to female owned farms (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 50 funded projects supporting effective
adaptation to climate in the agriculture led by female
farmers (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 5 new technologies, practices or livelihood
diversification options, equally available to men and
women (baseline: 0)
Activity 1.2: Expand guarantee ▪ Development of at least 1 women-dedicated guarantee USD 5M CRDB Bank and Within first
coverage to support ARA solution integrating women-specific interests (50% of the Implementing 2 years
activities (baseline: 0) USD 10M partners
overall
† Costs are indicative of the overall amount dedicated to each activity and do not focus on gender specific considerations (amounts extracted from the Funding
Proposal)

--- Table 1 on Page 150 ---
Activities |  | Indicators and targets | Costs† | Responsibilities | Timeline | 
 | Component 1: Agriculture Resilience and Adaptation (ARA) Innovative Financial Products |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output statement: At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of both amounts provided through financial support (loans, guarantees and insurance |  |  |  |  | 
 | schemes) and numbers of projects receiving those supports; at least 30% of medium and large farms loans dedicated to female owned farms; at |  |  |  |  | 
 | least 50 funded projects supporting effective adaptation to climate in the agriculture led by female farmers; at least 5 new technologies, practices |  |  |  |  | 
 | or livelihood diversification options, equally available to men and women; 80% of local financial institutions, financing agriculture activities, |  |  |  |  | 
 | sensitized to lending and guarantee providing to female farmers; at least 30% of local financial institutions providing guarantees to female |  |  |  |  | 
 | farmers; 100% of female smallholder farmers aware of, and allowed access to insurance schemes; at least 80% of female smallholder farmers |  |  |  |  | 
 | accessing insurance schemes. |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 1.1: Establishment of
a dedicated credit line for
CRDB ARA lending
operations |  | ▪ Development of at least 1 women-dedicated credit line
options integrating women-specific interests (baseline:
0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of ARA credit
volume to support effective adaptation to climate in
agriculture dedicated to women (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 10 000 women receiving ARA loans each year
(baseline: 0)
▪ At least 10 000 women benefitting from the adoption
of diversified, climate resilient technologies, practices
and livelihood options (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 30% of medium and large farms loans
dedicated to female owned farms (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 50 funded projects supporting effective
adaptation to climate in the agriculture led by female
farmers (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 5 new technologies, practices or livelihood
diversification options, equally available to men and
women (baseline: 0) | USD 85M
(50% of the
USD 170M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank and
Implementing
partners | Within first
6 months | 
Activity 1.2: Expand guarantee
coverage to support ARA
activities |  | ▪ Development of at least 1 women-dedicated guarantee
solution integrating women-specific interests
(baseline: 0) | USD 5M
(50% of the
USD 10M
overall | CRDB Bank and
Implementing
partners | Within first
2 years | 

=== PAGE 151 ===
Page 148
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of guarantees’ activity
amount to support effective adaptation to climate in amount)
the agriculture dedicated to women (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of guarantees
credit facilities opened for female farmers (baseline: 0)
▪ 80% of local financial institutions, financing
agriculture activities, sensitized to lending and
guarantee providing to female farmers (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 30% of local financial institutions providing
guarantees to female farmers (baseline: 0)
Activity 1.3: Establishment of ▪ 100% of female smallholder farmers aware of, and USD 5M CRDB Bank and Within first
an insurance scheme dedicated allowed access to insurance schemes (baseline: 0) (50% of the Implementing 2 years
to ARA for smallholder ▪ At least 80% of female smallholder farmers accessing USD 10M partners
farmers insurance schemes (baseline: 0) overall
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of total value of activity
assets protected belonging to female farmers (baseline: amount)
0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of the insurance
scheme payout dedicated to women (baseline: 0)

--- Table 1 on Page 151 ---
 | ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of guarantees’
amount to support effective adaptation to climate in
the agriculture dedicated to women (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of guarantees
credit facilities opened for female farmers (baseline: 0)
▪ 80% of local financial institutions, financing
agriculture activities, sensitized to lending and
guarantee providing to female farmers (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 30% of local financial institutions providing
guarantees to female farmers (baseline: 0) | activity
amount) |  | 
Activity 1.3: Establishment of
an insurance scheme dedicated
to ARA for smallholder
farmers | ▪ 100% of female smallholder farmers aware of, and
allowed access to insurance schemes (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 80% of female smallholder farmers accessing
insurance schemes (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of total value of
assets protected belonging to female farmers (baseline:
0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of the insurance
scheme payout dedicated to women (baseline: 0) | USD 5M
(50% of the
USD 10M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank and
Implementing
partners | Within first
2 years

=== PAGE 152 ===
Page 149
Activities Indicators and targets Costs‡ Responsibilities Timeline
Component 2: Technical assistance (all enabling activities, managed by CRDB Bank)
Output statement: At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female stakeholders involved in all trainings, consultations and preparation of
deliverables; at least 40%, with a target of 50%, of the budget spent on activities ensuring gender equality; integration of gender specific aspects
(risks, impacts, considerations, parameters, etc), informed with sex-disaggregated data, in all the deliverables (online interface, extension
service and insurance parametric programmes, policy updating and technical support, etc.); at least 40%, with a target of 50%, of women owned
agribusinesses during capacity building and extension programme activities; creation of at least 10 climate agribusiness incubators providing
equal support to men and women; creation of at least 10 climate agribusiness incubators providing equal support to men and women; at least 30
women climate agribusiness entrepreneurs incubated; promotion of business successes for 10 women on the online interface; at least 40%, with
a 50% target, of CRDB Bank personnel trained through the different training activities being women.
Activity 2.1: Development of ▪ At least 40%, with a 50% target, of CRDB Bank USD 1,25M CRDB Bank, By end of
an online interface and training personnel trained on the climate risks assessment tool (50% of the Implementing the
support for the CRDB climate being women (baseline: 0) USD 2.5M partners, sub- programme
risks assessment tool ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female overall lenders
stakeholders involved in the preparation of the online activity
interface (consultations, preparation of the interface amount)
preparation, etc.) (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of gender specific risks and impacts in the
interface (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data in the interface
(baseline: 0)
Activity 2.2: Customer ▪ Capacity building targeting women-specific needs and USD 0,5M CRDB Bank, Within first
capacity building on adaptation barriers (especially on developing skills related to (66% of the Implementing year
technologies and business implementing ecofriendly solutions, management, USD 0.75M partners,
development economic planning and other skills relevant to women- overall agriculture value
led agribusinesses) (baseline: 0) activity chain
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of trainees being amount) stakeholders
female stakeholders (baseline: 0)
▪ 100% of the trainees understanding adaptation
technologies and business development solutions, with
a special focus on gender-specific solutions (baseline:
0)
‡ Costs are indicative of the overall amount dedicated to each activity and do not focus on gender specific considerations (amounts extracted from the Funding
Proposal)

--- Table 1 on Page 152 ---
Activities |  | Indicators and targets | Costs‡ | Responsibilities | Timeline | 
 | Component 2: Technical assistance (all enabling activities, managed by CRDB Bank) |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output statement: At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female stakeholders involved in all trainings, consultations and preparation of |  |  |  |  | 
 | deliverables; at least 40%, with a target of 50%, of the budget spent on activities ensuring gender equality; integration of gender specific aspects |  |  |  |  | 
 | (risks, impacts, considerations, parameters, etc), informed with sex-disaggregated data, in all the deliverables (online interface, extension |  |  |  |  | 
 | service and insurance parametric programmes, policy updating and technical support, etc.); at least 40%, with a target of 50%, of women owned |  |  |  |  | 
 | agribusinesses during capacity building and extension programme activities; creation of at least 10 climate agribusiness incubators providing |  |  |  |  | 
 | equal support to men and women; creation of at least 10 climate agribusiness incubators providing equal support to men and women; at least 30 |  |  |  |  | 
 | women climate agribusiness entrepreneurs incubated; promotion of business successes for 10 women on the online interface; at least 40%, with |  |  |  |  | 
 | a 50% target, of CRDB Bank personnel trained through the different training activities being women. |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 2.1: Development of
an online interface and training
support for the CRDB climate
risks assessment tool |  | ▪ At least 40%, with a 50% target, of CRDB Bank
personnel trained on the climate risks assessment tool
being women (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female
stakeholders involved in the preparation of the online
interface (consultations, preparation of the interface
preparation, etc.) (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of gender specific risks and impacts in the
interface (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data in the interface
(baseline: 0) | USD 1,25M
(50% of the
USD 2.5M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank,
Implementing
partners, sub-
lenders | By end of
the
programme | 
Activity 2.2: Customer
capacity building on adaptation
technologies and business
development |  | ▪ Capacity building targeting women-specific needs and
barriers (especially on developing skills related to
implementing ecofriendly solutions, management,
economic planning and other skills relevant to women-
led agribusinesses) (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of trainees being
female stakeholders (baseline: 0)
▪ 100% of the trainees understanding adaptation
technologies and business development solutions, with
a special focus on gender-specific solutions (baseline:
0) | USD 0,5M
(66% of the
USD 0.75M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank,
Implementing
partners,
agriculture value
chain
stakeholders | Within first
year | 

=== PAGE 153 ===
Page 150
▪ Building capacity for at least 40%, with a target of
50%, of agribusinesses owned by women (baseline: 0)
▪ Creation of at least 10 climate agribusiness incubators
providing equal support to men and women (baseline:
0)
▪ At least 30 women climate agribusiness entrepreneurs
incubated (baseline: 0)
▪ Promotion of business successes for 10 women on the
online interface (baseline: 0)
Activity 2.3: Tailored TA for ▪ At least 40%, with a 50% target, of CRDB Bank USD 0,5M CRDB Bank and By end of
the integration of climate risks personnel trained on the integration of risks (50% of the Implementing the
assessments in extension assessment in extension service programme being USD 1M partners programme
service programme women (baseline: 0) overall
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data in the assessment activity
of climate risks (baseline: 0) amount)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female farmers
included in the extension programme (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 50 female extension services officers trained
(baseline: 0)
▪ At least 1 000 female farmers trained on the new
agriculture advisory services integrating climate
resilience and adaptation practices (baseline: 0)
Activity 2.4: Capacity building ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of all trainees USD 0,3M CRDB Bank, By end of
for the establishment of the being female stakeholders (baseline: 0) (50% of the Implementing year 3
new insurance parametric ▪ 100% of the trainees understanding insurance USD 0.6M partners,
programme programming, with a special focus on gender-specific overall Government of
solutions (baseline: 0) activity Tanzania,
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data to inform amount) industry
parametric insurance (baseline: 0) representatives,
▪ Integration of gender specific parameters in the community
parametric insurance products (baseline: 0) leaders and
associations, end
users
Activity 2.5: Dedicated legal ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of ARA deal USD 0,15M CRDB Bank and By end of
and financial TA including sourcing trainees being female stakeholders (baseline: (50% of the Implementing year 3
support for sourcing 0) USD 0.3M partners

--- Table 1 on Page 153 ---
 | ▪ Building capacity for at least 40%, with a target of
50%, of agribusinesses owned by women (baseline: 0)
▪ Creation of at least 10 climate agribusiness incubators
providing equal support to men and women (baseline:
0)
▪ At least 30 women climate agribusiness entrepreneurs
incubated (baseline: 0)
▪ Promotion of business successes for 10 women on the
online interface (baseline: 0) |  |  | 
Activity 2.3: Tailored TA for
the integration of climate risks
assessments in extension
service programme | ▪ At least 40%, with a 50% target, of CRDB Bank
personnel trained on the integration of risks
assessment in extension service programme being
women (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data in the assessment
of climate risks (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female farmers
included in the extension programme (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 50 female extension services officers trained
(baseline: 0)
▪ At least 1 000 female farmers trained on the new
agriculture advisory services integrating climate
resilience and adaptation practices (baseline: 0) | USD 0,5M
(50% of the
USD 1M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank and
Implementing
partners | By end of
the
programme
Activity 2.4: Capacity building
for the establishment of the
new insurance parametric
programme | ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of all trainees
being female stakeholders (baseline: 0)
▪ 100% of the trainees understanding insurance
programming, with a special focus on gender-specific
solutions (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data to inform
parametric insurance (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of gender specific parameters in the
parametric insurance products (baseline: 0) | USD 0,3M
(50% of the
USD 0.6M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank,
Implementing
partners,
Government of
Tanzania,
industry
representatives,
community
leaders and
associations, end
users | By end of
year 3
Activity 2.5: Dedicated legal
and financial TA including
support for sourcing | ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of ARA deal
sourcing trainees being female stakeholders (baseline:
0) | USD 0,15M
(50% of the
USD 0.3M | CRDB Bank and
Implementing
partners | By end of
year 3

=== PAGE 154 ===
Page 151
▪ Integration of gender specific considerations in the overall
legal instrument (baseline: 0) activity
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data in the financial amount)
risk modeling and insurance protection (baseline: 0)
Activity 2.6.A: Support for the ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of ARA fairs USD 0,5M CRDB Bank, By end of
implementation of the participants being female stakeholders (baseline: 0) (66% of the Implementing the
Tanzania’s National Climate ▪ 100% of the Tanzania National Climate Change USD 0.75M partners, programme
Change implementation projects supported integrating gender considerations overall Government of
and targets (baseline: 0) activity Tanzania
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of stakeholders amount) national, regional
(from project holders to workers) being women and local
(baseline: 0) divisions,
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of the budget spent ministries, and
on activities ensuring gender equality (baseline: 0) agencies, industry
Activity 2.6.B: Support for the ▪ Participation of members of the relevant ministries actors
implementation of the responsible for Gender aspects in 100% of the
Tanzania’s National Strategy discussions (baseline: 0)
on Gender and Climate Change ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of ARA fairs
implementation participants being female stakeholders (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of stakeholders
(from project holders to workers) being women
(baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of the budget spent
on activities ensuring gender equality (baseline: 0)
Activity 2.7: Policy ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female USD 0,925M CRDB Bank and By end of
interventions and support for stakeholders interviewed during the policy dialogue (50% of the Implementing the
the ministry of agriculture and (baseline: 0) USD 1.85M partners programme
development of Agriculture ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of AARDS setting overall
Adaptation Routine Data up trainees being female stakeholders (baseline: 0) activity
System (AARDS) ▪ Integration of gender aspects in 100% of the amount)
new/updated policies, and in climate assessment tools
and technologies (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data in the climate
assessment tools and technologies and for the
adaptation indicators (baseline: 0)

--- Table 1 on Page 154 ---
 | ▪ Integration of gender specific considerations in the
legal instrument (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data in the financial
risk modeling and insurance protection (baseline: 0) | overall
activity
amount) |  | 
Activity 2.6.A: Support for the
implementation of the
Tanzania’s National Climate
Change implementation | ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of ARA fairs
participants being female stakeholders (baseline: 0)
▪ 100% of the Tanzania National Climate Change
projects supported integrating gender considerations
and targets (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of stakeholders
(from project holders to workers) being women
(baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of the budget spent
on activities ensuring gender equality (baseline: 0) | USD 0,5M
(66% of the
USD 0.75M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank,
Implementing
partners,
Government of
Tanzania
national, regional
and local
divisions,
ministries, and
agencies, industry
actors | By end of
the
programme
Activity 2.6.B: Support for the
implementation of the
Tanzania’s National Strategy
on Gender and Climate Change
implementation | ▪ Participation of members of the relevant ministries
responsible for Gender aspects in 100% of the
discussions (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of ARA fairs
participants being female stakeholders (baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of stakeholders
(from project holders to workers) being women
(baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of the budget spent
on activities ensuring gender equality (baseline: 0) |  |  | 
Activity 2.7: Policy
interventions and support for
the ministry of agriculture and
development of Agriculture
Adaptation Routine Data
System (AARDS) | ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female
stakeholders interviewed during the policy dialogue
(baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of AARDS setting
up trainees being female stakeholders (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of gender aspects in 100% of the
new/updated policies, and in climate assessment tools
and technologies (baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data in the climate
assessment tools and technologies and for the
adaptation indicators (baseline: 0) | USD 0,925M
(50% of the
USD 1.85M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank and
Implementing
partners | By end of
the
programme

=== PAGE 155 ===
Page 152
Activity 2.8: Support to the ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female USD 0,5M CRDB Bank, By end of
Tanzania Meteorological stakeholders interviewed during the policy dialogue (50% of the Implementing the
Authority for climate (baseline: 0) USD 1M partners, programme
information services for ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female trainees overall Tanzania
agriculture and water resources in the Tanzania Meteorological Authority (baseline: 0) activity Meteorological
monitoring ▪ Identification of data that can be sex-disaggregated amount) Authority
(baseline: 0)
Activity 2.9: Support to the ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female USD 0,25M CRDB Bank, By end of
Tanzania Insurance Regulatory stakeholders interviewed during the policy dialogue (50% of the Implementing the
Authority for further (baseline: 0) USD 0.5M partners, programme
development of crop ▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data to inform overall Tanzania
parametric insurance in parametric insurance products setting (baseline: 0) activity Insurance
Tanzania amount) Regulatory
Authority
Activity 2.10: Support to the ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female USD 0,375M CRDB Bank, By end of
Financial Sector Deepening stakeholders interviewed during the policy dialogue (50% of the Implementing the
Trust (FSDT) for the (baseline: 0) USD 0.75M partners, programme
integration of climate risks into ▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data to prepare overall Financial Sector
financial sector training manuals and guiding operation frameworks activity Deepening Trust
(baseline: 0) amount)
▪ Integration of gender aspects in 100% of the training
manuals (baseline: 0)

--- Table 1 on Page 155 ---
Activity 2.8: Support to the
Tanzania Meteorological
Authority for climate
information services for
agriculture and water resources
monitoring | ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female
stakeholders interviewed during the policy dialogue
(baseline: 0)
▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female trainees
in the Tanzania Meteorological Authority (baseline: 0)
▪ Identification of data that can be sex-disaggregated
(baseline: 0) | USD 0,5M
(50% of the
USD 1M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank,
Implementing
partners,
Tanzania
Meteorological
Authority | By end of
the
programme
Activity 2.9: Support to the
Tanzania Insurance Regulatory
Authority for further
development of crop
parametric insurance in
Tanzania | ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female
stakeholders interviewed during the policy dialogue
(baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data to inform
parametric insurance products setting (baseline: 0) | USD 0,25M
(50% of the
USD 0.5M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank,
Implementing
partners,
Tanzania
Insurance
Regulatory
Authority | By end of
the
programme
Activity 2.10: Support to the
Financial Sector Deepening
Trust (FSDT) for the
integration of climate risks into
financial sector | ▪ At least 40%, with a target of 50%, of female
stakeholders interviewed during the policy dialogue
(baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of sex-disaggregated data to prepare
training manuals and guiding operation frameworks
(baseline: 0)
▪ Integration of gender aspects in 100% of the training
manuals (baseline: 0) | USD 0,375M
(50% of the
USD 0.75M
overall
activity
amount) | CRDB Bank,
Implementing
partners,
Financial Sector
Deepening Trust | By end of
the
programme
