=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20210912160125+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 21 for Word
/ModDate: D:20210913204319+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe PDF Library 21.5.92
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board  
4 – 7 October 2021  
Virtual meeting  
Provisional agenda item 15  GCF/B.30/0 2/Add.01 
14 September 2021  
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum I 
Funding proposal package f or FP 169 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled "Climate change adaptation solutions for Loc al
A
uthorities in the Federated States of Micronesia";
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or foc al
p
oint(s);
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat ’s assessment;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;
f)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g)Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.30/02 /Add.01  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  78 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  79 
Secretariat’s assessment  81 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   99 
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's  
assessment  110  
Gender documentation  112


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
  
 
  
Project/ Programme  title: Climate change adaptation solutions for Local Authorities in 
the Federated States of Micronesia  
Country:  Federated States of Micronesia  
Accredited Entity:  Pacific Community (SPC)   
Date of first submission:  2021/03/2 5 
Date of current submission  2021/08/09  
Version number  V.6


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE b OF 75 
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  INFORMATION  
 Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK 
 Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS
 
 
Section H ANNEXES  
 
NOTE TO ACCREDITED ENTITIES ON THE USE O F THE FUNDING PROPOS AL TEMPLATE  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross- reference 
to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 
60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service 
standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and Programme  funding proposals will 
be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to 
the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited 
Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.   
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 3 OF 75 
 A. PROJECT/ PROGRAMME  SUMMARY   
A.1. Project or 
Programme  Programme  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals ( RFP) Enhancing Direct Acess (EDA) Enhancing Direct Acess (EDA)   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/ Programme targets. For 
each checked result area(s) , indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. The  
total of the percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:   
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment:     
☒ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
 
 
25% 
25% 
25% 
25% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  Indicate t CO2eq over 
lifespan  A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  Direct = 5 4,301 (47.2 % of 
FSM’s population)  
Indirect = 92 ,016 (80% of 
FSM’s population)  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  19,710,637 USD   
A.9. Project size  Small (Upto USD 50 million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  16,591,556  USD  
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts . The sum of all total amounts should be consistent  
with A.8.  
☒ Grant  16,591,556   
☐ Loan   Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based   
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  7 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of AE 
internal approval  11/10/2019  A.14. ESS category  I-2  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used to 
prepare this FP ? Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
Programme ? Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
Programme ? Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  SPC will be the Accredited Entity and the sole Executing Entity  for this Programme .  
A.21. Executive summary (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s) 
The aim of the proposed Enhanced Direct Access ( EDA) Programme  “Climate change adaptation solutions for 
Local Authorities in the Federated States of Micronesia ” is to shift the status quo from a pathway of climate 
vulnerability, elevated health risks and limited socioeconomic development for vulnerable communities in the Federated 
States of Micronesia ( FSM ) to one of improved food and water security, enhanced disaster risk reduction (DRR)  and 
recovery, and improved socioeconomic development by building the adaptive capacity of Local Authorities (LAs) to 
respond to climate change.  
 
Climate change is expected to severely threaten FSM across all sectors of its economy, particularly through increased:  
sea level rise ; variability of rainfall ; severe weather events and king tides ; and temperature. Past inundation, surge and 
storm events have caused  significant losses and damage s to communities’  assets and livelihoods , including lasting


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 4 OF 75 
 impacts to community infrastructure, coastal resources, and agriculture and water systems.  Further, the frequency and 
magnitude of these extreme climate events could potentially increase due to El Nino conditions coupled with increased 
sea surface and atmospheric temperatures. Currently, approximately 60% of households in FSM live within 180 m of 
the shoreline with millions of dollars’ worth of agriculture, buildings, etc. exposed to climate threats. Further, the vast 
majority of FSM is reliant on underdeveloped agriculture, livestock, and fisheries value streams both for subsistence 
consumption as well as for primary income streams, and climate change is expected to limit these systems further 
constraining livelihoods and threatening community food security. Water security is likewise constrained due to 
insufficient technology like catchment sys tems and mismanaged watershed resources both of which are made more 
difficult due to future climate change.  
 
As of 2020 , FSM’s estimated population is 11 5,021, with a GDP of USD 408 million and a GDP per capita of almost 
USD  3,550. The majority of the country’s population live in the coastal regions of the high islands, with more than half 
the population living in rural areas.  According to the Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES), one requires 
an average of USD 1.84 per adult per day to meet b asic caloric needs in FSM and USD 4.34 per adult per day to meet 
all basic needs. Across FSM, approximately 10% of the population falls below the food poverty line and approximately 
41% of the population falls below the nationally determined ‘total basic needs poverty line’ . 
 
According to the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND -GAIN), FSM is the 4th most vulnerable country to climate 
change and the 78th in terms of climate change readiness in the world (FSM scored 0.640 on the vulnerability s cale 
and 0.360 on the readiness scale). The FSM GCF Country Programme  concluded that at present, none of the FSM 
States have a ‘high’ level of adaptive capacity required to ensure adaptation to the effects of climate change.  
 
This EDA  Programme  will overcome critical barriers to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable communities to the 
impacts of extreme climatic events as well as long term water and food insecurity as a result of predicted climate 
change. GCF resources will be critical in stre ngthening the adaptive capacity of local authorities and communities  to 
improve DRR and coastal management  as well as  food and water security for FSM’s most vulnerable populations  
located in the main islands and outer atolls .  
 
The EDA Programme will estab lish a dedicated Grant Facility to strengthen the capacity of local authorities ( LAs) in 
FSM to adapt to climate change and to address urgent, top priority vulnerability issues. The facility will empower 
participating LAs by providing them with organizational and individual capacity -building in resilience and priority 
adaptation project development. The Programme has two components:  
• Component 1: Local authorities empowered to deliver climate change adaptation services to their 
populations  
• Component 2: Priority project implementation -EDA Facility for strengthening local community 
resilience  
The Programme, through the implementation of sub- projects, will directly contribute to increasing the adaptive capacity 
of local communities and will deliver on a number of economic, social, environmental and gender co- benefits. The EDA 
Grant Facility is a nticipated to directly benefit 5 4,301 people, accounting for 4 7.2% of the total FSM population. Indirect 
beneficiaries of the proposed Programme will represent 8 0% of the population.1 
 
GCF funding is required because of the limited availability of public and private funding to support transformation in 
FSM’s DRR capacity and agricultural and water sectors. GCF funds will be used specifically to address critical 
information and capacity g aps of LAs as well as cover the additional cost of climate change adaption. Indeed, the 
current costs estimates for climate change adaptation solutions far exceed allocated budgets for national , State  and 
municipal governments . This highlights the necessity of the proposed GCF grant structure and concessionally to directly 
support local communities.  
 
The total Programme cost is USD 19,710,637 comprising USD 16,591,556 of GCF funding in the form of grants and 
USD 3,199,081 co-financ e from the Government of FSM and SPC . As the Accredited Entity,  SPC’s Climate Finance 
Unit (CFU) within its Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability (CCES) Division (also SPC’s GCF focal point) 
will be responsible for overall project management. A dedicated EDA Programme Coordination Unit (ECU) will be 
hosted within SPC ’s Regional Office for Micronesia, located in FSM. The EDA Programme  Board (EPB) will be a 
national body chaired by FSM’s National Designated Authority ( NDA ) and responsible for taking corrective action as 
needed to ensure the EDA Programme  achieves the desired results.  
 
1 The numbers provided represent conservative estimates, to be understood as the minimum number of the sum of the 
potential number of direct beneficiaries across all three thematic areas. This methodological choice was made to prevent the 
possibility of double counting as beneficiaries of projects in each state will likely overlap.  See Annex 2, Section 14.


---
*Page 7*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 75 
 
  
2 World Bank Data, World Development Indicators 2020 .  
3 FSM Statistics –  Poverty Profile of the Federated States of Micronesia.  Last Ac cessed 22 August 2020; Available here  
4 Assessing the Impact of COVID -19 on the Federated States of Micronesia Economy; Available here. 
5 McGree  et al. 2016. Trends and variability in droughts in the Pacific islands and Northeast Australia. Journal of Climate 29: 
8377-8397.  
6 FSM . Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change;  Available here.  
 B. PROJECT/ PROGRAMME  INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Adaptive  context  of the Programme  area 
1. The Federated States of Micronesia (hereafter “FSM”)  is a widely dispersed archipelago located in the North Pacific 
Ocean. FSM is formed by four states (Chuuk, Yap, Pohnpei, and Kosrae) and comprised of 607 islands, of which 
74 are inhabited.  The distance between the eastern- most State (Kosrae) and the west ern-most State (Yap) is 
2,700 km. Under the 1979 Constitution, FSM has three levels of government: national, state, and municipal. The 
four State governments of Chuuk, Kosrae Pohnpei, and Yap are relatively autonomous. Each State has its own 
governor, judi ciary and legislative bodies, along with relevant government departments.  
2. As of 2019 , FSM’s estimated population is 11 5,0212, with a GDP of USD 408 million and a GDP per capita of 
almost USD  3,550. The majority of the country’s population live in the coastal regions of the high islands, with more 
than half the population living in rural areas.  According to the HIES, one requires an average of USD 1.84 per adult 
per day to meet basic caloric needs in FSM and USD 4.34 per adult per day to meet all basic needs3. Across FSM, 
approximately 10% of the population falls below the food poverty line and approximately 41% of the population falls 
below the tot al basic needs poverty line.  
3. The ongoing COVID -19 pandemic is projected to further impact  the FSM economy in coming year s4. Construction, 
transportation and communications and the tourism sectors are estimated to shrink for at least the next fiscal year. 
Overall GDP is expected to have decline d by approximately 5% over fiscal year 2020 and to decline 2% over fiscal 
year 2021. T he private sector is expected to be the hardest hit, with an estimated private sector GDP reduction of 
18.7% between 2019 and 2021.  
4. There is a strong correlation between the extreme climate vulnerability of FSM and the livelihoods  of communities, 
as a lar ge share of the population heavily relies on natural resources.  Rising oceans, changing precipitation 
patterns, increase in the intensity of extreme climate events and extended drought periods are expected to have a 
dramatic impact on the food and water security of local populations, while posing a serious disaster risk to assets 
and people.  
Climate analysis  
5. The climate of FSM displays considerable year -on-year variability  due to the El Niño- Southern Oscillation 
(ENSO)5. The country has two seasons – a dry season from November to April and a wet season from May to 
October. Rainfall in throughout the country and region is affected by the movement of the Intertropical Converg ence 
Zone6. 
6. Due to the diversity of environmental conditions  between States and their respective islands and atolls,  
climate trends tend to differ from one island state to another, and between island states and atolls .  
• Climatically, Yap lies in an area that generally experiences a monsoon climatic pattern, with more frequent 
periods of drought  than in other States .  
• The climate of Chuuk  is hot and humid with an average temperature of 27ºC, and little variation throughout the 
year. Average annual precipitation is 3,100 mm, with the months of January to March being drier.  
• Pohnpei  is generally hot and humid, also with a me an temperature of 27ºC. Temperatures vary little from 
month to month. The mean annual rainfall is 4,826 mm, with January and February being slightly drier than 
average.  
• Kosrae ’s climate is characterized by high temperatures, heavy rainfall and high humidity. The average annual 
rainfall measured at the weather station in coastal Lelu is 5,000 mm. In the mountainous interior rainfall is 
estimated to be as high as 7,500 mm annuall y with average temperature 27ºC at sea level. Average monthly 
temperatures vary from the annual average by no more than 1ºC and the difference between the average minimum and maximum temperatures is less than 8ºC.  
Historical trends


---
*Page 8*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 75 
 
  
7 Pacific -Australia Climate Ch ange Science and Adaptation Planning Program. 2014 . Current and future climate of the 
Federated States  
of Micronesia. Available here . 
8 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program; Available here . 
9 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program; Available here . 
10 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program; Available here . 
11 World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Federated States of Micronesia profile; Available here. 
12 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program; Available here . 
 7. Temperature:  With less than 1.5°C between its hottest and coldest months, FSM experiences very little seasonal 
variation in mean air temperatures. Mean annual temperature (1901– 2016) is 27.1°C. Annual maximum and 
minimum temperatures in FSM have increased since records began in 1952, with a nnual maximum  temperatures 
having increased at a rate of 0.18°C per decade in Pohnpei  (eastern FSM) and 0.23ºC per decade in Yap (western 
FSM)7. Extreme temperatures such as warm days and warm nights have been increasing in Pohnpei consistent 
with global warming trends. Temperatures are expected to continue to increase throughout FSM under all 
emissions scenarios8.  
• Annual maximum air temperatures at three sites across FSM (Pohnpei, Yap and Chuuk) have risen between 
0.10–0.14°C per decade since the 1950s9. 
• There is variation in air temperature trends within FSM. For the state of Pohnpei, the greatest trends involve 
minimum air temperature, whereas for Yap, the greater trends are observed in maximum air temperature10. 
 
8. Precipitation: There is variability  between States in changing precipitation patterns. Mean annual precipitation 
(1901 –2016) stands at 3,810.4mm. The wet season takes place between May and September, with the West 
Pacific Monsoon affecting rainfall in the western islands by contributing additional rain11. 
• Generally, there has been a decreasing  trend for rainfall in Pohnpei (an eastern State) since records began in 
1950. There has also been a decreasing trend in Very Wet Day rainfall in Pohnpei. However, Consecutive Dry 
Days in Yap (a western State) have decreased since 195212.


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 75 
 
  
13 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program; Available here . 
14 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program; Available here . 
15 Fletcher  et al.  2010.  Climate Change in the Federated States of Micronesia, Food and Water Security, Climate Risk 
Management, and Adaptive Strategies. University of Hawaii Sea Grant College Programme.  
16 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program . 2014.  Sea-level rise in the western tropical 
Pacific. Available here . 
 • Although the frequency of drought s is projected to decrease in FSM, drier conditions and droughts are linked 
to ENSO events, with an increased intensity of events occurring under  El Ni ño conditions.  The driest year on 
record for Micronesia was 1998 and was a direct consequence of an El Niño phenomenon the same year . 
Figure 2 below illustrates the variability of precipitation patterns and the intensity of drought periods in Pohnpei 
and Yap13. 
 
 
Figure 1. Observed Time Series of Annual Consecutive  Dry Days  and Annual Very Wet Day Rainfall  in Pohnpei and Yap  
9. Sea level rise: Between 1993 and 2010, FSM has experienced a disproportionate amount of sea level rise, ranging 
from 8 to 12 mm per year , compared to other areas in the Western Pacific (see Figure 2 below)14. Since 2000, 
FSM has been occasionally experiencing a periodic rise of sea level in the low -lying coastal areas of both high and 
low islands. Additionally, ENSO variations  amplify15 the mean sea level across FSM which exacerbates the  
impact s of tidal surges, rainfall, and extreme events like typhoons. Climate variability due to seasonal changes and 
large- scale climate features such as ENSO  can lead to overall changes in trade wind patterns  and temperature, 
which in turn may affect sea level at timescales of months to years. For instance, ENSO can cause sea -level 
changes up to 30 cm in the western tropical Pacific, depending on time of year and location.  Natural ly occurring  
sea-level changes  due to tides, weather and climate variability can be quite large at any one time compared to sea-
level rise through climate change alone. A small amount of overall, long -term sea- level rise due to climate 
change will compound the effects of natural variability and cause an increase in extreme sea levels to 
happen more often16. 
 
10. Overall, the effect that climate change will have on ENSO incidence and severity remains uncertain, but it is clear 
that ENSO events result in a direct increase  of large -scale sea level anomalies (SLAs)  in the Western Tropical


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 75 
 
  
17 Ren et al. 2020. Asymmetry of interannual sea level variability in the western tropical Pacific: Responses to El Niño and 
La N iña. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 125, e2020JC016616. Available here . 
18 Muis  et al. 2018. Influence of El Niño-Southern Oscillation on global coastal flooding. Earth's Future, 6, 1311–  1322. 
Available here. 
19 Ibid. 
20 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program; Available here . 
 Pacific region17.  Furthermore, t he anomalous ocean -atmosphere conditions during ENSO can induce changes in 
the intensity, frequency, and tracks of storms, thereby affecting the generation of extremes  such as tides and storm 
surges18. These events cause marine inundation that  damages groundwater resources, taro beds, soil, and agro-
forestry resources in coastal settings, especially on low atoll islets. On high islands, coastal communities that 
experience both intensifying storm runoff and rising ocean waters are experiencing i ncreased flooding and other 
drainage problems19. 
 
 
Figure 2. Regional distribution of the rate of sea level rise (1993 -2010) in the Western Pacific  
11. Extreme climate events:  FSM is highly susceptible to extreme weather events such as tropical storms and 
typhoons20. For example:  
• In 2002 Typhoon Mitag caused a storm surge that inundated up to 500 m inland  and destroyed nearly all the 
food crops in low -lying areas in the north, northeast, and southern parts of the main island of Yap (please see 
Annex 2 of the Feasibility Study for a list of past climate damaging events).   
• In March 2015, Typhoon Maysak devastated the country, killing four people, wiping out 90% of key agricultural 
crops (banana, breadfruit and taro) in two of its states (Chuuk and Yap), affecting 29,000 people and causing 
USD  8.5 million in damages  (more information on climate change impacts on agriculture below) . 
• Sea salt deposition caused from tropical cyclones can devastate agriculture and cause significant corrosion 
affecting electricity infrastructure.  
 
12. The ENSO phenomenon  has a profound effect on the distribution of tropical cyclones in the FSM. During La Nina 
events, above average numbers of tropical storms occur in the FSM region. The formation region of cyclones is also impacted. During El Nino, typhoon formation extends eastward resulting in an increased risk of a typhoon for 
Pohnpei during El Nino years, and a decreased risk during the year following El Nino and during La Nina years. 
On Pohnpei, the risk of having typhoon force winds of 65 kt (33.4ms -1) or greater is one year in 10 for El Nino 
years, and approximately one year in 50 for non- El Nino years.


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 75 
 
  
21 Climate  projections  for FSM  have been  derived  from up to 26 new  GCMs  in the CMIP5 database (the exact  number  is 
different  for each  scenario),  compared  with up to 18 models  in the CMIP3  database reported  in the previous  report  from the 
Australian  Bureau of  Meteorology  and CSIRO  (2011) (Source  here p. 76).  
22 FSM. Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Clim ate Change.  Available here.  
23 Australian Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO . 2014.  Climate Variability, Extremes and Change in the Western Tropical 
Pacific: New Science and Updated Country Reports. Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning 
Programme Technical Report, Australian Bureau of Meteorology and Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organizatio n, Melbourne, Australia  
24 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Programme –  Current and future climate of the 
Federated States of Micronesia; Available here. 
25 FSM. Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  Available here.  Climate change projections21 
13. Temperature:  Climate projections  under all emissions scenarios  suggest that the frequency and occurrence of 
higher maximum daily temperatures will dramatically increase for Pohnpei and FSM more broadly22. By 2030, 
under a very high emissions scenario, this increase in air temperature is projected to be in the range of  0.6–1.1°C23. 
Table 1 below shows the projected changes in annual average surface air temperature in FSM24. 
Table 1. Projected changes in average surface air temperature in FSM  
Geography  2030  2050  2070  2090  
FSM East  Projected °C increase  
Very low (RCP 2.6)  0.4–0.9 0.6–1.2 0.5–1.2 0.5–1.2 
Low (RCP 4.5)  0.5–1.0 0.7–1.4 1.0–1.9 1.0–2.1 
Medium (RCP 6)  0.4–0.9 0.7–1.4 1.0–2.0 1.3–2.6 
High (RCP 8.5)  0.6–1.1 1.0–1.9 1.6–3.1 2.1–4.1 
FSM West  Projected °C increase  
Very low (RCP 2.6)  0.5–0.9 0.6–1.1 0.5–1.2 0.4–1.2 
Low (RCP 4.5)  0.5–1.0 0.8–1.4 1.0–1.8 1.0–2.1 
Medium (RCP 6)  0.4–0.9 0.7–1.4 1.1–1.9 1.4–2.6 
High (RCP 8.5)  0.6–1.1 1.1–1.9 1.6–3.1 2.1–4.0 
 
14. Precipitation: In general, FSM is expected to experience an increase in precipitation over the next century, with a 
decrease in the frequency of drought events  but an increase in their intensity .  
• FSM’s Second National Communication explain how CMIP3 models predict little change in rainfall by 2030 bu t 
with a majority of simulations estimating an increase of rainfall of greater than 5% by 2090 under a high 
emissions scenario.  
• Under a high emissions scenario, an increase in mean annual precipitation of up to 8% ±  11% in eastern FSM 
and up to 12% ±  15% in western FSM is expected by 2090.  
• Interannual rainfall variability is also projected to increase.  
 
15. Sea level rise: By 2030, under a very high emissions scenario, the  rise in sea level is projected to be in the range 
of 8– 18 cm. The f requency of extreme high sea level (tidal surges) for FSM are projected to increase dramatically 
as a result of climate change25. Sea level rise is projected to continue to increase under all climate scenarios (see 
Table 2 below).  The sea level rise combined with natural year -to-year changes and phenomena such as 
ENSO will amplify the impact of storm surges and coastal flooding . For example,  ENSO variations already 
significantly impact mean sea level across FSM, with knock -on effects during tidal surges, heavy rainfall and storm 
events. Consequently, during La Niña periods, the above- average number of tropical storms that will occur  
combined with higher sea levels because of climate change would result in coastal inundation during such storms 
being higher than in the absence of climate change- induced sea level rise.  
Table 2. Sea Level Rise Under Various Emissions Scenarios  
Emissions 
Scenario  2030  2050  2070  2090  
Very low (RCP 2.6)  8–18 cm  14–30 cm  20–45 cm  24–60 cm  
Low (RCP 4.5)  8–17 cm  14–31 cm  22–49 cm  30–68 cm  
Medium (RCP 6)  7–17 cm  14–30 cm  22–48 cm  31–69 cm  
High (RCP 8.5)  8–18 cm  17–35 cm  28–59 cm  41–90 cm


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 75 
 
  
26 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Programme –  Current and future climate of the 
Federated States of Micronesia; Available here.  
27 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program; Available here . 
28 FSM. Second National Communi cation to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  Available here.  
29 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Programme –  Current and future climate of the 
Federated States of Micronesia; Available here.  
30 FSM. Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change;  Available here. 16. Lower -lying atolls are especially vulnerable to inundation events and even losing arable land from projected sea 
level rise and extreme tide events. With projections of increased sea level rise under all climate scenarios and an 
increase in extreme high ti de events due to climate change, FSM’s vulnerability will further increase in the future. 
Figure 3 illustrates the extent of the flooding hazard caused by sea level rise for the islands of Pohnpei and Yap.  
 
Figure 3. Sea Level Rise and Flood Hazard Maps for Pohnpei and Yap  
17. Extreme climate events:  It is projected that there will be a  decrease  in the number of typhoons globally by the 
end of the 21st century. However, these p rojections also indicate that typhoon intensity will increase, with an 
increase in average maximum wind speed of typhoons between 2% and 11% as well as  an increase in rainf all 
intensity of 20% within 100 km of a typhoon’s cent re26. For FSM, the projection for a decrease in frequency of 
formation of tropical cyclones in the northern basin  has only a low confidence level27. Extreme hourly and daily 
rainfall events, such as Tropi cal Storm Chataan which resulted in massive landslides and damage across Chuuk 
State are also projected to increase in frequency, particularly in Pohnpei and Kosrae28. The frequency and intensity 
of extreme rainfall events are projected to increase. This conclusion is based on analysis of daily rainfall data from a subset of CMIP5 models using a similar method to that in Australian Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO (2011)  
with some improvements (Chapter 1), so the results are slightly different to those in Australian Bureau of 
Meteorology and CSIRO (2011).  Projections also show that temperatures  on “extremely hot days ” in FSM will 
increase in line with increases in average temperatures ; the frequency of such days is also expected to increase 
29. 
18. Drought: El Niñ o years  in FSM tend to cause droughts which have resulted in water and food shortages (including 
staples such as taro, coconut, breadfruit, banana, yam, sweet potato, citrus  and cash crops ), and had impacts on 
terrestrial habitats,  wildfires, and invasive species30.  ENSO influences the minimum air temperatures in both Yap 
and Pohnpei in the wet season, but in the dry season there is a weak but significant impact on air minimum 
temperatures in Pohnpei and maximum air temperatures in Yap (all being warmer in El Niño years and colder in 
La Niña years).  The incidence of drought is expected to decrease over the 21st century (except during ENSO


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 75 
 
  
31 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program; Available here . 
32 FSM. Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change;  Available here.  
33 Johnson  et al. 2015 . Pacific Islands Ocean Acidification Vulnerability Assessment; Available here .  
34 Ibid. 
35 FSM Chuuk Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change; Available here . 
36 FSM Pohnpei Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change; Available here . 
37 FSM Yap Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change; Available here. 
38 FSM Kosrae Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change; Available here . 
39 200 yards.  
40 For an interactive map of population concentration along the coastline, see: here . 
 conditions as outlined above ), consistent with a  projected overall increase in rainfall  for FSM. Recent projections 
suggest that:  
• Mild drought will occur approximately seven to eight times every 20 years by 2090 under the B1 (low) 
emissions scenario and six to seven times under the A 1B (medium) and A2 (high) scenarios approximately 
eight to nine times every 20 years in 2030.  
• Moderate drought will occur approximately once to twice every 20 years in 2030 once to twice every 20 
years in 2030 and once every 20 years in 2090 for all emissi ons scenarios moderate drought will occur . 
• Severe drought will occur approximately once every 20 years across all time periods and scenarios31. 
 
19. Ocean acidification and sea surface warming:  Ocean acidification, as measured by the decrease in aragonite 
saturation, has risen in the region of Micronesia since measurements began in the late 18th century32. Studies33 
have indicated that a  level above 4 is optimal for coral growth in the Pacific. Projections indicate that levels will fall 
below 3.5 by approximately 2030, indicating an increase in ocean acidification which would severely negatively 
affect coral reefs in FSM. Under all emissi ons scenarios34 for FSM, sea surface temperatures are expected to 
increase in the coming decades. Rising sea surface temperatures as well as a projected increase in ocean 
acidification in the coming decades due to climate change will cause increased occurrences of coral bleaching, a 
reduction in migratory fish stocks, and overall decrease the health of the marine environment35,36,37,38. A decrease 
in the health of these habitats could result in less catch for households that utilize fisheries and marine resources 
and result in a rise in food insecurity throughout FSM.   
Vulnerability of the Programme  area 
20. As explained  above, all FSM States are susceptible to acute climate change risks such as extreme rainfall events, 
drought, high sea levels, strong winds and extreme high air temperatures.  FSM is particularly vulnerable to climate 
change and likely to suffer serious, a dverse environmental, social and economic consequences. Limited 
infrastructure, geographic remoteness and  the fact that FSM remains heavily reliant on the economic assistance 
under the Compact  of Free Association  (COFA), the economic outlook beyond 2023 is uncertain and fragile which 
exacerbate the country’s vulnerability.   
21. Approximately 60% of households in FSM live within 180 meters39 of the shoreline , with the State of Kosrae having 
the greatest proportion of coastal -dwelling households (80%) and C huuk having the least (38%).  94% of the FSM 
population lives within at least 1km of the coastal strip and 100% within 5km.40 Additionally, the majority of 
structures in FSM are located near or along the coast (see Figure 4 ). Almost all outer island islets lie within the 2-
meter zone of potential sea level rise, and all lie within a 5- meter zone of storm surge. This poses a signi ficant 
disaster risk to the majority of households in the project area.


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 75 
 
  
41 FAO, SPC and GoFSM . 2016 . Federated States of Microne sia Integrated Agriculture Census 2016; Available here . 
42 GCF Country Programme –  Federated States of Micronesia; Available here . 
43 SPC.  Federated States of Micronesia –  IWRM Outlook Summary and NWTF Report; Available here.   
44 Calculated using average for all four FSM states: Share of households reporting drought as the main barrier to agricultural 
production: Yap (45%), Chuuk (21%), Pohnpei (9%), Kosrae (3%).  
45 Sea level rise analysis was conducted for the main islands for the States of Yap, Chuuk, Pohnpei and Kosrae. This 
analysis utilized projections of 0.3 meters of sea level rise by 2055 and 0.62 meters of sea level rise by 2090. The projec ted 
sea level rise for Yap indicates that there will be inundation of large parts of existing coastline and low -lying areas of the 
main island. The main island of Pohnpei will experience coastal changes due to sea level rise by 2055 as well as saltwater 
inundation of low -lying areas, including the Pohnpei airport. The main island of Chuuk and the other islands located in the 
  
22. In terms of terrestrial agriculture, t he majority of agricultural 
production within FSM occurs in the low -lying areas of the high, 
volcanic islands. 92% of agricultural workers surveyed in the 
Integrated Agriculture Census41 (IAC) were unpaid, 
demonstrating the subsistence nature of agricultural production 
in FSM. The livelihoods of these communities are increasingly 
subject to lowland flooding as well as seawater inundati on from 
sea level rise42. For most staple food crops, extreme weather 
events including storm surges and king tides (and the resulting salinization) will have the greatest impact in the short - to 
medium- term timescale (2030– 2050), compared to  changes in 
mean temperature where significant impacts are not expected 
before 2050. The projected increase in the frequency and 
intensity of extreme weather events due to climate change 
poses the greatest risk to agricultural  production over the next 
few decades.  
23. With regards to fisheries, t he small -scale fisheries 
underpinning food and livelihoods across the region have a moderate to high vulnerability to climate change because: (i) 
incre ases in SST will progressively drive many target species 
to higher latitudes; (ii) degradation of coral reefs is expected to 
reduce the productivity of those fish species able to remain on 
reefs; and (iii) the majority of the small -scale catch is derived f rom coral reefs  whose habitats are expected to be 
severely impacted by ocean acidification.  
24. There are no comprehensive studies on freshwater resources and climate change in FSM,  and large data gaps 
remain especially for hydraulic modelling of atoll aquifer systems
43. However, with the continued projections for 
sea level rise, the increased occurrence of storm surges and inundation events coupled with unpredictable 
seasonal variati ons in rainfall and ENSO, freshwater availability in FSM will continue to be negatively impacted by 
climate change in the coming decades. Additionally, 20% of all households surveyed in the IAC in 2016 reported 
drought as being the main barrier to agricult ural production44. Therefore, there is the need for improved water 
storage and distribution systems as an adaptation measure to address climate change issues on the water stressed 
islands.  
25. The combination of the factors and climate vulnerabilities described above requires the implementation of locally 
led adaptation measures and demonstrates the relevance of the proposed EDA Programme . More detail on the 
sectoral vulnerabilities and potential impacts (including impacts on crops and freshwater resources) of climate 
change in FSM can be found in Section 4 of the Feasibility Study.  
 
26. The following table provides a summary overview of climati c and non- climatic drivers and their associated impacts 
for the FSM islands , and the potential adaptation interventions proposed by the EDA Programme.  
Type of drivers  Drivers Impacts  EDA Programme potential sub- grant  
interventions  
Climate change 
drivers  Sea level rise and storm surges
45 Approximately 60% of households in FSM live 
within 180 m of the shoreline, with Kosrae • Small -scale coastal infrastructure 
constructed that will reduce the risk of Figure 4 Building locations for main islands/atolls


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 75 
 
  
main atoll are also projected to experience coastal changes due to sea level rise by 2055 along with saltwater inundation. 
The main is land of Kosrae is projected to experience sea level inundation of low -lying areas up through 2090.  
46 GCF – Federated State of Micronesia Country Programme.   
47 FSM. Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change;  Available here. 
48 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Programme –  Current and future climate of the 
Federated States of M icronesia; Available here.  
49 E.g. post-harvest and post -catch processing for small -scale and semi -subsistence livelihood practices  
 having the greatest proportion of coastal -
dwelling households (80%) and Chuuk having 
the least (38%).46 Additionally, the majority of 
structures located in FSM are located near or 
along the coast. Almost all outer island islets lie 
within the 2- metre zone of potential sea level 
rise, and all lie within a 5- metre zone of storm 
surge.  
 
The projected impacts o f the increase d 
magnitude of climate change events  and effects 
– including increased sea level rise47 and more 
intense typhoons48 – represents  the greatest risk 
to agricultural production in the FSM over the 
next decades, with impacts on:  
• Crop productivity: increased soil salinity  
after coastal inundation and saltwater 
intrusion into ground water  leading to total 
loss of key crops (cassava, yam, pawpaw)  
• Reduced arable land caused by coastal 
erosion 
• Reduced agricultural production: food 
insecurity and reduced income for subsistence farming households  
• Food insecurity: crop shortages results in 
malnutrition and health issues for the 
impacted communities.  
Sea level rise and saltwater inundation also negatively impact water security:  
• Low-lying atolls are more susceptible to sea 
level rise and saltwater inundate from tidal events and storm surge. With enough saltwater inundation, the fragile freshwater 
lens within an atoll’s aquifer can become 
contaminated and unusable.  
Additional negative impacts include:  
• Demographic shift: immigration from low -
lying islands to high islands  
• Biodiversity: watershed health  
• Freshwater supply and availability  losses and damages caused by climate -
induced disaster events (as appropriate, 
use of endemic species planting, wave 
breakers, man- made channels)  
• Restoration, rehabilitation or substitution 
of ecosystems relevant for adaptation (e.g. 
mangrove restoration, re- vegetation, sea-
grass beds)  
• Development and use of climate- resilient 
crop species and varieties (resilient to 
drought, waterlogging, saltwater, pests), including techniques for their consistent 
supply (germplasm collections, nurseries)  
• Farming and land use techniques 
facilitating soil and water conservation 
(e.g. mulching, organic farming, mixed 
cropping, drainage)  
• Establishment of agroforestry 
demonstration sites integrated with 
livestock  
• Building value chains for crops, fisheries, 
and livestock49 
Precipitation  Increased occurrence of intensifying rainfall 
exacerbates the impacts of storm surges, 
resulting in:  
• Landslides: erosion, loss of arable land 
• Flooding: surface run- off, loss of arable 
land, damages to the built environment  
• On the higher islands, increased extreme 
weather events and precipitation events 
could result in damage to watersheds from 
soil erosion and landslide events and result in a reduction in water security to 
communities that depend on these 
watersheds.  • Watershed reforestation for landslide protection and flooding control  
• Small -scale coastal infrastructure 
constructed that will reduce the risk of 
losses and damages caused by climate-
induced disaster events (as appropriate, 
use of endemic species planting, wave 
breakers, man- made channels)  
• Restoration, rehabilitation or sub stitution 
of ecosystems relevant for adaptation 
(e.g. mangrove restoration, re- vegetation, 
sea-grass beds)  
Air temperature  Increased air temperatures are projected to have 
a moderate impact on agricultural production in 
FSM (across different emissions sc enarios). 
Projected impacts relate to:  • Development and use of climate- resilient 
crop species and varieties (resilient to drought, waterlogging, saltwater, pests),


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 75 
 
  
50 SPC. 2016. Vulnerability of Pacific Island agriculture and forestry to climate change.   
51 FSM. Chuuk Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change.   
52 FSM. Pohnpei Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change .  
53 FSM. Yap Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management  and Climate Change.   
54 FSM. Kosrae Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change.   
55 SPC Policy Brief #32 2019 Implications of climate -driven redistribution of tuna for Pacific Island economies.  
56 E.g. local marine protected areas and habitat conservation, sustainable fishing programmes, improved post -harvest 
practices.  
57 E.g. post-harvest and post -catch processing for small -scale and semi -subsistence livelihood practices  
58 Bailey et al. Groundwater Resources Analysis of Atoll Islands in the Federated States of Micronesia Using an Algebraic 
Model.  
 • Specific impacts of temperature increase on 
crops are difficult to predict based on current 
knowledge, but temperatures approaching 
2°C and beyond will create significant 
physiological stress for many of the staple crops.
50 
• Negative impacts are projected for rice, 
swamp taro and yams (high negative 
impact), and sweet potato and taro 
(moderate impact) –  physiological stress  
• Projections for changing climate in the 
Pacific generally improves conditions for 
pest growth and spreading staple crops 
specifically, fruit flies, mealybugs, scale 
insects, and whiteflies.  including techniques for their consistent 
supply (germplasm collections, nurseries)  
• Farming and land use techniques 
facilitating soil and water conservation 
(e.g. mulching, organic farming, mixed 
cropping, drainage)  
• Water infrastructure (e.g. water tanks, 
solar wat er pumps)  
• Procurement and distribution of rainwater collection tanks  
• Capturing and storage of rain and 
groundwater resources (individual 
household and community storage 
capacities)  
Ocean acidification (aragonite 
saturation) and sea 
surface warming  • Risin g sea surface temperatures as well as 
a projected increase in ocean acidification in 
the coming decades due to climate change 
will cause increased occurrences of coral 
bleaching, damage to migratory fish stocks, 
and overall decrease the health of the 
marin e environment. 51,52,53,54 This will be 
especially impactful to near -shore coral reefs 
and the fish and other marine species that 
depend on these coral reefs for habitat.  
• A decrease in the health of these habitats 
could result in less catch for households that 
utilize these resources and result in an 
overall reduction in food security throughout FSM. The tuna license revenue in 2016 in 
FSM was approximately USD  63.2 million . 
Under high emission scenarios it is 
estimated that up to USD  16.4 million in 
revenue could be lost by 2050, which is a loss of 14.6% relative to 2016.
55 
• An FAO review in 2013 projected declines in 
catches of tuna in FSM of about 15% also 
expected to cause reductions of about 0.8–
1% in GDP, and about 1– 2% in government 
revenue.  • Small scale aquaculture 
• Fisheries and coastal resources 
management56  
• Building value chains for crops, fisheries, 
and livestock57 
Natural climatic 
drivers  El Niño/La Niña 
phenomenon - 
drought  Although the incidence of drought is expected to decrease over the 21st century in FSM, ENSO 
conditions are expected to result in drought episodes in the following year, with severe impacts on:  
• Ground water resources: water shortages and drop in agricultural production due to 
unavailability of water  
• Agroecosystems: significant drop in yields for key crops such as coconut, taro and breadfruit  
• Biodiversity: localized loss of species and occurrence of wildfires  
• Economy: during drought periods, agricultural losses resulted in the need to import vital food supplies and bottled water  
• Water security:  Groundwater on low -lying atolls is subject to perceptible reductions due to 
climate driven droughts. Results of an analysis
58 indicated  that of the 105 atoll islands that 
were studied, only six would retain enough groundwater to sustain an island’s community 
during a drought with similar conditions to the drought experienced in 1998.


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 75 
 
  
59 SPC. Federated States of Micronesia –  IWRM  Outlook Summary and NWTF Report.   
60 Pacific Catastrophe and Risk Financing Initiative, 2011.  
61 Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Programme –  Current and future climate of the 
Federated States of Micronesia; Available here.  
62 Bell et al. 2011. Vulnerability of tropical Pacific fisheries and aquaculture to climate change.  
63 Adaptation Fund –  Practical Solutions for Reducing Community Vulnerability to Climate Change in FSM; Available here .  
64 USAID – Pacific -American Climate Fund; Available  here.  
65 Adaptation Fund –  Practical Solutions for Reducing Community Vulnerability to Climate Change in FSM.   El Niño/La Niña 
phenomenon - Sea 
level rise  Sea- level rise cause d by climate change will combine with natural year -to-year variability resulting 
from climatic phenomena to accentuate the impact of storm surges and coastal flooding. E xtreme 
high- sea level (tidal surges) for FSM are naturally recurring event s but are expected to increase 
dramatically in frequency as a result of project ed climate change.  
• To date here are no comprehensive studies on freshwater resources and climate change in 
FSM and there remain large data gaps especially for hydraulic modelling of atoll aquifer 
systems.59 
• However, it is clear that with the continued projections for sea level rise, storm surge and 
inundation events and unpredictable seasonal variations in rainfall and ENSO events outlined 
above, freshwater availability in FSM will continue to be negatively impacted due to climate 
change events in the coming decades.   
• Estimated costs of flooding from extreme rainfall events for a representative village are 15.59 million in 2050 and 23.01 million in 2100 (3% discount rate).  
• On average, in any one year, FSM is expected to incur USD  8 million in losses due to tropical 
cyclones and earthquakes. The relative contribution from earthquakes is small as most islands of FSM are situated in a relatively quiet seismic area. In the coming 50 years FSM has a 50% chance of experiencing natural disaster losses exceeding USD  105 million. 
Additionally, there is at least a 10% chance that FSM will experience a loss greater than USD 450 million and fatalities of more than 600 individuals.
60 
 
Non-climatic 
drivers  Deforestation Deforestation exacerbates  and is in turn 
exacerbated by  the negative impacts of floods 
and landslides  that are caused by climate 
change effects such as more intense typhoons61, 
resulting in:  
• Loss of arable land  
• Surface run- off, sedimentation, 
downstream pollution of waterways  • Watershed reforestation for landslide 
protection and flooding control  
• Restoration, rehabilitation or substitution 
of ecosystems relevant for adaptation 
(e.g. mangrove restoration, re- vegetation, 
sea-grass beds)  
High pressure on inshore fisheries  High fishing pressure may result in depletion of fish stocks as well as damage to inshore and 
coastal ecosystems , further exacerbating the 
impacts of climate change on inshore fisheries 
such as reduced production
62 • Rehabilitation of ecosystems relevant for 
adaptation (e.g. mangrove restoration, 
sea-grass beds)  can provide nurseries for 
fish species  
Environmental 
pollution  Waste management is listed as a priority adaptation area for municipalities largely because of its 
impact on water and soil quality when mismanaged. While this can be an important adaptation 
strategy for Local Authorities, waste management projects will not be funded by this EDA project. 
Even still it is important to capture the stated priorities of the Local Authorities  
 
Related projects and interventions  
27. There has been a number of past and on- going projects and initiatives in FSM that have sought to overcome some 
of the key climate change  challenges previously mentioned.  Specifically, the ‘Practical Solutions for Reducing 
Community Vulnerability to Climate Change in the Federated States of Micronesia’ Adaptation Fund project63, the 
Pacific -American Climate Fund (PACAM)64 projects administered through USAID, the recently approved ‘Climate 
Resilient Food Security for Farming Households across FSM’ GCF project and the Small Grants Programme (SGP) 
projects administered by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) have all aimed to increase adaptation capacity and 
impleme nt sub- grants in FSM through NGOs .  
Project / Programme title  Description  Additionality / complementarity with EDA 
Programme  
‘Practical Solutions for 
Reducing Community 
Vulnerability to Climate 
Change in the Federated This is a nationwide Adaptation Fund project that has an 
overall project goal to build/increase the ecological, 
social and economic resilience of communities by 
reducing vulnerability to stressors from climate change.65 
The project focuses o n protecting marine ecosystems in The present programme proposal will work to 
leverage the past experience with small grants, 
particularly utilizing them to support specific local priorities for adaptation as well as the increased 
capacity of communities that have participated in


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 75 
 
  
66 USAID – Pacific -American Climate Fund.   
67 GEF SGP.   States of Micronesia’ – 
Adaptation Fund  FSM and increasing their resilience to climate change. 
Expected outcomes of this project include:  
• Natural assets or ecosystems under protected area 
management are adequately protected/rehabilitated 
through effective legisl ative, institutional and 
financial arrangements and support.  
• Natural assets or ecosystems under protected area management are adequately protected/rehabilitated 
through effective State- level enforcement of MPA 
and nearshore fisheries legislation regulations.  
• Strengthened awareness and ownership of 
adaptation and climate risk reduction processes at local level.  
• Improved Knowledge Management for Protected 
Areas and Ecosystem based adaptation Solutions  
The project also leveraged an EDA Facility to provide 
support for 10 communities to implement priority actions 
identified in their Local Early Action Plans for climate 
adaptation - demonstrating that the small grants mode of 
delivery works well in FSM.  this projec t in regard to water conservation and 
coastal protection.   
Opportunities to be leveraged for the proposed 
EDA Programme:  
• Increased understanding of climate change 
risks/adaptation at the local level.  
• Improved protection of fishing grounds (food security).  
Pacific- American Climate 
Fund – USAID The PACAM regional programme provides grant support to NGOs operating in Pacific island communities in 
adapting to climate change.
66 The programme includes 
focus on capacity building through various means 
(technical training, workshops, purchasing equipment 
through grants, etc.) and projects are both regional and 
country/community specific. Relevant recent projects 
that have been implemented in FSM include ‘Climate Change Adaptation through Family Gardens, Food, and 
Health’ and ‘Improving Community Climate Resilience in 
Micronesia’. The family gardens project aims at 
strengthening the capacity of households and school 
communities to grow food in FSM. The climate resilience 
project is a regional project that targets remote outer 
islands and strengthening community resilience to 
climate change risks and hazards.  The present programme proposal will work to 
leverage the community knowledge of 
implementing home gardens and other 
household level food security projects through 
the family gardens project and increased 
capacity for climate change adaptation planning 
on outer islands through the climate resilience 
project.  The proposed EDA is synergistic with the 
USAID initiative as it will seek to increase  
community capacity to implement coastal 
management projects.  
‘Climate Resilient Food 
Security for Farming 
Households across FSM’ – 
Micronesia Conservation 
Trust (MCT) Green Climate 
Fund (GCF)  This additional GCF project is focused on providing a system -wide solution to increasing the resilience of 
FSM’s most vulnerable communities to food insecurity in the face of climate change. Goals of the project include strengthening the enabling environment with the 
agriculture sector at both the national and State- levels, 
providing an evidence- base for specific interventions, 
developing new opportunities for market access and development and targeting climate smart agricultural 
techniques and opportunities to be used at the 
household level.  Potential areas for leverage with the present 
programme include utilizing updated data,  
mapping, and climate information from the food security project to provide better targeted 
interventions across all three climate impact 
areas.  The vulnerability assessments conducted 
as part of Component 1 of the MCT project will 
inform and guide the elaboration of sub- projects 
by LAs by supporting the prioritization and decision- making processes.  
Additionally, as the MCT project does not target 
outer atoll communities, the proposed EDA 
Programme will aim to provide sub -grants for 
climate -resilient agriculture and water security 
interventions to enhance the resilience of 
households in more remote co mmunities , in 
addition to fostering activities undertaken under the MCT project . 
To ensure there is no duplication of efforts 
between the MCT project and the proposed 
Programme, the ECU will assess, using the sub-
project screening form, the potential syner gies 
and opportunities to be leveraged.   
Small Grants Programme – 
Global Environment Facility  
(GEF)  The GEF SGP provides financial and technical support to communities in developing countries for small projects 
that conserve and restore the environment and enhance 
community well -being and livelihoods. The programme 
provides grants up to USD  50,000 to beneficiaries for 
project implementation.
67 Various SGP projects have 
been implemented in FSM and the region, including a 
climate food security p roject in the community of The present programme proposal will work to 
leverage the increased capacity to implement 
various types of adaptation projects throughout 
FSM that has been increased through the SGP.


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 75 
 
  
68 https://fsm -data.sprep.org/  
69 FSM. Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change;  Available here. . 
 Enimwahn and a coastal and land ecosystem 
rehabilitation project in the community of Satawan.  
ADB/GCF Pacific Islands 
Renewable Energy 
Investment Program  The Pacific Islands Renewable Energy Investment Program (the program) will support a paradigm shift from 
diesel power generation to renewable energy in seven 
Pacific SIDS and place the SIDS on a sustainable, 
climate resilient development pathway. Participating 
SIDS include Cook Islands, Tonga, Republic of Marshall 
Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Papua New 
Guinea, Nauru and Sam oa. 
In terms of adaptation, the project will focus in particular 
in floating solar panels on water reservoir to minimize 
evaporation and secure water supply (in Yap State), but also incorporate climate proofing into technical design of infrastructure.  The project is in the early stages of 
implementation, but it can inform the present 
programme on implementation of a GCF project 
in FSM and highlight specific challenges for project development in the individual FSM 
States. Further, to the extent that the Stat es and 
Local Authorities have developed prior capacity 
with distributed renewable systems, particularly 
solar, the programme can leverage that capacity 
to support the design, operations, and 
maintenance of the PV systems envisioned to 
support adaptation solutions in the EDA sub-
projects.  
FAO El Niño drought: Food 
insecurity monitoring, 
preparedness and support 
in Micronesia and Melanesia  The project worked to mitigate risks to the food security 
and nutrition of vulnerable households created by El 
Niño-induced effects, particularly droughts. Specifically, 
the project:  
• Developed and designed a food availability monitoring system for data collection and 
analysis.  
• Trained government officials in Solomon Islands, Palau, the Marshall Islands and 
Micronesia (Federated States of) on the use of 
tablets populated with the Kobo Toolbox 
software for data collection, analysis and 
reporting.  
• Guided and assisted government departments 
to prepare implementation plans for data 
collection and monitoring capability for 
household food security and nutrition.  
• Liaised with ministries of agriculture and 
village leaders/local representatives to ensure 
regular collection and triangulation of data  The project also trained government officials and guided and assisted government departments to 
prepare implementation plans for data collection 
and monitoring capability for household food security and nutrition. This capacity will be helpful 
in guiding the development and implementation 
of food security sub- projects.  
 
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages  plus diagram ) 
Barrier analysis  
28. A number of barriers continue to hamper the design, planning  and implement ation  of food security, water security 
and infrastructure adaptation projects  as well as the overall adaptive capacity of LAs . These barriers are listed 
below along with a short description, while the table further below demonstrates how the Programme  will address  
them.  
1) Information barriers:  
• Limited scientific and technical knowledge and understanding of climate change and adaptation 
programming :  There  is currently limited  availability of data and information on the impacts of climate change  in 
FSM because the mechanisms and process es for producing such data are nascent.  Information is this limited at  
this stage,  but mechanisms are now in place ( e.g. SPREP environmental portal  for FSM68, Pacific Data Hub)  to 
improve climate information dissemination.  Staff members from the Department of Environment, Climate change 
& Emergency Management (DECEM)  have now been dedicated to maintenance of these  portals. States have also 
been trained to able to disseminate climate information easily.  Specifically, FSM’s Second National Communication 
to the UNFCCC highlighted69 the limited information related to climate baseline data, vulnerability and adaptation 
assessments, and changing environmental, demographic, economic patterns and trends as a key knowledge 
barrier to adaptation. Further,  there remains an insufficient scientific and technical knowledge in -country to 
effectively utilize climate change information and data.  
• Lack of central mechanism to collect climate change information and disseminate as needed at the state 
and local level : There is currently no specific or dedicated mechanism in FSM to collect and disseminate climate


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 75 
 
  
70 The Pacific Climate Change Portal  is used to access climate resources, news and events in the Pacific island’s region. It 
is also linked with the Pacific Environment Portal  which provides access to environmental datasets to support environmental 
planning, forecasting and reporting. Another tool that has recently been created to make datasets available (including 
climate change information) is the Pacific Data Hub . 
71 FSM Climate Change and Disaster Risk  Finance; Available here. change information ; instead,  the country relies on regional platforms70. Climate change information is also shared 
in the schools by the Department of Environment, Climate Change and Emergency Management ( DECEM ) and 
the International Organization for Migration ( IOM) through projects (PREPARE and CADRE).  
• Limited local awareness of climate change from households and community members which leads to 
limite d buy -in for climate adaptation priorities : Outcomes of the stakeholder engagement process revealed 
limite d awareness of the linkages between climate change and impacts on DRR  and coastal protection, food 
security and water security.  
2) Technical barriers   
• Limited experience in designing, implementing and managing climate change adaptation projects  and 
limited operational capacities : The Capacity Assessment conducted as part of the development of the Feasibility 
Study highlighted that although municipality capacity varies within and between States, in general, municipalities 
were found to have limited scientific and technical knowledge and understanding of climate change and adaptation 
programming, limited operational capacity and limited experience in designing, implementing,  managing and 
undertaking monitoring, evaluation and learning for climate change adaptation projects.  This inclu des limitations in 
human resources, equipment, tools, finance and procurement systems, amongst others.  
• Private sector has limited engagement in adaptation planning : The NDA office has involv ed the private sector 
in its consultations for the preparation of the Country Program.  The Chamber of Commerce is a member of the 
FSM Climate Change and Sustainable Development Council to ensure inclusion of the private sector. However, successful engagement  of the private sector in climate change investments requires transformative economies of 
scale. As a small and fragile island economy, FSM doesn’t have the capacity, resources and knowledge to fully engage its private sector with regards to mobilisation of capital from the private sector or active collaboration towards achieving the nation’s climate change adaptation and mitigation targets.  
• Local climate change adaptation capacity is not sustained effectively:  Past attempts at projects have largely 
been one- off pilot projects that failed to build system- wide capacities for increasing the resilience of FSM ’s most 
vulnerable communities in the face of climate change. While some level of capacity is built during the 
implementation of such projects, they  often lack sustainability. These capacities are thus soon lost. Other limitations 
or challenges include the brain drain, general level of educational attainment in the various states, the standard of education and available domestic educational  opportunit ies or resources.  
3) Financial barrier   
• Insufficient available financing from alternative sources to develop and implement locally relevant 
adaptation projects : Climate finance funding has already been leveraged, but the funding amount is still 
inadequate to meet adaptation needs, considering the magnitude of potential climate change impacts . Further, 
more than 60% of the funds go “uncoordinated” among national institutions71 which creates a void for effective and 
coordinated financing for climate adaptation in FSM communities.  
4) Institutional barriers   
• Uncoordinated government adaptation planning and integration into national policy frameworks : While 
decision -makers’ awareness of climate change is reasonably high;  a concrete institutional response is at a very 
early stage in FSM. States have low adaptive capacity that is further constrained by weak linkages among 
government institutions nationally and between different levels of government and with communities.  
4) Social barriers   
• Traditional  social structures and conceptions can create complexities for the implementation of certain 
adaptation projects : Micronesian societies (with the exception of Yap and a few atolls in Pohnpei),  emphasize 
matrilineal descent where identities, titles, rights and acquisition to property  are traced through female hereditary 
lines. Through colonization, women’s rights to land ownership and their access to resources have changed from 
traditional matrilineal  descent to a system with most decision- making related to land ownership and land use being 
retained by male members of the family. Key aspects of land ownership in the four FSM states are as follows:  
o Pohnpei  – Private landowners have f inal authority on  private land.  However, any conflict goes through the 
Department of Land and the Land Commission ( land court ). The State has the final authority for all state-
owned terrestrial land and marine resources. States make final decisions on the use and/or conser vation 
of marine resources or the designated protected areas.


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 75 
 
  
72 https://apt.pacificclimatechange.net/  
73 USAID Pacifi c Islands Development Program “Small Grants Guide” ; Available here . 
74 https://fsm -data.sprep.org/dataset/fsm -national -climate -change -data-portal  
75 https://www.sprep.org/inform/data-portals   o Kosrae  – Kosrae  has similar laws to Pohnpei regarding land ownership. Kosrae Land Court has 
procedures to resolve conflict of interests regarding the use of private lands. For public lands, the use of 
these lands is regulated by state law in the public interest. Any use of the waters, lands, and other natural 
resources within the marine space of the municipality by the state government is subject to prior 
consultations between the state and the m unicipality where the marine space is situated.  
o Yap - For Yap, land ownership resides at the community level first (village/municipality) involving the 
resource owners, titled estates of the place, and traditional leader of the place. On land ownership/resource 
conflict, if brought to State Court and the issue has not been discussed at the Municipal Court (overseen by the chief of each municipality with appointed judges from the place), the State Court would defer it back 
to the Municipal Court . Decisions made at municipal court can be appealed to state level.  
o Chuuk  – Land ownership and near shore marine resources are privately owned . However, Chuuk only 
issues title of certificate to terrestrial land ownership but not marine ones . As with any other state, any 
conflict goes through the court system but authority on conservation and natural resource use on privately 
owned lands lies with  the private landowners. The state works with families and communities who owned 
near shore marine resources for conservation and natural resource use.   
 
• Socio -cultural and educational barriers coupled with limited representation leads to gender -blind desi gn 
of climate adaptation policies and projects :  Although women’s groups interviewed as part of the stakeholder 
engagement process reported that times were rapidly changing and that FSM society was heading toward a modern 
conception of women’s roles and responsibilities, there remains gender inequality in some of the most remote LAs. 
Mainstreaming gender considerations and acknowledging the unique contribution to and knowledge of food 
security, water security and DRR  has been lacking in both climate change adaptation policies and projects. The 
stakeholder engagement process revealed that women’s groups felt they had limited  capacity in adaptation project 
design, proposal development and project implementation and moni toring.  
Table 3 below provides an overview of identified barriers and the proposed interventions to address them.  
 
Table 3. Interventions to address the identified barriers to adaptation  
 Barriers to adaptation  How the project will address specific barriers  Information barrier  Limited scientific and technical 
knowledge and understanding of 
climate change and adaptation 
programming The Programme  is working directly with LAs to build technical capacity for climate 
change, particularly climate change adaptation planning through particularly the 
climate adaptation decision support framework and training (Activity 1.1.1, 1.1.2) 
and the project preparation trainings (1.2.1, 1.2.2). SPC will develop a framework 
for LAs t o identify and screen for climate change adaptation risks in their 
communities. The framework will include intensive community engagement to allow for inclusive identification and prioritization of adaptation solutions, as well as 
develop tools and frameworks which will allow LAs to match needs with potential 
sources of funding both national and international. Examples of resources which 
could be used to train the LAs include the Pacific Adaptation Tool
72, the UNDP 
Toolkit for Practitioners - Designing Climat e Change Adaptation Initiatives , the 
Community Based Risk Screening tool – Adaptation and Livelihoods (CRiSTAL)  
and the USAID’s Pacific Islands Development Program Small Grants Guide73.  
At least two (2) representatives per municipality will be trained (approximately 140 
persons). At least two (2) representatives from relevant State agencies will also be 
trained (approximately 80). Areas for training will include but not be limited to (i) 
Problem Analysis - Defining and identifying the specific cl imate change related 
issues, (ii) Identifying key possible adaptation responses or preferred solutions, (iii) 
Barrier Analysis and Potential Solutions, (iv) Cost -Benefit Analysis (CBA), and (v) 
Stakeholder Consultation Techniques.  
There is no single and central mechanism to collect and disseminate climate 
change information, but there are some platforms regularly used in FSM to 
disseminate climate change information. Under the EU GCCA project, a climate 
change portal was created74 that has been used by the Government of FSM and 
others. It has also been linked with the INFORM portal75, overseen by 
DECEM. Further strengthening of the climate change portal will be undertaken Lack of central mechanism to 
collect climate change information 
and disseminate as needed at the 
State and local level


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 75 
 
 under the EU GCCA SUPA project. The Government of FSM – and in particular 
DECEM – is thus in the process of strengthening information dissemination on 
climate change. This EDA project will contribute to the dissemination of information 
through these initiatives.  
 Technical barriers  Limited local awareness of climate 
change from households and 
community members which leads 
to limited buy -in for climate 
adaptation priorities  LAs and community stakeholders have been engaged throughout the initial project 
design to build awareness of climate change and identify key adaptation priorities. 
The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7) details the ongoing stakeholder 
engagement and risk mi tigation strategies, particularly awareness of climate 
change and integration of all community concerns into sub-grant  design.  
Limited operational capacities 
(e.g., human resources, 
equipment, tools, finance and 
procurement systems, etc.)  To address the limited operational capacities, all of the LAs are receiving direct 
technical training and capacity building for project development and operations, as 
well as continued technical assistance through trainings on service delivery and 
project management/financial management support from SPC.  
 
The direct training for the LAs specifically includes capacity building for designing, 
implementing, managing, and monitoring climate adaptation projects. The 
Programme will also be deploying speci fic support capacity to continue to guide 
the LAs throughout the sub- grant  implementation. Strengthening of capacities and 
systems for monitoring and evaluation of adaptation measures will support informed decision- making, prioriti sation and resource allocation on climate change 
at the national and sub- national levels . While this will mostly be at the municipal 
government and state level, this will be a strong foundation for building national level experience.   
 
The private sector is  fully engaged in terms of consultations on climate change in 
FSM. For example, the private sector was extensively consulted for the 
development of the States Joint State Action Plans (JSAPs) for disaster risk 
management and climate change. The private sec tor is generally supportive of 
government decisions and initiatives on climate change.  
 
However, the limited capacity and scale/fragmentation of local private sectors in 
Pacific countries present challenges . LAs  will be able to  include the private sector 
and academia as part of their sub- grant  applications  as stipulated in the  RCGF 
application process and relevant forms.  The private sector  can be included within 
the sub- grants  from the RCGF as participants in an application.  Similarly,  
academia can be included where there is a requirement for technical expertise 
within bids.  The RCGF application and evaluation process has been modified to 
allow for the provision of more explicit information on the extent to which private 
sector and other actors are i ncluded in applications for sub- grants under the 
RCGF. The EOI form and Grant Application Form (Appendices I and II to the 
Operations Manual) have been modified to explicitly request information on private 
sector and other actors’ involvement in sub- grants . Moreover, the Sub- Grant 
Review Checklist (Appendix VII of the Operations Manual) includes a specific 
evaluation question on the inclusion of private sector and other actors in the sub-
grant applications.   
  
Likewise,  academia  will be encouraged to contri bute to and support the 
development of the various capacity building materials.  There is also potential for 
academia to serve as facilitating agents, where the expertise within FSM’s 
academia matches the requirements for the facilitating agents. Finally, lessons 
learned and other information from the project  will be shared with COM.    
 Constrained project monitoring at 
the State and national level, which 
results in discordant climate 
financing  
Limited experience in designing, 
implementing and managing 
climate change adaptation projects  
Private sector has limited 
engagement in adaptation 
planning 
Local climate change adaptation 
capacity is not sustained 
effectively  Financial barriers  Cost estimations for implementing 
adaptation measures/projects at the State level outstrips current 
department budgets  The Programme  provides an influx of critical financing opportunities for state 
agencies and municipal governments to accelerate the addressing adaptation 
priorities that currently cannot be financed by existing budgets or alternative 
sources of financing. The direct ac cess mechanism also ensures that the new 
financing is directly supporting adaptation priorities rather than more general 
development outcomes.  Insufficient available financing from 
alternative sources to develop and 
implement locally relevant 
adaptation projects  Social 
barriers  Land ownership and other social 
structures can create complexities 
for the implementation of certain 
adaptation projects   
As explained in the barrier analysis above, i ndividual communities will have 
differing structures and systems, but since private land ownership is varied, but 
mostly limited in much  of FSM, the Programme  will be focused on conducting


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 75 
 
  
76 During the progr amme design phase, a survey was conducted with LAs to assess their absorption capacity in light of the 
current and programmed funding received. Generally, municipalities have budgets ranging from USD 10,000 up to USD 
500,000, while State agencies have handled grant amounts up to USD 1m. For more information on the survey conducted, 
please see Annex 4 of the Feasibility Study.  Socio- cultural and educational 
barriers coupled with limited 
representation leads to gender -
blind design of climate adaptation 
policies and projects  extensive community engagement and co -development of sub-grant  proposals to 
ensure that any potential barriers that can arise for activities like siting/distribution 
of resources and interventions are managed proactively  with communities . The 
Programme will comply with FSM government legislation with regard to land 
owners hip/land tenure for sub- grants implemented in public locations.  
 
The Programme  is deliberately working to address issues of gender equity and 
gender mainstreaming by providing for balanced representation and empowered 
decision making/training for women in project design and implementation and 
ensuring effective screening and technical expertise is in place to effectively support positive gender outcomes both in project design and throughout its implementation.  Institutional barriers  A deficit in government 
coordination regarding integrating 
adaptation in FSM’s national policy 
framework  The Programme ’s bottom -up approach to mainstreaming climate adaptation 
priorities as well as the direct LA financing through the EDA mechanism create a 
strong foundation for s tate and local  level coordination of climate finance and 
adaptation priorities and addresses the current deficit in the national policy 
framework.  
 
GCF Focal points at the State level and the central government are currently 
working on improving coordination between entities through the Readiness II 
project. The proposed programme will support this coordination effort by 
leveraging the GCF State Focal Points to support the ECU and the NDA in the 
dissemination of information on the results of the programme.  Specifically, under 
Component 1, the training activities (Output 1.1) along with t he adaptation decision 
support framework and tools will help streamlining adaptation priorities.  Climate finance and adaptation 
priorities are not coordinated at the 
State and national levels  
 
Theory of change  
29. The proposed EDA Programme ’s Theory of Change (ToC) builds on the principle that reducing the vulnerability of 
local communities FSM depends on their empowerment and increased capacity to identify and understand climate 
change impacts on their livelihoods, and subsequently to design and implement climate adaptation solutions  
relating to food security, water security and DRR. Figure 5 presents the ToC of this Programme and demonstrates 
how the current barriers will be addressed through the Programme activities to achieve transformational change.   
30. Component 1 supports a variety of capacity assessment and capacity building activities to ensure that LAs are able 
to access EDA resources  and implement identified priority sub- projects76. This will enable LAs  to develop and 
implement effective projects tailored to their communities’ local adaptation priorities. The key adaptation results 
delivered will include number of people trained in resilience planning and development of priority adaptation 
projects. Component 2 leverages this foundation to support the implement ation of  priority adaptation projects by 
the LAs. These projects will be tailored to  local needs to build adaptive, anticipatory, and absorptive capacity in 
these communities in three critical sectors based on the prioritization process (more details on the prioritization 
process can be found in Section 5 of the Feasibility Study). Adaptation outcomes will vary  from project to project , 
but are likely to include uptake of diversified, climate resilient livelihood options, improved food security and water 
security for vulnerable households, enhanced local coordination mechanisms, reduced economic and human costs 
from disasters/climate change, and overall increased resilience of target communities.


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 75 
 
  
77 Varieties likely to include: salt - and drought -tolerant banana (Miri et al. 2009; Vanhove et al. 2012); salt -tolerant breadfruit 
(Ragone 1997); salt -tolerant swamp taro (Webb 2007; Rao 2010); and salt -tolerant sweet potato (van Kien et al. 2013; 
Carretero et al. 2007).  
78 Ibid.  
Figure 5. EDA Programme  Theory of Change  
31. Table 3 below summarizes  the identified climate risks and impacts, and how the Programme’s Theory of Change 
address es these climate change impacts through adaptation interventions in the three thematic areas.  
 
Table 4. Contribution of the EDA Programme The ory of Change to identified climate change impacts  
Climate Risk  GCF Result Area  Thematic area  Evidence of Impact  Adaptation 
Intervention  Adaptation Benefit  
Increased 
temperature  
Health and well -
being, and food and 
water security  Food security  Temperature 
increases of 2°C and 
beyond create 
significant 
physiological stress 
for most staple crops  
 
Reduced agricultural 
production results in 
food insecurity and 
reduced income for 
subsistence farming households  
 Promotion and 
dissemination of 
climate -resilient crop 
species and varieties77 
(resilient to drought and pest) including techniques for their 
consistent supply and 
conservation 
(germplasm 
collections, nurseries)  Increased 
agricultural 
productivity and 
increased number of 
food- secure 
households in 
areas/periods at risk 
of climate change 
impacts e.g. droughts  
Sea level rise  Food security  Saltwater intrusion 
contaminates the soil 
which results in 
decreased crop Promotion and 
dissemination of 
saltwater resistant crop 
varieties78, including


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 75 
 
  
79 According to the Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP), “access to safe drinking water” is defined as the “availability of at 
least 20 l per person per day from an improved source within 1 km of the user’s dwelling”. “Improved source” includes 
household connec tions, public standpipes, boreholes, protected dug wells, protected springs and rainwater collections.  productivity and/or 
crop loss  techniques for their 
consistent supply and 
conservation 
(germplasm 
collections, nurseries)  
Water security  Saltwater intrusion in 
freshwater sources 
and watersheds 
reduces the 
availability and 
quality of freshwater 
supply  Establishment of small -
scale water storage infrastructure for 
capturing and storing 
rainwater  Increased freshwater 
availability and 
reduced frequency of 
water -borne 
diseases  
 
Increased number of 
water -secure 
households in 
periods at risk of 
climate change 
impacts e.g. sea 
surges  
Disaster Risk 
Reduction  Damage or 
destruction of 
coastal buildings and 
infrastructure, 
undermining 
community 
livelihoods  Small -scale coastal 
infrastructure  Decreased expected 
loss of economic 
assets due to the 
impact of sea level 
rise in the 
geographic area of 
intervention  
Rainfall variability  Water security  Results in soil 
erosion, landslides 
and down- stream 
water pollution around watersheds, 
lowering water 
quality  Establishment of small -
scale run- off 
catchments and/or 
rainwater harvesting  Increased number of 
people with year -
round and off -season 
access to reliable 
and safe79 water 
supply despite 
climate shocks and 
stresses  
Increased magnitude and 
frequency of 
extreme climate 
events such as 
storms and 
typhoons  Most vulnerable 
people, 
communities, and 
regions  Disaster Risk 
Reduction  Results in casualties 
and loss of lives  Early warning systems, 
emergency plans and 
shelters  
 Decreased expected 
loss of lives and 
economic assets due 
to the impact of 
extreme  climate -
related disasters in the geographic area 
of intervention  
Infrastructure and 
built environment  Disaster Risk Reduction  Results in loss of 
lives and economic 
assets such as 
buildings and 
community 
infrastructure  Rock revetment, sea walls, retrofitting of 
buildings  
 Physical assets 
made more resilient 
to climate variability 
and change, 
considering human benefits (reported 
where applicable)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  Disaster Risk Reduction  Reduced capacity of 
ecosystems to act as 
a natural protective 
barrier against 
extreme climate 
change events  Ecosystem restoration, rehabilitation 
(mangrove restoration, 
re-vegetation, sea-
grass beds), planting 
of endemic species, 
wave breakers etc.  Increased 
coverage/scale of ecosystems 
protected and 
strengthened in 
response to climate 
variability and 
change  
 
B.3. Project/ Programme  description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages )


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 75 
 
  
80 A Method for Enhancing Capacity of Local Governance for Climate Change Adaptation (May 2020); Available here .  
Figure 6 Process for delivery of climate resilient communities in FSM  
Component 1.  Local authorities empowered to deliver climate change adaptation services to their populations  
GCF: USD 1,724,637  
GoFSM: USD 70,000  
 
Outcome 1: Local authorities are empowered to deliver climate change adaptation services to their populations  
32. Across FSM, LAs (municipalities and the State- level governments) are well -situated to coordinate and develop 
local responses to climate change, to enable participatory decision‐ making, and to ensure financial and technical 
assistance resources reach beneficiary communities. The beneficiary assessment (See Annex 2, section 5) 
identified that capacity of LAs to respond to climate change in FSM is limited along a number of dimensions,  which 
can be categorized by the availability of different forms of human, financial, and environmental capital80. 
Component  1 is structured to address barriers to increased human capital to respond to projected climate impacts 
outlined in B.1, while  the financial flows and access supported under Component 2 support the protection and 
resilience of the environmental capital of vulnerable communities.  
33. Component 1 delivers three outputs to strengthen the capacit ies of LAs across FSM:  
• Output 1.1 will d irectly address barriers such as the limited scientific and technical knowledge and 
understanding of climate change vulnerability  and insufficient knowledge to effectively utilize climate change 
and adaptation information for adaptation programming;   
• Output 1.2 will provide direct technical support on how to prepare climate change adaptation projects targeting 
the project’s Resilient Communities Grant Facility (RCGF) to improve access to climate financing;  
• Finally, Output 1.3 will create a knowledge management network for cooperation and sharing among different 
LAs (municipalities and State- government agencies) to share experience and develop solutions to local 
adaptation problems.  
34. Component 1 activities will be implemented by a dedicated ECU that will be established under component 2 and 
hosted within SPC regional office in FSM. The ECU will have the dual responsibility to run the day -to-day operations 
of the EDA Programme and manage the RCGF under component 2 under the respons ibility of SPC as the 
Executing Entity . 
 Output 1.1 Build technical expertise to identify and prioritize adaptation solutions  
35. Activities under output 1.1 will deliver climate adaptation decision support tools and training to LAs empowering 
them with the scientific and technical knowledge and understanding of climate change vulnerability and adaptation 
options to identify and prioritize adaptation actions.  
Activity 1.1.1 Develop climate adaptation decision support framework and training curriculum incl uding interactive case 
studies targeting government officials  
Implementing party(ies): ECU  
36. To ensure a transformation in the way LA’s and state agencies identify and prioritize appropriate local adaptation 
measures, SPC will develop an adaptation measure prioritization framework, climate risk screening tools and a


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 75 
 
  
81 See: https://apt.pacificclimatechange.net/  
82 See: https://www.adaptation- undp.org/resources/training-tools/designing -climate -change-adaptation-initiatives -toolkit -
practitioners  
83 See: https://www.iisd.org/cristaltool/  
84 USAID Pacific Islands Development Program “Small Grants Guide”; Available here . 
85 See Table 7 i n Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP  
86 See Table 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP  
 training curriculum informed by  scientific data and analysis that will support LAs to identify and screen for climate 
change adaptation risks and identify appropriate adaptation measures. Intensive LA and community engagement 
will present approaches from existing and successful toolkits  that be adapted into a national “FSM Adaptation 
Measure Prioritization Framework” which will then be presented to the Climate Change and Sustainable 
Development Council  for potential endorsement . Existing toolkits that will be adapted include the Pacific Adaptation 
Tool81, the UNDP Toolkit for Practitioners - Designing Climate Change Adaptation Initiatives82, the CRiSTAL  tool83 
and the USAID’s Pacific Islands Development Program Small Grants Guide84. This will incorporate the following 
gender -responsive sub-activity from the Gender Action Plan85: 
• Activity 1.1.1. Gender Responsive design incorporated into sub- grant development training; localized 
strategies for gender mainstreaming, gender criteria, and implementation are developed  
Activity 1.1.2 Climate adaptation decision support training for local authorities (2 trainings per State)  
Implementing party(ies): ECU  
37. SPC will train LAs on the framework and resources identified and provide an in troduction to the EDA Facility to 
familiarize local government officials with the objectives of the facility, the process, eligibility criteria, and details of  
the three thematic areas for adaptation sub- grant s. At least two (2) representatives per municipality will be trained 
(approximately 140 persons). At least two (2) representatives from relevant State agencies will also be trained 
(approximately 80). Each State will have two trainings, one for municipalities and one for Stat e agencies.  The NDA 
will make recommendations  on the invitation of representatives from municipality and state agencies. Based on 
these invitations, the municipality and state agencies would nominate their preferred representative.  
  
38. Areas for training wil l include but not be limited to (i) Problem Analysis - Defining and identifying the specific climate 
change related issues, (ii) Identifying key possible adaptation responses or preferred solutions, (iii) Barrier Analysis 
and Potential Solutions, (iv) CBA, and (v) Stakeholder Consultation Techniques.  This will incorporate the following 
gender -responsive sub-activity from the Gender Action Plan86: 
• Activity 1.1.2. Resilience training, includes training on gender -mainstreaming for climate resilience, for local 
authorities’ staff and elected and appointed officials  
Activity 1.1.3 Develop train -the-trainer’s module and conduct training for national consultants and/or local NGOs in 
each State to become Facilitating Agents  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU  
39. NGOs and national consultants from all four states will be selected and procured by SPC through a competitive 
process to serve as technical support Facilitating Agents (FAs) and will provide capacity and project implementation 
support.  The selection criter ia for the national consultants and/or local NGOs will be based on individual fields of 
expertise, job titles or track record delivering on projects or initiatives in food security, water security, DRR and 
coastal protection in relation to climate change a daptation.  SPC will develop and deliver a train- the-trainer’s module 
to ensure FAs can support LAs in the prioritization and development of climate change projects, particularly for the 
EDA Facility. FAs will be added to a roster of experts and paired with  LAs by SPC based on FAs ’ expertise and 
experience.   
 
Activity 1.1.4 Facilitating Agents to support LAs prioritize adaptation actions for Grant Facility  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU, FAs, State GCF Focal Points  
40. Based on the beneficiary assessment, municipalities and State government agencies will need tailored support to 
catalyse  relevant project ideas that will be channelled through the EDA Facility in component 2. FA’s will conduct 
site-visits to State agencies  and individual municipalities (approximately 70– 80 site visits will be conducted) to 
provide support to LAs for consultations with communities and to prioritize adaptation actions under the FSM Adaptation Measure Prioritization Framework.  All LAs will be eligible for technical assistance under this activity, 
although priority will be given to municipalities or state agencies showing the highest level of vulnerability as well


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 75 
 
  
87 See Table 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP  
88 The number will vary depending on the breakdown of individual consultants versus non-governmental organizations that 
are selected. For example, an NGO may be able to support a greater number of LAs than an individual and the number of 
individual consultants would therefore be less).  
89 https://www.weadapt.org/sites/weadapt.org/files/2017/august/guide_to_climate_change_low_re.pdf  
90 See Table 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP  as the lowest level of adaptive capacity to implement resilience -building activities. This will incorporate the following 
gender -responsive sub-activity from the Gender Action Plan87: 
• Activity 1.1.4 Integration of gender considerations into the development of sharing mechanisms and a 
community of learning and practice  
Output 1.2. Technical support on project preparation  
41. Once project priorities have been identified under output 1.1, training will be provided by FAs (locally) and 
international experts (remotely) to LAs on how to develop adaptation sub-grant s targeting the EDA Facility. This 
will be done through deploying FA s directly to municipalities and State governments to conduct targeted training.  
Activity 1.2.1 Project Preparation Trainings and Mentoring  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU, FAs, State GCF Focal Points  
42. Two to three (2- 3) workshops per State will be held on eligible sub -grant activities  (under the food security, water 
security and DRR/coastal protection themes) , project preparation and development, targeting around five (5) FAs 
per State for a total of tw enty (20).88 Training will support municipalities and State- government agencies to submit 
an expression of interest (EOI) through activity 2.2.2 and a full sub- grant proposal through activity 2.2.6. A guideline 
will be developed to explain how GCF investmen t criteria and results management framework, gender and 
environmental and social safeguards is to be incorporated into the sub- grant design. The guide will also incorporate 
USAID’s Guide to Climate Change Adaptation Project Preparation. 89 Areas of training will include: (i) Elements of 
project design and formats; (ii) Community Engagement Processes (ii) Budgeting and Economic and Financial 
Aspects, (iii) Implementation and management arrangements and (iv) Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting.  This 
will inco rporate the following gender -responsive sub-activities from the Gender Action Plan90: 
• Activity 1.2.1a Capacity support to local authorities to strengthen ability of staff to integrate gender 
considerations into project design and gender -responsive project design in local authorities based on audits  
• Activity 1.2.1b Ensure inclusive stakeholder consultations for identifying adaptation priorities  
Output 1.3. Knowledge sharing mechanisms to develop and foster a network of local governm ent authorities  
Activity 1.3.1 Develop a knowledge platform and ensure the Programme is connected to regional platforms across the 
Pacific  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU  
43. A web portal will be developed to host all materials developed as part of the project including the guide (activity 
1.2.1) and  FSM Adaptation Measure Prioritization Framework (activity 1.1.1) all training materials, webinars, and 
communication tools and information on FSM adaptation approaches, methods and tools that facilitate the planning 
and implementation of adaptation actions , as well as the municipal -level and sub- project level data collected 
(activit ies 2.2.3 and 2.3.2) . The platform will also host t he knowledge portal including monitoring and reporting 
results (activity 2.3. 2) and lessons learned collated (activity 2.3. 3). Additionally, to encourage remote working where 
possible, the platform will connect users via relevant and appropriate social media accounts and cross -platform 
messaging and teleconference services. Learning exchanges and a national FSM conference on adaptation action 
(activity 1.3.3) will support integration of the knowledge platform. The web portal will also connect to the data po rtals 
and knowledge communities that already exist in the Pacific such as SPC’s Pacific Data Hub, the Pacific Climate 
Change Port al, and SPREP’s Pacific Environment Portal . This will include the following sub- activity from the 
Gender Action Plan:  
• Activity 1.3.1  The programme web portal and database include sex -disaggregated data at the municipal and sub-
project level on the three thematic areas and on key socioeconomic indicators to inform the design of future 
adaptation interventions.  
Activity 1.3.2 Learning ex changes and site visits  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU, NDA office, State GCF Focal Points  
44. To promote cross -learning and create a network of climate change advocates and practitioners among local 
government officials across FSM, this activity will support learning exchanges between LAs as well as site visits to 
ongoing projects funded through the EDA Facility. SPC hosted learning exchanges ( in years 3 and 5 of the project)


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 75 
 
 allow for regional dissemination and lessons sharing between Pacific island o fficials regarding similar issues 
through site visits by local government officials to other countries and relevant workshops and conferences.  To 
foster the engagement of the private sector in future sub- projects and the overall grant facility, private sec tor actors 
will be identified and invited to participate in the learning exchanges and workshops.  Initial criteria to be used for 
the selection of private sector participants will include:  
• Businesses that can be directly (hardware stores that supplies water catchment tanks) or indirectly (restaurant s 
or food retailers  through the food security sub- projects ) impacted by the sub- projects  
• Businesses that are capable or can contribute to the provision of resilience- oriented goods, finance or servic es. 
 
45. Additionally, the criteria will include the following gender -responsive target from the Gender Action Plan:  
• Activity 1.3.2  Learning exchanges and site visits promote gender -sensitive cross- learning between climate change 
practitioners, local officials and private sector actors:  At least 25% of private sector actors invited will be women 
and/or women owned businesses  
Activity 1.3.3 Climate change adaptation local authorities conference  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU, NDA office, State GCF Focal Points  
46. One conference will be organized toward the end of the overall EDA Programme implementation to allow LA 
officials to showcase implemented projects and reflect on challenges, successes and lessons learned and to revisit 
the Programme’s exit and sustainability strategy as well as progress on the recapitalization of the EDA F acility. As 
above, private sector actors will be invited to join in the conference to learn on the successes and opportunities 
generated by the EDA Programme.  This wil l include the following sub -activity from the Gender Action Plan:  
• Activity 1.3.3 Climate change adaptation local authorities conference promotes the inclusion of women and women-
owned businesses as key  agents for adaptation planning:  a minimum of 25% of pr ivate sector actors invited will be 
comprised of women and/or women- owned businesses.  
Component 2.  Priority project implementation -Grant Facility for Enhancing local community resilience  
GCF: USD 13,943,717  
SPC: USD 91,750  
GoFSM: USD 2,80 7,571  
Outcome 2: Grant Facility for Enhancing local community resilience through priority adaptation projects 
implementation  
47. Under Component 2, SPC (via the ECU)  will establish a Resilient Communities Grants Facility (RCGF) (output 2.1) 
to address the long- term vulnerabilities identified in the feasibility study (annex 2). The RCGF will provide sub-
grants for sub -grant s prioritized under Component 1. The RCGF will  award grants and provide targeted technical 
assistance to LAs and State governments across all four FSM States including outer atolls (output 2.2). It will 
support 30– 40 sub- grants in the range of USD 75,000 –1,000,000. An estimated breakdown of size of pr ojects is 
provided in Table 3 below:  
Table  4. Indicative Breakdown of Sub -grants by grant size  
Number of Projects  Sub-grant Range (USD per project)  Total Average Amount*  Municipal/State  
Implemented  
15-20 75,000 -250,000  2,550,000  Municipal  
10-15 250,000 -500,000  4,500,000  Municipal and State  
5 500,000 -1,000,000  3,750,000  State  
Totals:  30-40 75,000 -1,000,000  12,000,000   
*Taking average of the range x the average of the number of projects within the sub- grant range  
48. The stakeholder consultation process, climate change vulnerability analysis and other studies conducted and 
presented in the project feasibility study (see: Annex 2, section 12) identified three priority thematic areas and a list 
of indicative intervention prototypes across DRR and coastal protection, food security and water security (see: 
Annex 2, appendix 7).  
49. In addition to building climate resiliency, the EDA Facility , through the awarded grants,  will assist in strengthening 
the local managerial and financial  as well as monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL)  capacit ies so that the 
recipient  LAs develop sufficient capability to implement adaptation sub-grant s and sustain the country’s climate-
resilient development in the long term.  
50. Sub-projects will be informed and selected based on past viability of similar projects and interventions in FSM and 
other Pacific communities. Modelling, feasibility analysis and design of sub- grant s will ultimately be driven by the 
context and needs of the LAs requesting sub- grants as prescriptive preselection of sub -projects ex- ante 
weakens the EDA approach of building the capacity of LAs to identify, prioritize and develop projects


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 75 
 
  
91 The indicative list of interventions for each thematic area will be refined by the governing bodies at the outset of the 
Programme.  
92 This EDA programme proposal has been developed in constant communication with the proponents of the GCF project 
“Climate resilient food security for farming households across the Federated States of Micronesia”. It will be implemented in 
a complementary manner to ensure that any food security action taken does not result in duplication of efforts.  themselves. As such, the EDA Programme  provides FA s and specialized consultants support to technical 
assessment and design of sub- grant activities ( e.g., engineering design for solar water pumping, planting 
environmental management plans for mangrove restoration). Alignment with GCF funding requirements will be 
ensured through stringent approval criteria of sub- grant proposals and screening processes conducted by the ECU 
(activities 2.2.2, 2.2.7). The three thematic areas, which can be cross cutting, and their sub- grant  interventions are 
outlined  below (for detailed description including examples refer to Annex 2, section 11).91 
Table 5. Thematic areas and adaptation interventions for the EDA Programme  
Thematic area description  Adaptation interventions  
Climate -induced DRR and Coastal Protection:  
Climate impacts:  Including interrelated coastal erosion, sea level rise, 
storm surges associated with typhoons and tropical storms as well as 
flooding and landslides due to extreme rainfall and storm events.  
DRR sub-projects:  Community -led, that can safeguard lives, 
livelihoods and infrastructure. Depending on the climate change 
projections for the area, such projects could prepare for extremes 
ranging from flash floods to typhons.  
Coastal protection sub -project s: Ecological infrastructure can in 
some cases play a role in buffering extremes, and as such be 
incorporated as part of climate- proof small infrastructure projects. Such 
interventions will need to be linked to projected climate change related 
impacts on c ommunities being reduced or prevented as a result of 
healthy and functioning ecosystems.  • Retrofitting existing buildings to climate -proof against increased 
storm incidents ( e.g., cyclone proofing, solar panels, rainwater 
tanks)  
• Watershed reforestation for  landslide protection and flooding 
control  
• Small -scale coastal infrastructure constructed that will reduce the 
risk of losses and damages caused by climate- induced disaster 
events (as appropriate, use of endemic species planting, wave 
breakers, man- made channels)  
• Restoration, rehabilitation or sub stitution of ecosystems relevant 
for adaptation ( e.g., mangrove restoration, re- vegetation, sea-
grass beds)  
• Equipping municipalities with necessary tools to respond to 
climate -induced disaster, including emergency plans, building 
shelter, medical and other supplies  
Food Security92 
Climate impacts: Climate change –induced extreme weather events 
and sea- level as well as the projected impacts of warmer atmospheric 
and open water temperatures, erratic rainfall intensity and distribution, 
more frequent and more intense tropical cyclones etc and their effect 
on land, soil and water resources, agricultural production systems 
(including those of livestock and fisheries), infrastructure, and social 
(community) systems.  
Food security sub- projects: Address the management of cropland, 
livestock, forests and fisheries. Sub- projects that aim to support food 
security under the new realities of climate change through sustainable 
and equitable transitions for agricultural systems and livelihoods as well 
as access to m arkets and value chains. Specifically, to target increased 
productivity (i.e., produce more food and boost local incomes) and 
enhanced ability of communities to adapt to climate change and 
weather extremes. In FSM, it is important to also support benefits to 
coastal ecosystem (e.g., by reducing sediment into the coastal zone 
through taro swamps, reducing pressure on wild- caught fisheries, 
reducing pollutants from fertilizers).  • Development and use of climate -resilient crop species and 
varieties (resilient to drought, waterlogging, saltwater, pests), 
including techniques for their consistent supply (germplasm 
collections, nurseries)  
• Farming and land use techniques facilitating soil and water 
conservation ( e.g., mulching, organic farming, mixed cropping, 
drainage)  
• Small scale aquaculture 
• Fisheries and coastal resources management  
• Livestock management  
• Watershed management  
• Establishment of agroforestry demonstration sites integrated with 
livestock  
• Building value chains for crops, fisheries, and livestock  
Water Security  
Climate impacts: Climate -induced disturbances in water supply and 
security including reduced aquifer recharge from hydrological 
disturbances, salinization and contamination of aquifers from sea- level 
rise and flooding  
Water security sub -projects:  interventions that addres s increased 
impacts of droughts in Yap and Chuuk; shortages in freshwater 
supplies, especially in the outer  islands ; increased incidence of lowland 
flooding and seawater inundation, especially in the steep topographies 
of Chuuk, Pohnpei and Kosrae.  • Water distribution infrastructure ( e.g., solar water pumps)  
• Procurement and distribution of rainwater collection tanks  
• Reducing leakage of reticulated systems and water storage 
facilities  
• Water saving ( e.g., introducing compost toilets, demand 
management through awareness raising)  
• Water quality enhancement and assurance  
• Solar water purifiers  
 
Output 2.1 Establishment of Resilient Communities Grant Facility (RCGF)  
Under this output, SPC  will establish the EDA Facility that will openly and competitively fund applications for adaptation 
measures. The output will put in place the relevant requirements, rules, and regulations for the RCGF . It will be 
established and function as a grants funding mechanism to be governed as set out in this funding proposal and in 
accordance with the Operations Manual, operating in the legal name of SPC as the sole executing entity for this project .


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 75 
 
  
93 See Table 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP  
94 See Table 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP   
Activity 2.1.1. Governance structure for RCGF established and formalized  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU, NDA office, State GCF Focal Points  
51. SPC Micronesia Regional Office (MRO) , in partnership with FSM Department of Finance and Administration (the 
GCF NDA) will establish all committees, review panels (including expertise for E&S and gender assessment 
reviews) during the first six months of Programme implementation. SPC and the N DA will identify and recruit 
personnel for committees from relevant organizations and plan steering committee meetings (see B.4 for detailed 
structure).  As the Executing Entity, SPC will bear responsibility for the overall governance of the RCGF  as well as 
provide quality assurance, oversight and monitoring functions  for the EPB and ECU. This includes mediation and 
final decision -making by the SPC Representative i n cases where consensus cannot be reached within the Board, 
in accordance with SPC’s  role as the Executing Entity for the project  (please see Section B .4 and Annex 21: 
Operations Manual) . This function for final investment decision- making will ensure compliance of the on- granting 
mechanism of the EDA Programme with GCF and SPC’s relevant policies, but all decisions made will be based on 
and with the full involvement of the government and non- governmental members of the EPB . 
52. The stakeholder engagement during the project preparation phase indicated willingness on the part of various 
stakeholders – including the government of FSM –  to participate in the governance structure for the EDA 
programme, but formalization of this struct ure was not possible without an active project under which such 
formalization could take place. Consequently, this will take place during the inception phase of the project 
implementation.  This will incorporate the following gender -responsive sub-activit y from the Gender Action Plan93: 
• Activity 2.1.1 Establishment of inclusive and representative EDA Programme Board and Grants Technical 
Evaluation sub- committee  
Activity 2.1.2 RCGF guidelines and procedures endorsed and adopted by EDA Programme Board  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU  
53. Based on Annex 21: O perations Manual, the guidelines and procedures of the RCGF will be updated (if necessary)  
by the ECU . This will include  any necessary further detail ing of the overall procedures of the RCGF and refinement 
of guidance documents and forms for LAs to access the RCGF (based on Appendices I, II, III, IV and VII of Annex 
21: Operations Manual ). These will then be presented for endorsement and adoption as the procedures by which 
the RCGF will function by the EPB, as the governance mechanism responsible for overall guidance and direction 
to the EDA Programme.  Figure 7  below and output 2.2 provide an overview of the RCGF , sub- grant review criteria, 
and details eligibility criteria.  This will incorporate the following gender -responsive sub-activities from the Gender 
Action Plan94: 
• Activity 2.1.2.a Development of tender documents for the technical support to ensure adequate gender 
expertise for EDA programme and EDA Facility  
• Activity 2.1.2.b Refinement of gender review criteria for sub- grant selection  
Output 2.2 Grant award selection  
54. Under this output , the ECU (a unit to be established within SPC as the Executing Entity for the project) will operate 
the RCGF . Calls for expressions of interest (activity 2.2.1) and full proposals will be launched (activity 2.2.5) . Grants 
for adaptation investments will be screened (activities 2.2.2 and 2.2.7) and awarded (activity 2.2.8) to LAs (either State or municipal -level entities) for priority adaptation sub- projects worth USD 75,000– 1,000,000 across DRR and 
coastal protection, food security, and water security thematic areas. The EDA facility will also support LAs through 
technical assistance activities. An organizational audit (2.2.3) will determine whether the applicant has the 
necessary capacity to implement the proposed sub- grant. Based on the audit and sub grant screening selection, 
targeted technical assistance will then be provided to a) improve LA’s service delivery of adaptation interventions 
(activity 2.2.4), and b) prepare subgrants, to ensure suffi cient capacity to identify, prioritize and design a range of 
adaptation investments. To ensure no LA is left behind, additional targeted technical assistance will be provided 
by FAs appointed by ECU to support LAs who fail to meet RCGF funding criteria.


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 75 
 
  
95 See Table 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP   
Figure 7 EDA Facility grant award procedure overview  
55. The Programme also prioritizes funding for LAs that are considered the most vulnerable to climate change based 
on an assessment of 1. potential climate impacts and 2. adaptive capacity assessment. As such, the ECU will 
ensure that at least 40 –50% of the grants will go to LAs with a capacity rating of less than 3.6 (for prioritization see: 
Annex 2, section 5). Details on the types of eligible projects under these three thematic windows is detailed in 
Annex 2, section 11. The Sub- Grant Review, EOI, and Intake Form are in Appendix 4 of Annex 2.  
Activity 2.2.1 Initial call for expressions of interest  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU, FAs,  
Based on priority adaptation solutions identified under Activity 1.1.2 and Activity 1.1.3, ECU will release an initial 
call for EOI for all LAs  in Q3 year 2. Four (4) further calls for EOI will occur , with one call per annum in year 3, 4 5 
and 6.  If any EOIs are issued in Q3 Y7 , they  would be expected to proceed under the auspices of the RCGF itself 
upon its recap italisation after successful resource mobilisation (see Activity 2.3.4) rather than under the project , i.e. 
using non-GCF finances . Additional technical assistance to improve EOI applications will be provided by FAs to 
encourage LAs that did not submit an EOI to submit in the next round.  This will incorporate the following gender -
responsive sub-activity from the Gender Action Plan95: 
• Activity 2.2.1 Inclusive sub -grant design process  
Activity 2.2.2 Screening of Expressions of Interest  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU  
56. The EOI process will allow the ECU to pre- screen sub- grants against the GCF investment criteria, eligibility under 
the EDA Facility’s three thematic areas, E&S risk level , climate reasoning and rationale and level of community 
input/engagement  (the sub -grant review checklist can be found in Annex 4 of the Feasibility Study ). Additionally,


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 75 
 
  
96 See T able 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP  the ECU will ensure that the financing needs of the applicant cover the total cost of the chosen adaptation measure. 
If an applicant fails to submit an applic ation  that meets the eligibility criteria, ECU will allocate targeted technical 
assistance support to LAs to align their EOIs application with pre-screening criteria. Sub- grant alignment with GCF 
investment criteria is outlined in the table below.  This activity  will incorporate the following gender -responsive sub-
activity  from the Gender Action Plan96: 
• Activity 2.2.2 Sub -grants reviewed and directed technical assistance provided for sub- grants, to ensure 
appropriate gender mainstreaming as needed  
Table 6. Sub-grant Alignment Matrix for GCF Investment Criteria  
GCF Investment Criteria  Description  Intake Form  
Impact Potential  Overall adaptation potential; Results based on GCF 
Impact Indicators  “Potential for Impact” section addresses overall 
climate adaptation potential and impact across 
selected GCF adaptation metrics  
Paradigm Shift  Potential for transformative change from the status 
quo including the specific innovations leveraged, 
learning potential, sustainability and replicability of 
results  “Innovation, Change, and Sustainability” section 
addresses shift from status quo, innovation, learning 
potential, and project sustainability  
Sustainable Development  Environmental, Social, Economic, and Gender -
Sensitive development co -benefits  “Other Benefits” section includes expected benefits 
for environment, social systems, and economic 
systems. The “Gender” section assesses gender -
sensitive development impact.  
Needs of Recipients  Alignment with the specific community/beneficiary  
needs and priorities  “Community Needs and Priorities” section assesses 
community needs/priorities and the specific 
community engagement processes that have been 
utilized  
Country Ownership  Alignment with relevant FSM, State, and local policies 
and plans  “Community Needs and Priorities” section includes 
question on alignment with specific plans/policies  
Efficiency and Effectiveness  Financial and operational efficiency and effectiveness of grant resources  “Efficiency” section assesses the sub -grant’s 
approach to using grant resources effectively and 
utilizing best available technologies.  
 
57. Additional considerations to be taken by the ECU in the conduct of the screening of sub- grants will include the 
complementarity or additionality of the proposed sub- project with existing and ongoing initiatives, particularly with 
that of the MCT project “Climate resilient food security for farming households across the Federated States of 
Micronesia”, approved by GCF as SAP020. The ECU will prioritise interventions relating to food security in outer 
atoll communities, and will seek to address gaps to ensure potential beneficiaries in the most vulnerable and remote 
locations can access the RCGF.  
 
Activity 2.2.3 Organizational audit of sub- national entities/LAs under taken  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU  
58. Once the EOI is cleared by ECU, the ECU will initiate an organizational audit under activity 2.2.3 to determine the 
capability of the LA to manage and implement the proposed sub- grant and initial E&S risk level . If the LA is 
evaluated as “medium- capacity”, it will mean that technical training (2. 3.1) and support from FA s will be considered 
sufficient to develop and implement the sub- project. In addition to training under 2. 3.1, municipalities who are 
evaluated as “low capacity” will be able to choose to receive additional support either from a State agency or from 
SPC as outlined below:  
• Option 1 - The lower capacity LA (in this case, usually a municipality) would be matched with a higher 
capacity LA (usually a Stat e agency) to collaborate on the sub- grant and resubmit the EOI in the next call 
with the higher capacity LA as the lead agency.  
• Option 2 - The ECU would serve as the financial and procurement provider and directly support project 
implementation in collabor ation with the LA (in this case, usually a municipality).  
59. As detailed in the Sub- Grant Review Checklist (Appendix VII to Annex 21 Operations Manual), applicants will be 
assessed according to their abilities to comply with GCF requirements including management of E&S risks, alignment with GCF investment criteria, mainstreaming of gender considerations and other relevant aspects.  
60. Specific conditions will apply to the LAs that are State agencies to make sure local communities, through 
municipalities, will remain the target beneficiaries of sub- grants and further capacity building/skills transfer will be 
provided to municipalities during project implementation.  
61. A summarized audit report will inform a training manual to improve sub- national entity service delivery of climate 
adaptation interventions under activity 2 .3.1. The report will also inform the training manual and training conducted


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 75 
 
  
97 See Table 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP  
98 Further information on the composition of bodies is provided in the Implementation Arrangements section (Section 12).  
99 See Table 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP  for project management, reporting, finance and procurement where appropriate for applicant  entities under activity 
2.3.1 .  
62. In parallel to the organizational audits, a data collection exercise will be carried out in order to address the lack of 
municipal -level data available for the design of gender -responsive adaptation measures at the local -level. This 
exercise will include the collection and compilation of gender -disaggregated data pertaining to governance, civil 
society , food security, water security and disaster risk reduction. Types of data collected will include number of 
women and men involved in governance processes, number of food (in)secure households ,  number of water 
(un)safe households, number of assets at high risk of climate impacts, number of women- owned businesses, 
cooperatives and land, and women’s groups.  
Activity 2.2.4  Invitations to submit full proposal  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU  
63. The ECU  will issue invitations to the LAs to submit project proposals if an EOI passes screening and there is no 
duplication with other ongoing support in FSM. The ECU will prepare and share invitation documents for LAs including full proposal document templates and guidelines (based on those pres ented in the feasibility study (Annex 
2). 
Activity 2.2.5  Sub- grant preparation support provided  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU  
64. Applicants invited to submit a full proposal may request support for full project preparation. SPC and the ECU will 
deploy Consultants and NGOs trained under activity 1.2.1 as FAs to support applicants in their preparation of full 
proposals. Support can be provided, among others, to develop the proposal further, sub- grant climate rationale, 
logical framework, conduct further stakeholder engagement processes with target communities, undertaking a 
gender analysis, conduct an E&S screening. If the sub -grant is  deemed to be a medium risk project (Category B) 
SPC will deploy an independent contractor to conduct an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and associated E&S Management Plan (ESMP) for the project b ased on the p roposal  received.  This will incorporate the following 
gender -responsive sub-activity from the Gender Action Plan
97: 
• Activity 2.2.5 . Technical assistance support to local authorities to strengthen gender in sub- grant  design  
 
Activity 2.2.6  Sub- grant screening and selection  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU, EPB  
65. Following training, LAs will be invited by the ECU to submit their full proposal and will have 3- 4 weeks to prepare 
it, with potential support from FAs ( activity 2.2.5). Under this activity, full proposals will undergo a three- stage review 
process:  
I. Proposals pre- screened by the ECU against a set of review criteria  (see EDA Facility section below) and an 
E&S screening will be done by the SER (social and environmental responsibility) support from SPC. If necessary, applicants will be invited to improve their proposal with further support from FAs. Potential areas 
for support may include E&S safeguard screening and strengthening, gender mainstreaming, and monitoring 
and evaluation frameworks.  
II. Proposals reviewed by the SPC procurement committee. A Grants Technical Evaluation sub- committee will 
firstly provide an advisor y report on both technical and financial sides of the proposals. Then, this report and 
the organizational audit (Activity 2.2.3) will be used by the procurement committee to assess if the proposal 
needs to be reworked or can be sent to the Board. FA s will be made available for additional project 
development support at various stages where necessary.  
III. Proposals reviewed by the EPB who will make the final decision of the approval process
98. As t he Executing 
Entity, SPC will hold a position on the EPB and be legally responsible for the EPB’s actions and decisions. 
To this end, SPC will have the right to veto the approval of applications that are in non- compliance with 
policies of SPC and of GCF  on the basis of due diligence evaluations . 
This will incorporate the following gender -responsive sub-activity  from the Gender Action Plan99: 
• Activity 2.2.6  Screening of sub- grant proposals for effective gender considerations and design  
Activity 2.2. 7 Awarding of grants in the three thematic areas, of food security, climate- induced disaster risk reduction 
and coastal protection, and water security


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 75 
 
  
100 See Table 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP  
101 Including information on locations, gender, young people, older persons, persons living with disability, socioeconomic 
conditions, etc.  
102 E.g. number of people with improved resilience to climate change (direct and indirect beneficiaries, gender 
disaggregated), savings from avoided disasters , households with improved food or water security , areas of land under 
improved management, number of  people trained (gender disaggregated), etc.  Implementing party(ies) : ECU, NDA office, State GCF Focal Points, EPB  
66. The final step will be to award grants to applicants. All awarded grants will be announced publicly, and successful 
proposals will be posted on the Programme web portal (1.3.1).  An initial catalogue of tailored and gender -sensitive 
adaptation measures in the  three thematic areas will be developed and uploaded to the web portal.  This will 
incorporate the following gender -responsive sub-activity from the Gender Action Plan100: 
• Activity 2.2. 7 Portfolio of gender -responsive sub- grants funded by granting mechanism. It is anticipated that 
25% of sub- grants will be awarded to women- run businesses, cooperatives, or women’s groups  (totalling 10 
sub-grants) by the end of programme implementation.  
Output 2.3 Sub -project/grant award implementation  
67. Under this output, awarded grants will be implemented, monitored and evaluated. To ensure LAs have the required project management skills necessary for the implementation of sub- grants, targeted project management training 
(2.3.1) will be provided. A sub- grant agreement will be entered into between LA applicants and SPC for the sub-
projects to be implemented (2.3. 2). During the implementation of sub- projects will be monitored and reviewed , 
evaluated and lessons learned gathered (2.3. 3). During execution, SPC will engage with development partners to 
identify resources for re- capitalization of the EDA fund, preparing a resource mobilization strategy and preparing 
and securing app lication funding requests.  
Activity 2. 3.1 Training to improve sub- national entity service delivery of adaptation interventions  
Implementing party(ies): ECU, FAs  
68. Based on the organizational audit (activity 2.2.3), if it is determined that the applicant requires additional training in 
order to enhance their capacity to implement the proposed sub- grant, training tailored to specific gaps will be 
provided to strengthe n governance structures including areas such as improving the effectiveness of risk 
management, control, and governance processes. “Fit for purpose” coaching and potential reorganization 
recommendations will be provided to LAs to address the allocation of tasks and responsibilities, coordination and 
control mechanisms, rules and procedures, and financial management. This would require specialized expertise 
that would be outside of the scope of FAs and would be procured separately. Once training on these iss ues is 
complete, a grant agreement can be entered (2.3.2). Based on the capacity assessment, it is estimated that 10- 15 
municipalities may be eligible for training under this activity with an additional 2- 3 State agencies per State (total 
targeted training estimate 18- 27).  
 
Activity 2.3.2 Grant agreements entered, implemented, monitored and reviewed  
Implementing party(ies): ECU, FAs, EPB  
69. Under this activity , SPC will sign a grant agreement with the applicants for the implementation of selected projects. 
The Programme  will target issuing 30– 40 grants across FSM.  Sub-grants will be implemented and actively 
monitored by the ECU through the support of FA s. For C ategory B projects, an E&S specialist will be assigned by 
SPC to undertake E&S risk monitoring. A FA will be assigned to each project to undertake quarterly site- visits, 
support reporting processes, and flag any risks or implementation issues to the ECU.  During the monitoring 
process, gender -disaggregated data will be collected to complete the data previously collected at the municipal -
level. The database created will help inform the design of future adaptation projects and measures by providing up 
to date data and information on the three thematic areas (food security, water security and disaster risk reduction) 
in addition to key socioeconomic indicators.  Monitoring will include : i) overall project progress towards the project 
objective; ii)  detailed progress of project activities ; iii) benefits realised and delivered to intended beneficiaries101; 
iv) realised impact  achieved in terms of s upport ing adaptation and improv ing resilience to climate change102; 
v) achievements in terms of i nnovation, change , sustainability  and other co- benefits ; vi) management of 
environmental and social risks ; vii) how the sub- grant has integrated gender  issues; viii) what c hallenges  have 
arisen and how they have been addressed;  ix) how support from FAs has been accessed; and x) budget.  
 
Activity 2.3.3  Sub- projects evaluated, and lessons gathered  
Implementing party(ies) : ECU and EPB


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 75 
 
  
103 https://fsm -data.sprep.org/dataset/fsm -national -climate -change -data-portal  
104 https://pacificdata.org/data/organization/fsm -data 
105 See Table 7 in Annex 4: GCF Gender Assessment and Action Plan GAAP  70. At the conclusion of implementation, all grant awards will be evaluated, and lessons gathered and codified into a 
catalogue format with tailored and gender -sensitive adaptation measures, completed lessons learned reports and 
design documents of projects located uploaded to project knowledge portal (1.3 .1) and other regional 
portals/websites.  As detailed in Section 6 – Financial and progress reporting of the Operations Manual, the 
evaluation of sub- projects may be carried out either by the ECU  or through as a service from a Facilitating Agent.   
71. Lessons l earned will be gathered through the  reporting on  the sub- grants  by LAs and FAs.  This will be supported  
and systematized by the ECU.  Information will be disseminated through a range of  climate change and other  
information  platforms  available including the FSM climate change portal103, the INFORM portal,  the FSM DECEM  
Geoportal, the Pacific Data Hub104, etc. This will be undertaken by the ECU in partnership and coordination with  
DECEM  and FSM’s  NDA office.    
72. This will incorporate the following gend er-responsive sub-activity from the Gender Action Plan105: 
• Activity 2.3.3 Implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of priority adaptation sub- grants to track gender 
elements  
Activity 2.3.4  Continued resource mobilization  
Implementing party(ies):  ECU, NDA office, State GCF Focal Points, EPB  
73. As expressed in letters of support , SPC will continue to engage with development partners throughout the project 
cycle to re -capitalize the RCGF fund. Engagement will include site visits, meetings with bi -lateral and multilateral 
donors. The mid -term review evaluation report will include a c lear and costed action plan for the resource 
mobilization strategy (including GCF exit strategy), and the identification and confirmation of funding commitments.  
The plan will build on the initial results and lessons learned from the Programme  facility. In  the last two years of 
the project, SPC will prepare funding application requests with the aim for acceptance before or during the final 
year of implementation to ensure the smooth transition to new sources of climate finance.  
74. The Micronesia Conservation Trust (MCT) and various sources of  bilateral and other  development assistance 
already  provide funds for  on-granting in FSM, including for climate change adaptation and resilience- building 
measures at the local level.  As part of the resource mobilization act ivities,  discussions  will be held with such 
partners to solicit the re- direction of a proportion of such funds into the RCGF  – they might be able to commit to 
the facility.  Once the RCGF  has demonstrated its value in terms of  delivering  efficient and effective climate action, 
it is expected that crowding in of such sources of  funds would be possible.  
75. In addition, the resource mobilization activities will include assessing the extent to which regular government 
expenditure for resilience building activi ties might be re-directed into the RCGF.  For example, this would allow for 
funds from the Department of Environment, Climate Change and Emergency Management  to be funnel led through 
the RCGF to achieve the objectives of the Department’s annual workplans.  Similar engagement with State- level 
governments will be undertaken.  Other activities for resource mobilisation will include undertaking analyses to 
determine the minimum amount of capitalization needed for the viability of phase 2 of the RCGF based on projec ts 
under implementation as well as scenario planning based on future needs and a capacity assessment to determine 
the optimal extent of funding to scale up the RCGF.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words , approximately 3 pages plus diagrams ) 
Overall EDA Programme  
Accredited Entity  
76. SPC’s Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability  Division : As the Accredited Entity,  SPC’s CFU within 
the CCES Division  (also GCF focal point) will oversee and supervise the project implementation, provid ing technical 
guidance as necessary , with a  GCF Programme Manager, GCF Programme Officer and GCF Finance and 
Administrative Assistant  supported by additional SPC staff from the Operations and Management Directorate (such 
as procurement, finance, human resources, legal , MEL, SPL  and other staff) as well as technical staff from SPC’s 
technical divisions  (including the Geoscience, Energy and Maritime, Fisheries, Aquaculture & Marine Ecosystems, 
Land Resources, and Public Health Divisions as well as the Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability programme).  In this capacity as Accredited Entity, SPC will be in charge of overall reporting to the GCF, ensuring 
alignment with SPC’s procurement  processes and requirements , oversight of financ ial management  and ensuring 
monitoring, evaluation and learning ( MEL)  activities are undertaken. MEL will be supported by a specialist local 
consultant . A full -
time position at the NDA office will be financed by GCF resources. Office equipment, 
telecommunication, transportation etc. will be provided as co -financing from the NDA office.


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 75 
 
  
Executing Entity  and Other Implementing Partners  
77. SPC will be the sole Executing Entity for the proposed programme. A number of units , government 
departments and other stakeholders will contribute the operational management of the EDA Programme as well as 
the RCGF facility  as additional implementing partners under the overall management by SPC as the executing 
entity . These additional implementing partners have been selected in collaboration with the Government of FSM 
through stakeholder consultation processes (see Annex 7 for detailed consultation processes)  and include:  
• EDA Programme  Coordination Unit: A dedicated ECU will be hosted within the SPC regional office in 
FSM, including a Programme Coordinator, Programme Administrative Assistant, Finance and Procurement 
Officer and supported by other part time staff including a Grants Officer , MEL exper t, gender expert  and a 
communication expert.  SPC as the Executing Entity will be legally responsible for the acts and decisions 
of the ECU. The ECU will have the dual responsibility to run the day -to-day operations of the EDA 
Programme and manage the RCGF . The ECU will coordinate and implement the programme activities , 
budget,  and provide the necessary technical and financial reports.  The ECU will thus function as the 
Executing Entity, separately and with differentiated responsibilities from but under the oversight of SPC’s 
CCES progr amme as the Accredited Entity.  
• FSM Department of Finance and Administration: Recruitment of one support staff (using GCF 
resources) at the NDA office to support the States GCF focal points and to serve as liaison between LAs, 
the NDA and SPC. The NDA works alongside SPC’s CCES and ECU to establish the EDA Programme ’s 
governing bodies and will also assist in the supervision of sub- grant  design and implementation.  In-kind 
co-financing from the Government of FSM will support the functions carried out by this staff.  
• State GCF Focal Points: Each State’s GCF Focal Points will support the ECU and NDA to disseminate 
information about the Programme  to local government officials and to support organizing of meetings, 
trainings and workshops.  
• EDA Programme  Board: The EPB will be a national body chaired by the NDA and responsible for taking 
corrective action as needed to ensure the EDA Programme achieves the desired results. The Board 
members will include representatives from the NDA (Chair), each State GCF Focal Point, the Department 
of Environment, Climate Change and Emergency Management and NGO representatives . The FSM 
National Women’s Council has agreed to be part of the EPB  as a representative of FSM’s civil society 
organisations . SPC will serve in a quality assurance  and advisory  role and will support the EPB and ECU 
by carrying out objective and independent Programme oversight and monitoring functions. This role 
ensures appropriate project management milestones are monitored  and completed. The Programme 
assurance rol e is entirely  independent of the Programme coordination function.  SPC as the Executing 
Entity will be responsible for the acts and decisions of the EPB.  
 
78. The EPB will meet once a year with the possibility to hold virtual meetings for final sub- grant approv als every 6  
months or as needed. Specific responsibilities of the EPB include:  
• Overall guidance and direction to the Programme, ensuring it remains within any specified constraints and 
advise on or address project amendments, issues raised and grievances  
• Provide guidance on new project risks, and agree on possible mitigation and management actions  
• Ensure coordination between various donor, government -funded projects and government agencies  
• Track and review the Programme  progress, assess performance, co- finance, ensure that the agreed 
deliverables are produced satisfactorily according to plans, and appraise the Annual Work Plan  
• Approve the project Inception Report, Mid- term Review and Terminal Evaluation reports and corresponding 
management responses and discuss lesson learned and opportunities for scaling up  
• Receipt and oversight of addressing of grievances raised through the gri evance redress mechanism.  
 
79. In case consensus cannot be reached within the Board, the SPC Representative (or their designate) will mediate to find consensus and, if this cannot be found, will take the final decision to ensure project implementation is not 
unduly delayed.  This is in accordance with the role of SPC as the sole executing entity for the project.  
 
80. SPC-CCES will serve in the quality assurance role and will support the EPB and ECU by carrying out objective and 
independent Programme oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management 
milestones are managed and completed. The Programme  assurance role is totally independent of the Programme


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 75 
 
 coordination function. Figure 8  below presents an overview of the Programme  implementation arrangements 
described.  
 
 
Figure 8 Overall EDA Programme  Organization Structure  
EDA Programme  Flow of Funds  
81. The funding flows for the EDA Programme  are illustrated in Figure 9. As the Accredited Entity, SPC’s CCES Division 
– through its CFU  – will receive funds from the GCF . These funds , along with the in -kind co- financing from GoFSM 
and SPC will in turn flow to the ECU, in which capacity SPC as the Executing Entity for the EDA Programme has 
the responsibility for managing the RCGF. Based on the grants applications received and the capacities of the 
applicants to administer those grants, the ECU will either enter into grants agreements with the LAs submitting the 
applications or else contract support organi zations to deliver the goods and services outlined in the proposal. Funds 
will be thus be transferred by the ECU to the grantees on the basis of the grant applications following the procedures 
on dis bursement.  
82. The disbursement of funds to successful grantees will proceed according to SPC’s  Finance Regulations (2018),  
Finance Policy: Procurement  (2020),  Finance Policy:  Grants and Sub- delegations  (2020)  and Finance Policy: Anti -
Money  Laundering and Counter -Terrorism  Financing (2020).  These policies  ensure considerable internal controls  
and due diligence  so that funds provided grantees are properly disbursed and managed.


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 75 
 
  
Figure 9: Flow of Funds diagram  [* agreements directly with LAs that have capacity to implement sub-grants or with FA s if the LA doesn’t 
have the requisite capacities ] 
 
EDA Facility Mechanism  
83. In addition to the overall Programme structure, the grant facility (Component 2) will have a separate implementation 
structure to review, screen and approve sub- grant proposals. The proposed structure will include the SPC ECU, 
EPB,  the SPC Procurement Committee (which includes a Grants Technical Evaluation sub- committee)  and FAs.  
84. EDA Programme Coordination Unit: The ECU will be responsible for putting out the annual  call for EOI s to initiate 
proposal submissions to the RCGF. EOI’s will be screened by the ECU to determine project eligibility. The ECU 
(and potentially external consultant s) will be responsible for undertaking organizational audits of LA s. See Figure 
10. below for the ECU’s role in the EOI process .


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 75 
 
  
Figure 10. ECU Role EOI Process  
85. EDA Programme  Board: The EPB will be chaired by the NDA and will include State- level representation as well 
as national departments that reflect the different themes the RCGF will fund (disaster risk and costal protection, 
food security an d water security). Based on stakeholder consultations, the dedicated body would be composed of 
a climate expert from DECEM, the NDA, State GCF focal points, and a representative from FSM’s Women’s 
Council . 
86. Grants Technical Evaluation sub -committee (under S PC Procurement Committee):  An independent technical 
sub-committee of at least five individual experts will be appointed through a competitive bidding process  launched 
by SPC to be carried out under activity 2.1.1 Governance structure for RCGF established and formalized. One 
external expert from each of the thematic areas, an E&S and gender expert  and a national community engagement 
expert  will be selected to join the technical sub- committee along with  a representative from the ECU and a 
representative from the SPC Procurement team. The Committee will undertake a full technical and financial review 
of full proposals and provide recommendati ons to the SPC Procurement Committee to approve, reject or modify. 
The final decision will be made by the EPB. The eligibility criteria to be applied for the selection of the Grants 
Technical Evaluation sub- committee members have been detailed in Annex 21:  Operations Manual  and include 
appropriate qualifications and experience as well as no conflict of interest with any parties to the EDA Programme 
or sub- grant applicants . 
87. SPC Procurement Committee (PC): The SPC Procurement Committee is composed of an SPC D ivision Director 
(Chair), a Procurement Team representative who will provide secretariat support to the PC, a representative from 
the ECU who will act as the Submitting Officer and provide any clarification or information relevant to the 
procurement action, and two other representatives from other SPC divisions. The PC members are responsible for 
carrying out evaluations of proposals, ensuring that SPC’s procurement policy is duly followed and making 
recommendations if necessary.  
88. Facilitating Agents: A coho rt of FAs will be selected through a call for tenders. FAs will be national organizations 
(NGOs/CSOs) or individual national consultants. FAs will be trained through Component 1 to provide sub-grant  
development and implementation support. FAs will be assigned to each sub -grant  and will conduct a site  visit once 
each quarter to support the reporting and monitoring processes. Figure  below outlines the ECU, EPB, Grants 
Technical Evaluation sub- committee and FAs decision roles in the full proposal process.


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 75 
 
  
106 SPC Policy on Accountability; Available here .   
Figure 11. RCGF Governing Bodies Roles  
89. The entire EDA Facility w ill have a grievance mechanism that is aligned with SPC’s policies and frameworks106. 
Further details of the specific grievance mechanism process for E&S issues are outlined in Annex 6. Additional 
detail for processes is  included in the Operations Manual for the EDA Programme.  
 
90. Table 6 below provides an overview of responsible executing entit y and implementing partners for each activity 
under the proposed Programme.  
 
Table 7.  Summary of executing entit y and other  implementing partners responsible for the delivery of Programme activities  
Activities  Executing Entit y Other i mplementing partners  
1.1.1  Develop climate adaptation decision support framework and 
training curriculum including interactive case studies targeting 
government officials  SPC–ECU   
1.1.2  Climate adaptation decision support training for local 
authorities  SPC–ECU  
1.1.3 Develop tra in-the-trainer’s module and conduct training for 
national consultants and/or local NGOs in each State to become 
Facilitating Agents  SPC–ECU  
1.1.4  Facilitating Agents to support LAs prioritize adaptation actions 
for Grant Facility  SPC–ECU FAs, State GCF Focal Points  
1.2.1 Project Preparation Trainings and Mentoring  SPC–ECU FAs, State GCF Focal Points  
1.3.1 Develop a knowledge platform and ensure the Programme is 
connected to regional platforms across the Pacific  SPC–ECU  
1.3.2 Learning exchanges and site visits  SPC–ECU NDA office, State GCF Focal Points  
1.3.3 Climate change adaptation local authorities conference  SPC–ECU NDA office, State GCF Focal Points  
2.1.1  RCGF established and formalized  SPC–ECU NDA office, State GCF Focal Points  
2.1.2  RCGF guidelines and procedures developed and finalized  SPC–ECU  
2.2.1  Initial call for expressions of interest  SPC–ECU FAs 
2.2.2  Screening of Expressions of Interest  SPC–ECU  
2.2.3  Organizational audit of sub-national entities/LAs undertaken  SPC–ECU  
2.2.4  Invitations to submit full proposal  SPC–ECU   
2.2.5  Sub-grant preparation support provided  SPC–ECU   
2.2.6  Sub-grant screening and selection  SPC–ECU EPB


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 75 
 
  
107 SPC. 2016 . Pacific Community Strategic Plan 2016-2020; Available here . 
108 IPCC.  2019: Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, 
sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems . 2.2.7  Awarding of grants in the three thematic areas, of food security, 
climate -induced disaster risk reduction and coastal protection, and 
water security  SPC–ECU NDA office, State GCF Focal Points, 
EPB 
2.3.1  Training to improve sub -national entity service delivery of 
adaptation interventions  SPC–ECU FAs 
2.3.2  Grant agreements entered, implemented, monitored and 
reviewed  SPC–ECU FAs, EPB  
2.3.3  Sub-projects evaluated, and lessons gathered  SPC–ECU EPB 
2.3.4  Resource mobilization strategy  SPC–ECU NDA office, State GCF Focal Points, 
EPB 
 
Track record of the AE and EEs  
91. The Pacific Community  has been supporting development and environmental protection in the Pacific region 
since 1947. Headquartered in Noumea, New Caledonia, and comprising 26 governing territory member states, 
SPC as an international organization works for the effective and in novative application of science and knowledge 
to the fulfilment of Development Goals promoting sustainable economic development, the empowerment and 
resilience of local communities and ecosystems. SPC’s track record in the elaboration, implementation and 
management of climate change, food security, water security and DRR projects and Programmes is extensive, and 
the pipeline and strategic direction of projects is identified in the Pacific Community Strategic Plan 2016- 2020107. 
92. SPC’s Micronesia Regional Office, situated in Kolonia, Pohnpei, FSM , is the main hub for SPC’s projects and 
partnerships in the Micronesian countries of the FSM, the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) and the Republic 
of Palau and territories of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) and Guam. The regional office has supported a 
number of climate change adaptation projects in FSM including: The Global Climate Change Alliance Plus -  Scaling 
up Pacific Adaptation (GCCA+ SUPA ), EU  - Ready for El Nino (RENI) and Global Climate Change Alliance Pacific 
Small Island States (GCCA: PSIS) Project.  
93. FSM Department of Finance and Administration (GCF NDA) has been the recipient of two rounds of GCF 
readiness funding including the development of the Country Programme and the development  of two gap 
assessments for DAEs. It  is experienced in the development of GCF proposals, including FP036 and more recently 
an SAP Food security proposal, and an SAP concept note on increasing the resilience to the health risks of climate 
change . 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages)  
94. The project will overcome critical barriers to strengthen the resilience of the most vulnerable population to the 
impacts of extreme climatic events as well as long term water and food insecurity as a result of predicted climate 
change. GCF resources will be critical in strengthening climate resilience to improve DRR  and coastal 
management, food and water security for FSM’s most vulnerable populations.  
95. LAs are able to respond to climate change impacts that are specific to their geography, natural environment and socio -political context.  Further, LAs are also in a position that enables them the responsibility to manage and 
regulate land use planning, infrastructure and construction regulation and the management of natural resources. These authorities are idea lly positioned to efficiently coordinate between on- the-
ground stakeholders and key 
sectors in the area. Sustainable Development Goal 13 on climate action indicates that local governments are critical 
to strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity to cl imate- related hazards and natural disasters in all countries. 
The recent IPCC special report also emphasizes the important role that subnational governments play in developing 
and reinforcing measures for reducing weather - and climate- related risks108. 
96. GCF funding is required because of the limited availability of public and private funding to support transformation 
in FSM’s DRR capacity and agricultural and water sectors. GCF funds will be used specifically to address critical 
information and capacity gaps of LAs as well as cover the additional cost of climate change adaption.  Indeed, the 
current costs estimates for climate change adaptation solutions far exceed allocated budgets for both LAs and 
States. This highlights the necessity of the proposed GCF grant structure and concessionally to directly support 
local communities.  
97. GCF grant support is required to address a number of key market failures in FSM. Firstly, the majority of outputs 
and outcomes under this project meet the classical definition of non- rivalrous and non- excludable public goods for 
which benefits accrue to many beneficiaries and are often un -monetized or it is difficult to distinguish intrinsic


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 75 
 
  
109 International Monetary Fund.  2019.  FSM Climate C hange Policy Assessment  
110 Pacific Catastrophe and Risk Financing Initiative. 2011. Federated States of Micronesia, Country Risk Profile .  
111 Lee et al. 2018. The Economic Impact of Natural Disasters in Pacific Island Countries: Adaptation and Preparedness. 
IMF Working Papers, 18/108.  
112 International Monetary Fund.  2019.  FSM Climate Change Policy Assessment  
113 International Monetary Fund.  2019.  FSM Climate Change Policy Assessment  
 financial value and financial returns are unattractive. While some adaptation options may ulti mately result in 
increased revenue generation for individuals, it is often difficult to quantify specific returns on grant investments ex -
ante particularly since sub -grant s are unknow n. Such adaptation investments are currently not attractive to private 
investors because (i) return on investment is difficult to predict  and (ii) attractive and affordable debt finance is 
unavailable.  
98. Secondly, FSM local, State and national financial and technical capacity is extremely constrained, particularly when 
consideri ng the magnitude of potential climate change impacts. Specifically, a previous capacity assessment for 
FSM from USAID highlighted that estimated costing for operationalizing climate change policies and action at the 
State and local level currently far outw eighs department budgets and that there is limited capacity in national and 
State governments to effectively coordinate climate finance and adaptation priorities. Outside funding has been leveraged in this space, but the funding amount is still inadequate to meet adaptation needs and furthermore than 
60% of the funds go “uncoordinated” by national decision makers which further creates a void for effective and coordinated financing for climate adaptation in FSM communities. All of this highlights the important need for GCF 
grant financing in order to unlock adaptation outcomes for FSM communities.  
Concessionality  
99. The project seeks the maximum possible level of concessionality in accordance with FSM’s economic, institutional 
and fiscal constraints and specificities . Although the Government of FSM is taking actions to build a policy and 
legal framework to enable climate change action, structural barriers to accessing finance remain. Public resources , 
which are largely dependent on ODA,  are currently insufficient to achieve the meaningful reductions in climate 
change vulnerability and to improve resilience of LAs and beneficiary populations. FSM’s spending on climate change has thus far been tilted towards mitigation.  FSM’s public debt, all of which is ext ernal, is currently low at 
around 20%  of GDP, with the fiscal cliff expected to put public debt on an upward trajectory from 2024, FSM is 
assessed as high- risk of debt distress. Compounding the high risk of debt distress, potential extreme climate events  
could have a significant negative impact on growth and debt sustainability. Damages to public infrastructure and 
private capital as well as drops in total factor productivity would cause a loss to GDP, while higher spending on post-disaster rehabilitation and reconstruction of damaged infrastructure would lead to higher fiscal deficit and 
public debt.
109 Modelling  suggest that a cyclone causing damages of around 50%  of GDP is to be expected once 
every 100 years.  The Pacific Catastrophe and Risk Financing Initi ative (PCRAFI) estimates that it is likely that FSM 
will incur on average US D 8 million per year in losses from earthquakes and tropical cyclones.110 In the coming 50 
years, FSM has a 50%  chance of experiencing natural disaster losses exceeding US D 105 milli on and casualties 
larger than 220 people. In addition, there is a 10%  chance of experiencing a loss exceeding US D 470 million and 
casualties larger than 600 people.111 
100. Due to the nature and extent of the climate change risks, the government is not able to build resilience of FSM 
at scale without grant support from the GCF. The IMF -World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis confirms that natural 
disaster shocks pose major risks to FSM’s debt sustainability and assesses FSM’s risk of debt distress to be high112. 
Growth impacts could be worse given spill overs  from FSM -specific impacts such as El Niño and La Niña events 
will continue to occur in future, raising uncertainty and volatility in the fishery sector and fisheries -related 
government revenue. In addition, risi ng temperature and sea- level rise will dampen the authorities’ efforts to revive 
sustainable agriculture growth in FSM. Agriculture contributes significantly to the livelihoods and food security of a large proportion of FSM’s population and is identified a s a key productive sector for sustainable economic growth. 
Impacts on these sectors mean that the economy barely produces and sells enough goods and services to pay off 
its debts without incurring more debt.   
101. Given the national debt trajectory from 2024, f inancial instruments such as loans and guarantees are not 
appropriate financial instruments for this project, as this would increase the country’s public debt burden even 
further. The IMF concludes that “ Further  mobilizing external grant financing is therefore crucial to implement the 
climate change strategy while maintaining fiscal sustainability” and strongly recommends speeding up 
implementation of adaptation investment projects.113 Reimbursable grants are not an appropriate financial 
instrument for the pr oject because sub -grants focus on LAs who have no recourse for repayment of grants, and


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 75 
 
  
114 The cap for funding is USD 10 million per project for the GEF and USD 10 million per country for the Adaptation Fund. 
Therefore, the proposed project cannot be funded by these funds.  interventions will have limited income generation, particularly for LAs. While the benefits of the project will mainly 
fall to the general population, farmers, fisherfo lk and businesses dependent on water and food security, the benefits 
gained would generate insufficient cash surpluses for these beneficiaries to build their own resilience while 
reimbursing the cost of GCF support. The urgent need for adaptation investments to support disaster risk 
reduction, coastal protection and food and water security coupled with the inability of national 
Government, LAs and the population to afford debt finance for the proposed activities, justifies grant 
funding, which is n ot available at the scale needed from sources other than the GCF.114 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max.  500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Capacity building and developing a track record of project execution and financial management 
102. The GCF financial exit strategy is a key factor that is at the centre of resource mobilization and capacity 
enhancement efforts from the project inception. Each sub- grant will have to include an exit strategy, to demonstrate 
the long- term sustainability of  the proposed project intervention and how the project will provide long- term resilience 
in the specific LAs. GCF financial exit is achieved through identification and mobilization of additional resources 
during implementation and well before project closu re through activity 2.3. 4 which will not only include the 
development of a resource mobilization strategy and action plan to ensure recapitalization of the EDA facility but 
also establishes responsibilities within government at the LA and national scale to ensure continued mobiliz ation 
of resources for climate adaptation investment activities.  
103. The EDA model from this Programme has the strong potential to catalyse  additional financing for FSM and its 
LAs, particularly through its focus on capacity building for LAs to develop and implement projects, developing a 
fundable track record of project execution, and crucial capacity/experience showcasing effective project and 
financial management. All of this can help build donor/investor confidence, reduce investment risk, and ultimately 
unlock future projects and investment for FSM and the LAs.  
104. The sub- projects are characterized by high social  and environmental  returns but low cash returns. These 
investments are not likely to attract significant flows of private finance during the implementation of the proposed 
EDA programme because of perceived high risks and the limited cashflow generated. However,  private sector 
actors will be invited to engage in consultations and workshops to learn about the opportunities and successes generated by the programme and the implementation of sub- grants. Indeed, resilient  livelihoods, infrastructure and 
ecosystems will reduce the risks for complementary private investments, for example loans for farm improvements, increased trading activity, agricult ure processing, fisheries etc.  The improvement of ecosystem services will directly 
contribute to the increased attractiveness of sectors such as  agricultural processing and fisheries.  As the  
programme  matures, emphasis will be placed on the mobilization of  additional domestic and external resources 
and the ownership of processes by national and local governments, communities and the private sector to secure 
sustainability.   
Recapitalization of the EDA facility  
105. The primary source of revenue for the government of  FSM  is financial assistance provided under the terms of 
the Compact of Free Association between FSM and the United States. This  Compact will be re- negotiated in 2023.  
Given the level of  uncertainty  and the  highly political nature of the decis ion, it  is impossible  for the government of 
FSM to make a  quantifiable commitment  to recapitalization of the RCGF  from such  revenue  at this stage.  Moreover, 
there is  limited  potential for allocation  of tax or other revenues to the RCGF at this stage, parti cularly  with the 
extremely low tax rates  in FSM.  Given the federa l nature of FSM’s government and the decentralized decision-
making, State and municipal governments  may be in a position to later agree on allocating local revenues to the 
RCGF, but such agre ement  is challenging with the nascent  and innovative nature of the EDA  pilot globally.   
106. Further and as acknowledged in the GCF Country  Programme, the extent of private sector engagement in the 
context of FSM is currently limited to projects or  programmes  which have a private sector development component, 
rather than for projects or  programmes  that are generated or co- financed by private sector actors. As detailed in 
the CP and in the Funding Proposal and its annexes, the private sector in FSM is  relatively small and under -
developed, generally comprised of micro or small businesses in the agriculture or fisheries sectors. External private sector actors face important constraints such as high operational and transport costs, which limits their abil ity to 
engage in climate resilience initiatives.  
107. Given these constraints, the project will seek opportunities to build awareness within the private sector of 
opportunities for adapting to climate change. For example, private sector actors will continue to be engaged  in 
consultations and workshops – as is already happening under climate change projects in FSM – to learn about the


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 75 
 
  opportunities and successes generated by the programme and the implementation of sub -grants  (e.g. 
Activities  1.1.2,  1.3.2 and 1.3. 3). Private sector actors will thus be better informed on opportunities for resilience 
building. Moreover, such actors may be engaged through participation in bids as well as procurement for sub-
grants under the RCGF. Bidders will be encouraged to involve local companies , as t he EOI assessment and sub-
grants assessment criteria include consideration of the involvement of local private sector entities in bids. As the 
programme matures, emphasis will be placed on the mobilization of additional domestic and ex ternal resources 
and the ownership of processes by national and local governments, communities and the private sector to secure 
sustainability.  This is expected to have a catalytic effect in unlocking potential future investment from the private 
sector into resilience -building activities. P ublic funds from the RCGF will de -risk such investments by bridging 
viability gaps and covering risks that can’t be borne by priv ate sector actors.   
108. After the completion of the GCF funding period for the EDA  programme, the RCGF  will be handed over from 
SPC to the Government of FSM.  By this time, the EDA  programme will have established the practices, processes, 
guidelines and other r egulations necessary for the ongoing functioning of the RCGF.  Moreover, the relevant 
capacities for  management of the RCGF will have been established through the capacity development activities of 
the EDA  programme.   
109. Upon handover of the EDA  programme, the ECU will be absorbed into a relevant  FSM  government  institution  
– provisionally identified as  the Department of Finance and Administration and within the remit of the NDA’s office.  
SPC will thus step back from its role within the ECU as well as the EPB, with these functions being taken on by the 
Government of FSM.  Any future role that SPC may have in ongoing support to the RCGF will be considered based 
on a request from the Government of FSM to that effect.  
 
Effective knowledge transfer and dissemination of information on benefits  
110. Capacity development of LAs focusses on the technical, financial and managerial capacity to prioritize, plan 
for and implement climate- risk informed local DRR and coastal protection, water management solutions, adopt 
technol ogies and systems for climate resilient agricultural production and sustain climate resilience infrastructures 
and ensure their viability post -project.  LAs are key to ongoing operations and maintenance of project infrastructure 
after project implementatio n ends.  A request for further detail  on this has been included in the Innovation, Change 
and Sustainability  section of the Grant Application Form (Appendix II to Annex 21 Operations  Manual). Institutional 
arrangements have been defined to facilitate political processes between the central government, local 
governments and the sub- grant in order to establish the roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder, in particular 
in relation to operations and maintenance of project infrastructure beyond the GCF project lifetime. At  project 
implementation stage,  criteria would be developed to ensure maintenance is included before funds are disbursed 
and assets are delivered. The O&M costs  during the project implementation period  should be included in the sub-
grant proposals and it will be mandatory to request funds  allocated to the operation and maintenance of financed 
assets and equipment.  At the end of the 7 years ’ implementation period, legal owners of the assets and equipment 
will bear the mainten ance costs.   
111. Under component 2, the project will strengthen knowledge management at the local and national levels and 
systematize and disseminate the results of sub-grant  investments.  Knowledge and learning will be promoted, at 
the conclusion of implementation, all grant awards will be evaluated, and lessons gathered and codified into a catalogue format with tailored and gender -sensitive adaptation measures, completed lessons learned reports and 
design documents of projects located uploaded to project knowl
edge portal (1.3.1) and other regional 
portals/websites.  The project will adopt a systemic approach demonstration of project successes and engagement 
of public and private sector in efforts to replicate and scale- up results which will contribute to reinfor ce its paradigm 
shift potential.  The food and water security sub- grant s will create conditions for investments by public and private 
sector actors. Farmers will see concrete benefits in a variety of ways, for example through better allocation of 
resources and increased productivity, and protection of productive assets. By delivering tangible economic benefit 
to beneficiaries that adopt climate- resilient agriculture and efficient water management practices, the project will 
stimulate economic activity across  FSM  even under conditions of climate change. The effect of knowledge, 
experience of implementation and lessons learned during implementation will allow LAs to continue to apply these 
results beyond GCF financial exit and create conditions for investments by public and private sector actors.


---
*Page 46*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 75 
   
 C. FINANCING  INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF 
funding (i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
16,591,556  million USD ($)   
GCF financial instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter amount    Enter  % equity 
return  
 
(iv) Guarantees  Enter amount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  Enter amount     
(vi) Grants  16,591,556     
(vii) Result s-base d payments  Enter amount     
(b) Co-financing information  Total amount  Currency  
3,119,081  million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
Government of the Federated 
States of Micronesia  In kind  2,916,571  million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
SPC In kind  202,510  million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter amount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter amount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
19,710,637  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max . 250 
words, approximately 0.5  
page ) Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any 
type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).  
Please also explain other contributions such as in- kind contributions including tax 
exemptions and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or Programme.  
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component  and output  as outlined in section B. 3. above and 
disaggregate by source of financing.  More than one co- financing institution can fund a single component  or output.  
Provide the summari sed cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget  plan as annex 4. 
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
Options  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1: 
Local authorities 
empowered to deliver climate 
change 
adaptation 
services to their populations  Output 1.1 
Build 
technical 
expertise to 
identify and 
prioritize 
adaptation solutions  1,262,364  1,232,364  Grants  30,000
 In kind  GoFSM


---
*Page 47*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 75 
   
 Output 1.2. 
Technical support on 
project 
preparation  183,208  151,208  Grants  32,000 In kind GoFSM  
Output 1.3. Knowledge 
sharing 
mechanisms 
to develop 
and foster a 
network of local 
government 
authorities  349,064  341,064  Grants  8,000
 In kind  GoFSM  
Component 2: Priority project 
implementation-
EDA Facility for 
strengthening 
local community 
resilience Output 2.1 
Establishme
nt of 
Resilient 
Communities 
Grant Facility (RCGF)  130,508  120,508
 Grants  10,000  In kind  GoFSM  
Output 2.2 Grant award 
selection 1,256,374  1,076,624  Grants  179,750 In kind GoFSM and 
SPC 
Output 2.3 Sub-grant 
award implementati
on 15,456,155 12,746,584  Grants  2,709,571
 In kind  GoFSM and 
SPC 
Monitoring and Evaluation  168,364  168,364  Grants     
Project Management Costs  904,598  754,838  Grants  149,760  In kind  GoFSM and 
SPC 
Indicative total cost  (USD)  19,71 0,637  16,591,556  3,119,081  
 
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information  presented in other 
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
112. GCF financing will be used to invest in building capacity for DRR , food security and water security adaptation 
solutions for some of the most pressing needs of vulnerable communities. Component 1 will support three main 
outputs to strengthen the technical capacity of sub- national intuitions and LAs across FSM. In partic ular, the 
activities that will fund capacity building are conducted in stages to support local climate governance: The first will 
build technical expertise to support climate adaptation decision making to help LAs identify and inform decisions for prioriti zing adaptation solutions (Activity 1.1.1 and 1.1.2) reinforced through practical hands on support to 
prioritize actions. A train- the-trainer session (Activity 1.2.2) will be provided to national consultants and/or local 
NGOs in each state to become FA s to support sub- national entities/LAs to prepare sub- grant adaptation projects. 
While a knowledge sharing mechanism hosted on the project’s  web- portal will ensure a network of local government 
authorities across FSM and will be linked with regional knowledge platforms. In the second stage, organizational 
audits of sub- national entities and LAs will be undertaken to determine whether the applicant has the necessary 
capacity to implement the proposed sub- grant projects and a tailored training Programme will be d eveloped and 
implemented through training to strengthen areas such as financial management, risk management, control (2.2.4), 
and governance processes as well as project management, MEL, reporting, finance and procurement (2.3.1).


---
*Page 48*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 75 
   
  
113. The project will both develop, as well as transfer a set of nationally appropriate DRR, food and water security 
adaptation technologies and practices that would ensure the resilience of FSMs most vulnerable populations. 
Detailed description of potential technologies and practice prototypes are presented in Appendix 7 of Annex 2 and 
will provide gender -sensitive impact including:  
• Solar water pumping to address water insecurity and promote climate- resilient agriculture (not widely 
practiced in FSM).  
• Rainwater harvesting to address water insecurity (practiced at the household level in some areas of FSM).  
• ITTA -ALLEY farming system to address food insecurity (while mixed- tree gardening and other forms of 
agro- forestry are practiced in FSM, the ITTA -ALLEY techniq ue has not been introduced).  
• Salt-water tolerant varieties of food crops to address food insecurity (being practiced in some areas of 
FSM) . 
• Drip and micro- irrigation to address water insecurity and promote climate- resilient agriculture (not widely 
practiced in FSM).  
• Rock revetments for DRR (being practiced in some areas of FSM).  
• Offshore structures for DRR (not widely practiced in FSM).  
• Mangrove rehabilitation and protection for DRR (being practiced in some areas of FSM).


---
*Page 49*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 75 
   
 D. EXPECTED  PERFORMANCE  AGAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA   
This section refers to the performance of the project/ against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s  Initial  
Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
 
114. The proposed EDA Programme contributes to enabling climate- resilient sustainable development by improving 
the resilience of vulnerable people and communities, infrastructure and the built environment as well as ecosystems 
at LA levels. It does so by empowering municipaliti es and States in FSM to foster climate change adaptation at 
their operating scale, and by addressing top- priority vulnerabilities through the implementation of local projects in 
target sectors.  
 
115. As the exact nature and scale of the sub- grants to be supported by the EDA Grant Facility is unknown, the 
estimates for the number of direct beneficiaries to be targeted by the Programme were built on the assumptions 
below. As a whole, it is anticipated that the Programme will indirectly benefit 80% of FSM LA s through the increased 
capacity of Local Authorities to effectively plan, develop and implement community -led adaptation measures.  
116. For food security, the share of the total population depending on agricultural occupations for their livelihoods 
was derived using the share unpaid agricultural workers from the 2016 IAC. Adaptation measures would aim to 
address impacts related to increased temperatures, rainfall variability and sea level rise. Based on this assumption, 
the number of potential beneficiaries for  food security adaptation interventions is 19,819 people (of which 10,077  
males and 9,742 females)  
117. For water security, beneficiaries’ estimates were derived using the share of surveyed households who had 
reported drought as the main barrier to agricultural  production. Based on this assumption, the potential number of 
direct beneficiaries for water security adaptation interventions is 20,679 people  (of which 10, 514 males and 10, 165 
females).  
118. For DRR and coastal protection adaptation measures, aiming at addressing impacts from sea- level rise and 
extreme climate events, direct beneficiaries were derived by considering the share of the total FSM population 
living within 180 meters115 from the shoreline. In line with the share of beneficiaries compared to the total  FSM 
population to be targeted under the water security and food security interventions, and assuming that 20% of people 
living within 180 meters of the shoreline will benefit from DRR interventions, the potential number of direct 
beneficiaries for DRR int erventions is 13,803 people  (of which 7 ,018 males and 6,785 females).  
 
119. The sum of the potential number of direct beneficiaries is 54,301, accounting for 4 7.2% of the total FSM 
population.  For indirect beneficiaries, the proposed EDA Programme  will indirectly benefit 8 0% of the total 
FSM population116.  
 
120. All 75 municipalities, including those with councils of chiefs primarily in smaller municipalities, will be targeted 
by the proposed EDA Programme. The EDA Facility has been structured and designed to enable all municipalities, 
even those without formal governance structures which are the most vulnerable, to benefit from technical and 
financial support from State agencies or SPC directly to implement adaptation solutions targeting the most 
vulnerable communities and assets117. The sub- grant screening form will support the assessment of eligible sub-
projects by ensuring expected benefits and co- benefits are delivered to the most vulnerable groups by addressing 
identified climate impacts and vulnerabilities. By delivering on these adaptation sub- grants the EDA Programme 
will make a direct and transformative contribution to the climate resilience of FSM communities in line with GCF 
investment crit eria through:  
• Reduced vulnerability of Local Authorities through enhanced adaptive capacity to identify climate change 
impacts, and to design, plan and implement adaptation solutions to address them  
 
115 200 yards.  
116 The assumption used to estimate the number of indirect beneficiaries is that 80% of FSM municipalities wil l indirectly 
benefit from improved ecosystem services, avoided loss and damage, improved adaptive capacity of local authorities, 
enhanced resilience of agroecosystems generated by the implementation of sub- grants  (see Annex 2, Section 14) . 
117 The beneficiary selection  criteria are based on GCF’s criteria. This will be assessed as part of the Sub-Grant Review 
process.  Questions  11, 13–20 and 24–28 all deal with various aspects of beneficiary selection (see Appendix VII to  Annex 
21 Operations Manual).


---
*Page 50*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 75 
   
 • Increased awareness and utilization of climate informatio n in decision -making at the local and state level  
• Strengthened institutional systems for climate- responsive planning and development  
• Avoidance of economic losses and loss of infrastructure assets  
• Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate threats of communities through 
improved delivery of ecosystem services  
121. Ultimately, the Programme  will work to shift the status quo from a pathway of climate vulnerability, elevated 
health risks and limited socioeconomic development for vulnerable c ommunities in FSM to one of improved 
food/water security, enhanced DRR  and recovery, and improved socioeconomic development by building local 
capacity to respond to climate change.  The EDA Programme has been designed to deliver on the adaptation goals 
set out in the FSM  National Climate Change Strategy and contribute to four  of the GCF’s adaptation results areas:  
• GCF adaptation results area 1 (A1) – Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, communities and regions : Through the provision of technical assistance and capacity 
building, the EDA Programme will provide LA s with the required tools and knowledge to identify gaps in their 
adaptive capacity, and to prepare viable project proposals which will directly contribut e to increasing the 
resilience of communities by developing local solutions  delivering adaptation benefits over the short, medium 
and long term. All of the EDA Programme ’s thematic areas and proposed adaption interventions aim to alleviate 
the impacts of identified climate drivers and strengthen the sustainability of livelihoods and ecosystems.   
• GCF adaptation results area 2 (A2) –  Increased resilience of health and well -being, and food and water 
security: The delivery of sub-grant s to be financed by the EDA Grant Facility will directly contribute to 
increasing the adaptive capacity of communities who depend on agriculture for their livelihoods, and to alleviate 
the impacts of drought on agricultural production and water access. Und er the food security thematic area, sub -
grants relating to the implementation of sustainable and conservation agriculture techniques will mitigate the 
impacts of surface run- off and erosion caused by flooding, by improving soil structure and water retentio n 
capacity.  
• GCF adaptation results area 4 (A3) –  Increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment 
to climate change threats : DRR adaptation interventions will make a considerable impact on the capacity of 
critical infrastructure to sustain extreme climate hazards, safeguarding communities’ livelihoods and the 
delivery of basic services.  For example, the implementation of rock revetment structures under the DRR 
thematic area will contribute to protecting people and assets from the damages caused by  tidal surges.  
• GCF adaptation results area 4 (A4) –  Increased resilience of ecosystem and ecosystem services: By 
implementing sub-grant s pertaining to mangrove restoration, coastal protection and reforestation, the EDA 
Facility will alleviate pressure on key ecosystems and strengthen the delivery of ecosystem services which 
are critical for communities who depend on agriculture and for the protection of water resources.  For 
instance, mangrove reforestation activities will mitigate the impacts of storm surges while contributing to 
ecosystem health and biodiversity.  
122. Although the risk of maladaptation exists in all adaptation solutions, adaptation actions that seek to increase 
adaptive capacity (as in Component 1 of the proposed EDA progr amme) are generally least likely to be 
maladaptive. Adaption actions that aim to decrease sensitivity  (as in Component 2 of the EDA Programme)  can 
carry medium risk. In this light, the sub- grant screening form include several provisions designed to mitigate the 
risk of maladaptation (please see Annex 2 –  Feasibility Study, Annex 4 for more information). Additionally, a list of 
Special Risk activities has been included (Addendum 1 of Appendix 2 in FS) to exclude potential sub- grants with 
associated ri sks relating to the displacement of  environmental  pressures as well as  the displacement of  people.   
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
 
123. The entire focus of the EDA Programme and its sub- grants is centred on empowering local communities and 
States to develop and tailor climate change projects based on their specific needs and priorities. The 
implementation of the proposed Programme will lead to a paradigm shift away from systemic limits in capacity and 
resources  to reduce communities’ vulnerability to climate change impacts, to an increased availability of knowledge 
and technical ability to translate communities’ identified needs into viable climate adaptation projects. By 
addressing the identified knowledg e, technical, financial, institutional and gender barriers, the GCF funding will 
enable the execution of innovative climate adaptation projects that adequately address impacts identified at the 
local level, therefore guaranteeing the sustainability of the GCF investment and its potential to generate long -lasting


---
*Page 51*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 75 
   
 benefits. Further, by creating a pipeline of sub -projects aiming to reduce economic losses and improve the delivery 
of ecosystem services, the EDA Programme goes beyond one- off project investments and creates an enabling 
environment for LAs and sustained climate action.  Securing the delivery of ecosystem services will enable the 
uptake of value chains and markets, especially in the agricultural processing and fisheries sectors.  
 
Potential for scale- up and r eplication  
124. The Programme will adopt a systemic approach to the dissemination, replication and scaling- up of results which 
will contribute to reinforce its  paradigm shift potential.  First, the relevance of the Programme ’s results to other SIDS 
in the Pacific region and beyond is of particular relevance as  the implementation of the sub- grant s will improve the 
delivery of ecosystem services and in doing so demonstrate the technical adequateness and financial viability of 
these investments  by de- risking them, which will have the potential to crowd in private sector finance in the second 
phase of the RCGF . Second, t he methodology applied,  and processes followed for the design, planning and 
execution of these local -scale adapt ation sub-grant s will be able to be utilized in other FSM communities and 
replicated across other Pacific Island States. All of the Programme outputs and results will be collected and 
centralized in existing data portals, and workshop events have been planned to be regularly organised to gather 
momentum on the successes of sub- grant implementation and disseminate them to public and private sector actors. 
Indeed, Activity 2.3. will focus on finalising  the resource mobilization strategy to secure funding sour ces to 
recapitalize the EDA Facility  and handover its management. There is confidence that additional funding from public 
and private bodies can be secured and that  the operating capacity of the EDA Facility could be expanded in a 
second phase in which the number of countries and LAs could be scaled- up.  
 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
125. The sub- grants will focus on leveraging best available technology and approaches for the disaster risk 
reduction, water security, and food security activities including, but not limited to cyclone proofing, rainwater 
catchment systems, endemic species and ecosystem services, MPAs, livestock and fisheries development, etc. 
Further, given the focused effort to tailor technologies and approaches to the priorities and needs of the LAs and 
communities that the programme is focused on, it is expected that additio nal innovation and contributions to the 
fields will be learned through the programme applications. The Programme has been specifically designed to create 
pathways and channels to facilitate the generation and dissemination of knowledge through the learning  
exchanges, notably under Component 1. Lessons learned in the design and implementation of the capacity building 
activities and the delivery of  trainings can help inform development of future EDA and local capacity building 
projects. The sub- grant development, review, and implementation process can likewise help enhance both the 
other sub- grants within this EDA as well as priority adaptation projects in other communities. Technical knowledge 
will be generated during the execution of the  sub-grant s through t he implementation of innovative technology 
solutions to identified local constraints.  This knowledge will be tapped and utilized for selecting appropriate 
technologies and approaches in other  Pacific communities and will help  tailor  them to specific community needs. 
SPC will also be aggregating and synthesizing these lessons learned to help drive other projects in their portfolio 
and operations across the Pacific. Finally, the Programme will also connect to the data portals and knowledge 
communities that already exist in the Pacific such as SPC’s Pacific Data Hub, the Pacific Climate Change Portal , 
and SPREP’s Pacific Environment Portal  and support staff and DECEM through strengthening their engagement 
with these portals.  
 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
126. The Programme  will seek to catalyse  local and national policy change by demonstrating the effectiveness of 
small -scale, locally designed adaptation projects, and provide incentives for a greater budget allocation to climate 
change adaptation. At its core, the Programme  aims to build  the capacity of LAs to understand climate change 
impacts to develop and implement their own priority adaptation projects. These efforts will drive community 
ownership and buy -in while demonstrating the long- term sustainability of these investments, partic ularly as it relates 
to long- term maintenance ( i.e., green/blue/grey coastal infrastructure, rainwater systems, etc.) and behaviour  
change ( i.e., fisheries and livestock practices). By empowering LAs to build their capacity and implement priority 
projects,  the EDA Programme will also help to develop local frameworks and strategic plans for DRR, recovery, 
and response as well as new local frameworks supporting food and water security, particularly the deployment of 
both tested and innovative technologies and approaches to increase the resilience of communities. All of these 
frameworks can support bottom -up advocacy at the national and State level, particularly for DRR.  Lastly, the EDA


---
*Page 52*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 75 
   
 Programme will place on strong emphasis on engaging with private sector act ors throughout implementation, by 
inviting private actors to conferences, workshops and consultations to demonstrate the operational and financial 
sustainability of investments implemented as part of the sub- grants.  
 
Overall contribution to climate- resilient pathways  
127. Overall, the Programme  helps to build the adaptive capacity of LAs and communities in FSM to climate change 
by developing new capacity, plans, and infrastructure (green, grey, and blue) for improving DRR  and recovery, 
improving w ater security and access for vulnerable households, and improving livelihoods and food security. All of 
the activities and approaches are also highly replicable and scalable, as identified above, which builds the 
magnitude of impact that this Programme can have on influencing future climate -resilient pathways. Further, the 
pathways envisioned by the Programme and sub- grants help to advance the critical idea of local co- development 
and engagement for effective response to climate change which is a significant contribution to future climate-
resilient development in FSM and is in accordance with identified national strategic goals set by the GoFSM.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
128. The proposed EDA Programme  will contribute to the achievement of several Sustainable Development Goals , 
presented in the table below.  
Table 7. Contribution of the EDA Programme to SDGs  
SDG 1: No Poverty  SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation  SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities  
SDG 2: Zero Hunger  SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth  SDG 13: Climate Action  
SDG 3: Good Health and Well -Being 
SDG 10: Reducing inequalities  SDG 14: Life Below Water  
SDG 5: Gender Equality  SDG 15: Life on Land  
 
129. Additionally, the Programme will deliver the following co- benefits  to both direct and indirect beneficiaries , 
disaggregated by sectoral focus.  
 
Table 8. Expected co -benefits of the EDA Programme  
GCF Category  DRR Water Security  Food Security  
Economic co -
benefits  Economic co- benefits from DRR activities 
mostly centre on avoided economic losses 
from enhanced disaster resilience and 
improved recovery timelines. Specifically, the 
sub-grants will be supporting new grey and 
green coastal infrastructure, watershed 
rehabilitation, and flooding control to help limit 
economic damage to LAs and communities. 
Further the sub- grants will also be training 
and equipping LAs for improved emergency 
preparedness.  Sub- grant s required small 
constructions  and/or maintenance will 
generate co- benefits through increased 
employment opportunities.   
 Water security activities will help to 
lower costs of water for households 
and communities by improving 
access and availability through new 
catchment systems and di stribution.  By targeting livestock and 
fisheries as well as some specific 
crop value chains, the sub- grant 
activities will be helping to 
improve financial inclusion, 
income streams and income 
security for farmers in FSM by 
improving efficiency and output,  
but also developing and scaling 
market value chains and support 
for households.  
 
 
Social co -
benefits  The DRR activities are expected to lead to 
improved health outcomes from reduced 
disaster risk, particularly flooding. Further by 
reducing disaster risk and improving response 
times, social/community recovery can be 
improved. Finally, DRR activities can also 
help to preserve cultural sites and resources.  The principal social co- benefit from 
the water activities in the sub- grants 
will be improved access to and 
quality of water for vulnerable 
households through new catchment, 
pumping and distribution assets , as 
well as r educed morbidity related to 
water borne disease and unsafe 
drinking water . Social co- benefits from food 
security activities focus on 
improved nutritional outcomes, 
especially for young children, and 
food security for vulnerable 
households.  
 
Environmental 
co-benefits  To the extent that sub- grants utilize 
watershed management/restoration and 
green and blue infrastructure for climate 
resiliency and DRR, additional co- benefits for 
reforestation (particularly coastal mangroves), 
coastal/marine resource conservation, and Watershed management and 
restoration activities will help to 
improve water quality, ecosystem 
biodiversity , integrity and coastal 
resources. Reforestation activities 
and s olar water pumping will The activities focused on 
supporting improved coastal 
resource conservation and 
sustainable utilization will help to 
sustain biodiversity and improve 
habitat area. Depending on the


---
*Page 53*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 75 
   
 biodiversity co -benefits will be realized.  
Activities implemented to mitigate the impacts 
of flooding will result in avoided soil loss, 
improved soil structure and improved 
recharge rate of groundwater reserves, 
overall enhancing ecosystem functions and 
services across agroecological zones.  potentially lead to margina l GHG/air 
quality benefits as well depending on 
the baselines for pumping.   activities improved agro -forestry 
and livestock management can 
also lead to improvements in 
ecosystem conservation and 
water quality. Improved livestock 
management and agroforestry 
may also lead to marginal GHG 
benefits.  
Gender -
Sensitive 
Development 
Impa ct By supporting specific DRR activities 
implemented within the gender 
mainstreaming framework outlined in the 
Gender Action Plan (Annex 4) the sub-grants  
will help to identify and integrate key 
considerations for differing skills and capacity 
for DRR between men and women, improve 
access to resources for women,  improve 
gender -responsive leadership by both men 
and women at the community and national 
level f or disaster response, increase 
coordination and consultation with women 
stakeholders in planning and implementing 
effective gender -balanced strategies for 
disaster response, etc.  
  The sub- grants will be directly 
addressing identified gender barriers 
by su pporting improved participation 
and decision- making for women in 
watershed management as well as 
access to, ownership, and 
maintenance of new assets like solar 
water pumps, rainwater harvesting 
and other catchment systems which 
can increase water security and 
decrease collection times and 
associated risks for women. All of 
the activities will be conducted within 
the gender mainstreaming 
framework outlined in the Gender 
Action Plan (Annex 4).  The Programme  will support 
improved participation in decision 
making, control over financial 
resources, asset ownership, etc. 
for women on a variety of food 
security issues mostly related to 
fisheries and livestock.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Vulnerability of the country  
130. According to the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND- GAIN), FSM is the fourth most vulnerable country 
to climate change and the 78th least ready country in the world (FSM scored 0.640 on the vulnerability scale and 
0.360 on the readiness scale). 118 The FSM GCF Country Programme119 concluded that at present, none of the 
FSM States have a ‘high’ level of adaptive capacity required to ensure adaptation to the effects of climate change. 
As highlighted in Section B .1 above,  climate change impacts are expected to severely threaten FSM across all 
sectors of its economy, particularly through increased sea level rise, increased variability of rainf all, increased 
severe weather events and king tides, and increased temperature. Past inundation, surge and storm events have 
caused significant damage to communities , including through lasting impacts to community -built infrastructure, 
coastal resources  and fisheries , agriculture  and water resources . Currently, approximately 60% of households in 
FSM live within 200 yards of the shoreline with millions of dollars’ worth of agriculture, buildings, etc. exposed to 
climate threats. Further, the vast majority of  FSM is reliant on underdeveloped agriculture, livestock, and fisheries 
value streams both for subsistence consumption as well as for primary income streams, and climate change is 
expected to limit these systems further constraining livelihoods and threatening community food security. Water 
security is likewise constrained due to insufficient technology like catchment systems and mismanaged watershed 
resources both of which are made more difficult due to future climate change.  All these elements demonstrate the 
acute vulnerability of FSM to the effects of climate change and the need to urgently address the limited local 
capacity to design and implement climate adaptation projects , which is the core focus of the proposed EDA 
Programme.  
 
Economic and social development level of the country  
131. In FSM in 2013/2014, meeting essential caloric needs required an average of US D 1.84 per adult per day; 
meeting both food and non -food basic needs required on average US D 4.34 per day. At the national level, about 
10% of people in FSM are below the food poverty line and 41% are below the total poverty line. The poverty gap 
index, which indicates the extent to which average adult equivalent expenditures fall short of the poverty lines, is 
estimated at 3.6% at the food poverty line and 15.1% at the total poverty line. In addition to this, FSM is an under -
resourced country that is highly dependent on COFA funding. The COFA currently funds 80% of State budgets and 
over 90% of its funding is allocated for health and educati on. After 2023 when the current phase of financial support 
is due to expire, and if not renewed this funding source will be severely curtailed leading to an estimated annual 
financing gap of about USD 41 million (35 –45% of current national government expenditures). Negotiations for 
renewal of the COFA are underway, but it is uncertain what amounts will be available for what purposes at this 
stage. This level of socioeconomic development highlights a key need for outside funding to support projects to 
addres s impacts from climate change.   
 
118 ND GAIN Country Index; Available here . 
119 FSM GCF Country Programme; Available here.


---
*Page 54*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 75 
   
  
Absence of alternative sources of financing  
132. FSM local, State and national financial and technical capacity is extremely constrained, particularly when 
considering the magnitude of potential climate change impacts. Specifically, a previous capacity assessment for 
FSM from USAID120 highlighted that estimated costing for operationalizing climate change policies and action at 
the State and local level currently far outweighs department budgets and that there is limited capacity in national 
and State governments to effectively coordinate climate finance and adaptation priorities. Outside funding has been 
leveraged in this space, but the funding amount is still inadequate to meet adaptation needs and further, more than 
60% of the funds go “uncoordinated” by national decision makers which creates a void for effective and coordinated 
financing for climate adaptation in FSM communities.  It is worth noting that the total financing required for the 
identified pipeline of projects and programmes (est. USD 1.4 billion121) exceeds FSM’s national GDP five- fold122. 
 
Need for strengthening institutions  
133. The barrier  analysis  highlight ed a number of capacity constraints for FSM. As concluded in the GCF Country 
Programme, at present  none of the FSM States has the required level of adaptive capacity to adapt to the effects 
of climate change. Despite some variation in their adaptive capacities, all States are highly vulnerable due mainly 
to an inability to respond to climate impacts in  a timely manner and the wide dispersion of the islands in the FSM 
which poses transportation, communication and development challenges for the nation, particularly for costs of 
goods and services, costs of energy and transportation, and scalability and co nnectivity of markets123. Further, 
institutional capacity to secure sufficient funds and implement coordinated adaptation and mitigation projects is 
also inadequate, making progress slow and challenging. While decision- makers’ awareness of climate change is 
reasonably high, a concrete institutional response is at a very early stage in FSM. All of this highlights the need to 
improve capacities for climate adaptation particularly at the local level of governance which is the primary focus of 
Component 1 of the Programme, which will aim to foster the transfer, receipt and integration of knowledge across 
LAs, and ultimately building long- term collaborative problem- solving capacity in FSM.  
 
Needs of local communities  
134. GCF financing will s upport building capacity and undertaking on- the-ground interventions  for DRR, food 
security and water security to address the most pressing needs of FSM’s most vulnerable communities.  The sub-
grant  facility will empower LAs to implement climate change projects based on the specific needs and priorities  of 
vulnerable communities within their jurisdictions. This will be achieved b y addressing technical, financial, 
institutional and c apacity barriers  that currently prevent the implementation of locally led climate action to address 
climate change impacts at the local level  and generate long- lasting adaptation benefits.  The sub- grants will focus 
on three thematic areas that are most severely felt by vulnerable communities in FSM, namely DRR, food security 
and water security . 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Existing national climate strategy  
135. The proposed EDA Programme  is aligned with  climate change policy frameworks at the national, state and 
municipal level. At the national level, the Programme  complies with the Climate Change Policy (2013), the Climate 
Change Act  (2014) , and feeds into the objectives of  the Nationwide Integrated Dis aster Risk Management and 
Climate Change Policy (2013)124, specifically with Strategic Objective #2 “Promote, facilitate and develop training 
programs focused on disaster risk management and climate change for scientific, technical, managerial personnel 
and policy makers” and Strategic Objective 7: “Reduce and manage the risks associated with more frequent, severe 
and unpredictable extreme weather events”. Additionally, t he Second National Communication identifies risks to 
food and water security and coastal flooding from climate change impacts (sea level rise, saltwater inundation, 
extreme weather events) as key adaptation initiatives and highlights the need to support community -based 
adaptation projects to institute locally effective adaptation measures . 
 
120 FSM Climate Change and Disaster Risk Finance.  Available here.  
121 FSM GCF  Country Programme.  Available here.  
122 Ibid. 
123 World Bank. 2017.  Pacific Possible: Long-term Economic Opportunities and Challenges for Pacific Island Countries.  
Available here. 
124 FSM Nation Wide Integrated Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change Policy; Available here .


---
*Page 55*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 75 
   
 136. At the State level, the Joint State Action Plans for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change all also 
identify strategic objectives aligned with the proposed EDA Programme, as follows:  
• Pohnpei  – Objective 4.1:  Strengthen food security in Pohnpei, Objective 5.2:  Ensure water security of 
Pohnpei and Objective 6.1:  Improve critical infrastructure in Pohnpei to withstand disasters and climate 
change125.  
• Kosrae  – Objective 6.3:  Improve critical infrastructure in Kosrae to withstand disasters and climate change 
and Objective 6.8:  Strengthen management of freshwater resources126.  
• Chuuk  – Objective 1.2:  Improve infrastructure in Chuuk State to withstand disaster risk and climate change, 
Objective 2.4: Sustain productive agriculture and Objective 4.1:  Ensure water security for Chuuk127.  
• Yap – Objective 3.1:  Improve data and knowledge management to better support disaster risk management 
and climate change adaptation and Objective 3.5: Address food security issues in Yap and the risks 
provided by climate change and other events and Objective 6.3:  Improve critical infrastructure in Yap to 
withstand disasters and climate change128.  
137. Lastly, at the municipal level, Local Early Action Pla ns (LEAPs), which were developed as part of the 
International Climate Initiative, provide essential information on the vulnerability and adaptive capacity of local 
communities . Priority adaption actions to be implemented as part of Component 2 of the proposed Programme 
were directly inspired from the LEAPs , in alignment with both the national climate change framework and the needs 
of local populations .  
 
Existing GCF country Programme  
138. The GCF Country Programme also specifically identifies the need for food and water security projects, disaster 
risk management projects, and resilient infrastructure/roads projects129. Building on identified priorities , and given 
the centrality of climate change considerations, the GCF Country Programme endorses the sectoral focus of the 
JSAPs – food and water security, health and education, and infrastructure climate proofing. Further, the Country 
Programme acknowledges the difficulty in leveraging private sector financing for climate adaptation projects in 
FSM, due to the limited capabilities of national private sector actors.  As recommended in the Country Programme, 
the EDA grant facility will streamline local-level, pr iority adaptation projects relating to the food and water security 
sectors and DRR. Additionally, this Programme will build LA technical capacity, so that LAs can utilize climate 
change information, implement an informed adaptation response , which will str engthen their overall capacity to 
implement climate finance projects . 
 
Alignment with existing policies  such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs  
139. Although FSM’s contribution to greenhouse gas emissions  has always been marginal , the INDC states the 
need to implement priority adaption actions as laid out in the Nationwide Integrated Disaster Risk Management and 
Climate Change Policy (2013) and the FSM Climate Change Act (2014). The INDC emphasizes the urgency to 
enhance the local capacity to plan, design, imp lement, manage and operate adaptation projects and installed 
technologies , further demonstrating the relevance of the proposed EDA Programme.  At time of writing, FSM’s 
National Adaptation Plan is currently under development. A detailed list of regional, national, state and municipal 
policy frameworks of relevance to and aligned with the proposed EDA Programme can be found in Section 7 of the 
Feasibility Study.  
 
Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver  
140. SPC is the principal scientific and technical organi zation in the Pacific region, supporting development since 
1947. SPC is an international organization owned and governed by 26 member countries and territories. SPC 
applies science, knowledge and innovation in support of sustainable development, with a focus on critical cross -
 
125 Federated States of Micronesia –  Pohnpei Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change; 
Available here. 
126 Federated States of Micronesia –  Kosrae Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change; 
Available here. 
127 Federated States of Micronesia –  Chuuk Joint State Action Plan for Disaster R isk Management and Climate Change; 
Available here.  
128 Federated States of Micronesia –  Yap Joint State Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change; 
Available here. 
129 GCF – Federated State of Micronesia Country Programme; Available here .


---
*Page 56*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 75 
   
 cutting issues such as climate change, disaster risk management, food security, gender equality, human rights, 
non-commun icable diseases and youth employment. Drawing on a multi -sectoral integrated approach, SPC aims 
to support the empowerment of Pacific communities through the generation and sharing of locally owned  
knowledge130. SPC gained GCF accreditation in February 2019 , and is authorized to perform all financial, 
administrative and managerial processes for the execution of climate finance projects . The capacity of the AE to 
deliver is further strengthened by the presence of an SPC Regional Office in FSM. Located in Pohnpei, SPC’s RO 
will be a key implementing partner in the delivery of the proposed EDA Programme.  
 
Role of National Designated Authority  and Engagement with civil society organization s and other relevant 
stakeholders, including indigenous people s, women and other vulnerable groups  
141. In addition to this strategic alignment, the EDA Programme has been co- developed by SPC and the NDA, with 
strong support and inputs from other FSM stakeholde rs, including all four States , civil society organizations  and 
women’s groups . Even despite difficulties caused by the global COVID -19 pandemic, initial needs assessments 
were conducted for a number of FSM municipalities and through this specific adaptatio n priorities were identified 
through direct stakeholder meetings. The NDA, which will also be the official focal point, and the four States will be 
fully involved and play a key strategic role in the Programme implementation. Resources will be provided to the 
NDA and LAs to guarantee ownership by developing key strategic partnerships between SPC, the NDA and LAs. 
Further, a national decision- making body made up of representatives from key stakeholders will endorse key 
milestones and lead key Programme  imple mentation including the selection of sub -grants.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
142. The envisaged GCF budget for the implementation of prioritized  and identified pipeline of sub- grant projects is 
USD 12,000,000 while USD 4, 591,556 is expected to fund TA support for the implementation of these sub- grants . 
The total project budget is USD  16,591,556, all of which is to be provided by the GCF in the form of a grant. The 
programme includes USD 3,119,081 in co -finance, of which USD  2,916,571 is from the FSM Government and 
USD  202,510 from SPC.  
143. The GCF support in form of grant is crucial to address subs tantial adaptation needs of the FSM communities. 
The proposed programme aims to build the adaptive capacity of vulnerable LAs and to implement a variety of 
adaptation interventions for the increased climate resilience of communities and livelihoods. The ai m is to initiate 
an overarching approach that would support the identification of locally  led, most suitable interventions and in doing 
so lay the foundations for further scaling- up beyond the programme lifetime. The programme will support local 
public sector.  
144. Furthermore, the request for grant financing is justified by (i) the needs of the recip ients, who are local 
communities whose livelihoods are extremely vulnerable to climate change, (ii) the limited capacity of FSM LAs 
and States to leverage other sources of financing. Section B.1 of this Funding Proposal and Section 2 of the 
Feasibility Stu dy provide more detail on the socioeconomic conditions of FSM communities. The current cost 
estimates for climate change adaptation solutions far exceed allocated budgets for both LAs and States. This 
highlights the necessity of the proposed GCF grant stru cture and concessionally to directly support local 
communities. Further, similar mechanisms from other donors including the Adaptation Fund131, GEF Small Grants 
Programme132 and USAID PACAM133 that have been shown to be both effective and efficient at supporting LAs and 
community groups in developing projects and delivering local climate change outcomes, including in DRR, 
ecosystem -based adaptation, food security, and water security.  
145. Given that most of the interventions planned are public sector projects that use grant funding and therefore do 
not generate any revenues, a financial analysis is largely infeasible. Given this, a focus has been put on the 
economic analysis of the project. Generally, these types of investments produce outputs and outcomes that meet 
the classical definition of public goods (non- rivalrous and non- excludable).  
146. The project has the potential to generate a broad range of environmental, social, and economic benefits and 
co-benefits, some of which include:  
• Increased capacity of relevant stakeholders to identify, develop, and implement tailored and focused 
adaptation measures and needs;  
 
130 Pacific Community . 2019.  SPC Results Report 2019; Available here. 
131 Adaptation Fund –  Practical Solutions for Reducing Community Vulnerability to Climate Change in FSM; Available here.  
132 GEF Small Grants Programme –  Micronesia OP 5 Strategy; Available here.   
133 USAID PACAM Performance Evaluation Report . 2017.  Available here.


---
*Page 57*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 75 
   
 • Increased resilience of buildings and infrastructure to severe climate impacts, especially those resulting 
from climate extremes;  
• Reduced flooding and seawater intrusion due to coastal management interventions;  
• Reduced erosion and loss of coast, and loss of infrastructure such as roads;  
• Avoided loss of biodiversity due to, for example, mangrove planting:  
• Avoided crop losses and overall increased food security due to implementation of climate resilient 
crops/varieties such as saltwater resistant yam;  
• Avoided cost resulting from erosion and soil damage due to implementation of soil and water conservation 
techniques;  
• Increased water security and water subsistence due to implementation of water infrastructure such as 
rainwater harvesters;  
• Increased producti vity and avoided crop losses as a result of investing into water storage and irrigation  
systems; and 
• Health benefits resulting from increased water security.   
 
Efficiency and effectiveness of the project  
147. An economic analysis of the project has been performed to assess the incremental adaptation benefits to 
climate change for communities. The economic cost -benefit analysis uses a cash flow model over a 20- year period, 
and a 50- year period for coastal management. These periods include all investment and operational costs of the 
project, as well as the monetized  revenues from resulting externalities such as avoided losses. The approach 
undertaken was based on identifying the most probable interventions that wo uld reflect the most pressing 
adaptation needs . 
148. The results of economic analysis clearly show that the programme- level ENPV is positive  at USD 3 9,268,625 
and the programme- level EIRR is 11%. The programme level EIRR is above 6% discount rate and therefore the 
conclusion is that the proposed programme is economically viable and can be justified on economic grounds, even 
with 30% of non- investment budget costs for which no direct benefits are envisaged. It is also noteworthy that the 
analysis included conservative assumptions and not all benefits have been included in the economic calculations 
since it was not possible to estimate their monetary values, but these benefits would nonetheless occur under the 
proposed interventions. Some of benefits would include avoided coastal erosion, avoided crops damage due to 
availability of water for irrigation, increased capacity of relevant stakeholders to identify, develop, and implement 
tailored and focused adaptation measures and needs, and health benefits resulting from increased water security. 
For more details,  please see Annex 3.  
149. Accordingly, the EDA Programme  will demonstrate a strong cost effectiveness and economic  
soundness . The proposed financial s tructure of the facility is deemed adequate and reasonable in order to achieve 
the Programme’s objectives while minimizing transaction costs, in particular given the high complexity of targeting 
all municipalities in each of the States to include particularly vulnerable populations living in rural areas and outer  
islands . Indeed, the long distanc es, at times unfavourable weather, logistics and high- cost challenges of inter -island 
transportation in FSM make it particularly difficult to deliver assistance.  
150. Summarizing the comparable costs per beneficiary for sub- projects of the PACC grant mechanism presents 
the following:  
• Cook Islands: cost per direct beneficiary: USD 4,000  
• FSM: cost per direct beneficiary: USD 8,415  
• Samoa: cost per direct beneficiary: USD 436  
• Vanuatu: cost per direct beneficiary: USD 2,291  
151. Based on an estimate of 54,301 direct beneficiaries through the implementation of sub- grants through this EDA 
Programme with a total Programme cost of USD 19,71 0,637, the cost per direct beneficiary is approximately 
USD 363. The EDA Programme compares favourably against these benchmark s and is well below comparable 
sub-grant costs per direct beneficiaries.  
 
Application of best practices  
152. The programme has identified number of potential interventions that would most effectively and efficiently 
respond to adaptation needs (See table 4). The interventions were identified and prioritized based on stakeholder 
consultations. Interventions include pr oven sound technologies and practices completely aligned with the FSM 
context.


---
*Page 58*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 75 
   
 153. The sub -grants will focus on leveraging best available technology and approaches for the DRR , water security, 
and food security activities including, but not limited to cyclone proofing, rainwater catchment systems, endemic 
species and ecosystem services, MPAs, livestock and fisheries development , and other as defined within table 4 
of this proposal . Further, given the focused effort to tailor technologies and approaches to the priorities and needs 
of the LAs and communities that the Programme is focused on, it is expected that additional innovation and 
contributions to the fields will be learned through the Programme applications.  
154. The EDA model from this Programme has the strong potential to catalyse  additional financing for FSM and its 
LAs, particularly through its focus on capacity building for LAs to develop and implement projects, developing a 
fundable track record of project execution, and crucial capacity/experience showcas ing effective project and 
financial management. All of this can help build donor/investor confidence, reduce investment risk, and ultimately 
unlock future projects and investment for FSM and the LAs.


---
*Page 59*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 75 
   
 E. LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK   
This section refers to the project /Programme’s  logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/ Programme contributes  as 
a whole, including in respect of any  co-financing .  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☐ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
  
 
134 The details on the rationale and calculations for direct and indirect beneficiaries can be found in Annex 2,  Section 14.  E.2. Core indicator targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/ Programme. Methodologies 
for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in section A.  
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be 
reduced or avoided ( mitigation  
and cross -cutting  only)  Annual  Click here to enter text.  t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  Click here to enter text.  t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions ( mitigation  and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project financing        USD USD   
(b) Requested GCF amount        USD USD  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  N/A t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t  CO 2eq (d = a / c)  N/A Choose an item.  / t CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed 
(e = b / c)  N/A Choose an item. / t CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of finance 
to be leveraged by the proposed 
project/ Programme as a result of 
the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources ( mitigation  and 
cross- cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged        USD USD  
(g) Public source co-finance d       USD USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  None  Choose an item.  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b )        
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)         
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 0  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex )  Direct  54,301134 
49.2% of female  
Indirect  92,016 
49.2% of female  
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data per 
country in annex 1 7. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  47.2% (Expressed as %) of country(ies)  
Indirect  80% (Expressed as %) of country(ies)  
For a multi -country proposal,  leave blank and  provide the data per country in annex 1 7.


---
*Page 60*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 75 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Expected 
Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of 
the most 
vulnerable 
people, 
communities 
and regions  A1.1 Change in 
expected losses 
of lives and 
economic assets (US$) due to the 
impact of 
extreme climate -
related disasters  Post Disaster Assessments  
National census , 
Household Income Survey  
(HIES)  and 
Multiple Indicator 
Cluster Surveys 
(MICS)
135  
Progress reports 
on the implementation of 
the sub projects  196 housing 
buildings and 33 
public 
infrastructure 
buildings 
damaged or 
destroyed during 
the 2019 Typhoon 
Wutip  
Estima ted costs to 
repair housing buildings 
damaged or 
destroyed: 3.6 
million USD  
Estimated costs to 
repair public 
infrastructure 
buildings 
damaged or 
destroyed: 2.6 
million USD  
Estimated costs to 
repair damaged or 
destroyed utilities infrastructure: 
330,000 USD  
136137 
4 casualties caused by 
Typhoon Maysak
138 Total avoided damage costs of 
DRR sub -
projects  = USD 
445,100 
8 avoided 
casualties  in the 
project area  Total avoided 
damage costs of 
DRR sub -
projects  = USD 
735,500 
12 avoided 
casualties  in the 
project area  For mid -term target, 
assuming 2 interventions on 
housing or private buildings , 1 
on public buildings and 1  on 
infrastructures , 4 sub- projects 
in total.  
For final target, assuming 5 
interventions on housing  or 
private buildings, 4 on public 
buildings and 1 on 
infrastructure, 10 sub-
projects in total.  
For mid -term and final 
targets, assuming the 
average cos t to repair  one 
housing building is 
approximately 18,300 USD, 
and the average cost to repair 
one public infrastructure 
building is 78,500 USD. 
These figures were derived 
by dividing the total cost to 
replace all housing or public 
buildings damaged or 
destroyed by the number of buildings of each category.  
For average number of 
casualties, assuming one major climate- linked disaster  
similar to Typhoon Maysak  
occurs  every four years.  
For the value of buildings, a 
proxy was used (cost 
estimate to replace assets)  
due to the unavailability of 
data.  
Absence of ma jor natural 
disasters in the target area.  
No new buildings or 
infrastructure is established in 
exposed areas unprotected 
by the adaptation 
interventions.  
Selected adaptation 
interventions (rock revetment, 
sea walls etc.) effectively 
protect buildings and 
infrastructure on the coastline 
from extreme climate events.  
 
135 National census, HIES and MICS are being conducted in late 2021 and 2022 and will inform the baseline and progress 
towards targets now and during project inception.  
136 USAID and FEMA (2019) Typhoon Wutip Joint Damage Assessment Summary –  Federated States of Micronesia (FSM)  
137 USAID/OFDA (2020) Program Summary Federated States of Micronesia and Republic of the Marshall Islands  
138 USAID (2015) Typhoon Maysak –  Micronesia Fact Sheet. Available here.


---
*Page 61*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 75 
   
 A2.0 Increased 
resilience of 
health and well -
being, and food 
and water 
security  A2.2 Number of 
food secure 
households (in areas/periods at 
risk of climate 
change impacts)  National census, 
HIES, and MICS  
National surveys  
Progress reports 
on the 
implementation of 
the sub projects   
Independent 
surveys and 
interviews carried 
out as part of t he 
evaluation process  13,584
139 
households at risk 
of food insecurity 
and income loss 
caused by the 
impacts of sea 
level rise, extreme 
climate events and 
salinization  
(84,223  people)  1,598140 
households 
(9,909 people)  
with increased 
food security  3,196 households 
(19,819 people)  
with increased food security  
10,077 males  
9,742 females    
Assuming 4 food security 
sub-projects will be 
implemented by LA s by mid -
term, and 10 by the end of the programme.  
 
“Food security” and “food 
secure” in this programme will be understood according to 
the FAO four pillars 
framework to measure food 
security namely availability, 
accessibility, usability, and 
stability. Availability  relates 
to the amount, type and 
quality o f food that is 
available for consumption. 
This pillar also means that 
food can be produced, 
distributed and exchanged. 
Accessibility is the ability to 
access the type, quality and 
quantity of food required. 
Usability  is the capacity to 
consume and benefit from. 
Stability  is the resilience of 
availability and accessibility 
when there are changes in 
circumstances. Beneficiaries 
of food security sub- projects 
will be interviewed according to the four pillars described above.  
Beneficiary communities 
remain engag ed and apply 
the proposed adaptation 
measures (climate resilient 
seeds, sustainable farming 
practices etc.)  
Absence of major natural 
disasters in the target area.  
A2.0 Increased 
resilience of 
health and well -
being, and food 
and water 
security  A2.3 Number of 
males and 
females with 
yearround 
access to 
reliable and safe 
water supply 
despite climate shocks and 
stresses  National census, HIES, and MICS  
Agricultural 
census  
National surveys  
Progress reports on the 
implementation of 
the sub projects  20,162 people reported being 
affected by 
drought
141,142 
10,242 males  
9,920 females  10,340 people 
with access to 
reliable and safe 
water supply for 
consumption 
and irrigation  
5,257 males 
5,083 females  20,679 people 
with access to reliable and safe 
water supply for 
consumption 
and irrigation  
10,514 male s 
10,165 female s Assuming 4 water security 
sub-projects will be 
implemented by LA s by mid -
term, and 10 sub- projects by 
the end of the programme.  
Water safety will be 
measured against national 
and international  standards. 
Monitoring of water quality 
will be carried out as part of the 
evaluation process of 
sub-projects  by independent 
surveyors .  
Absence of major natural 
disasters in the target area.  
 
139 Number of people at risk of food insecurity derived by assuming 74% of the total population is growing crops for self -
consumption (I ntegrated Agricultural Census, 2016) , with 6.2 average hous ehold size (HIES 2013/2014).  
140 Share of population depending on agricultural occupations for their livelihoods derived using the share of unpaid 
agricultural workers (IAC, 2016) = 19,819 . 
141 45% of households in Yap, 21 % in Chuuk, 9% in Pohnpei and 3% in Kosrae reported drought as being the main concern 
and affected their use of agricultural land, resulting in an average 20% of households nationally.  
142 Integrated Agriculture Census –  Federated States of Micronesia (2016).  Available here.


---
*Page 62*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 75 
   
 A3.0 Increased 
resilience of 
intrastructure 
and the built 
environment to 
climate change  A3.1 Number 
and value of 
physical assets 
made more 
resilient to 
climate 
variability and 
change, considering 
human benefits  Government damage reports  
Progress report s 
on the 
implementation of 
the sub projects   196 housing 
buildings and 33 
public 
infrastructure 
buildings 
damaged or 
destroyed during 
the 2019 Typhoon Wutip  
Total cost to 
restore, replace or 
repair damaged or 
destroyed 
buildings and infrastructure: 13 
million USD
143144 4 physical 
assets climate -
proofed (buildings  and / 
or infrastructure)
145 
Total avoided 
damage costs of 
DRR sub -
projects = USD 
445,100 
 10 physical 
assets climate -
proofed 
(buildings and / 
or infrastructure)  
Total avoided 
damage costs of 
DRR sub-
projects = USD 735,500 
 Absence of major natural 
disasters in the target area.  
No new buildings or 
infrastructure is established in 
exposed areas unprotected 
by the adaptation 
interventions.  
Selected adaptation 
interventions (rock revetment, 
sea walls etc.) effectively 
protect buildings and 
infrastructure on the coastline 
from extreme climate events.  
Within the context of this 
Programme, physical assets 
will be considered “more 
resilient” to climate variability 
and change when, as a result 
of DRR interventions, they 
can withstand damage 
caused by climate change 
impacts  and maintain their 
function in the face of climate 
stresses  
A4.0 Improved 
resilience of 
ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services  A4.1 Coverage/scale 
of ecosystems 
protected and 
stregnthened in 
response to 
climate 
variability and 
change Government 
damage reports  
GIS Data/Remote 
Sensing  
Progress reports 
on the 
implementation of 
the sub projects  7,123 ha
146 of 
mangroves and 
6,432 ha147 of 
seagrass  
insufficiently protected and at 
risk of degradation 1,068 ha of mangroves and 
964 ha of 
seagrass  
restored and/or 
protected  2,136 ha of 
mangroves and 
1,929 ha of 
seagrass  
restored and/or 
protected  Assumptions for target setting 
have been derived from the 
Micronesia Challenge targets for Protected Areas (PAs)  for 
the States of Pohnpei, Kosrae 
and Yap. There was no 
assessment of the mangrove 
and seagrass surface area for 
the State of Chuuk in the 
Protected Area Network 
reports148 
A 30% target for the 
restoration and protection of 
mangroves and seagrass 
areas was set in line with the 
targets set by the Micronesia 
Challenge. The target may be 
updated in the first year of 
implementation based on 
potential areas of 
interventions.  
Absen ce of major natural 
disasters in the target area.  
No perverse incentives 
(policies, prices, monoculture 
industries that affect natural 
capital) are introduced in the 
project area  
  
 
143 USAID and FEMA (2019) Typhoon Wutip Joint Damage Assessment Summary –  Federated States of Micronesia (FSM)  
144 USAID/OFDA (20 20) Program Summary Federated States of Micronesia and Republic of the Marshall Islands  
145 Including: community buildings (individual homes, schools, clinics, community halls, churches, cultural sites); roads and 
bridges ; developed water resources and supply infrastructure.  
146 Total mangrove surface area (in hectares) for the States of Pohnpei, Yap and Kosrae.  
147 Total sea grass surface area (in hectares) for the States of Pohnpei, Yap and Kosrae.  
148 The Nature Conservancy  – Gap analysis and Spatial Priori tization Reports: Pohnpei , Yap, Kosrae  and Chuuk


---
*Page 63*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 75 
   
  
149 As described in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study and Annex 23 –  Operations Manual.  E.4. Fund -level outcomes  
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/ Programme . Select key expected outcomes and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per 
expected outcome. Add rows as needed.  
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term)  Final  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  A7.1 Use by 
vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and 
public -sector 
services of Fund 
supported tools, 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to respond 
to climate change 
and variability  Capacity 
assessment and 
scoring system  
 
National census, 
HIES, and MICS  
Household 
surveys  
 
Vulnerability 
assessments  
 
Training and 
workshop reports  
 Scores from LA s 
(municipalities 
and State 
agencies) 
Capacity 
assessments  
carried out at 
project design 
phase 
 
Communities 
who benefitted 
from the 
adaptation sub-
projects report 
having 
increased 
capacity and 
means to face 
climate stresses 
and shocks  
 
 Self-
assessment  
using scoring 
system149 
where 40% of 
extremely low, 
low and 
moderate 
capacity LAs 
report  higher 
scores and 
capacity to 
plan, manage 
and implement 
adaptation 
sub-projects 
and 
interventions  
 
40% of 
communities/i
ndividuals who 
benefitted 
from the sub-
projects report 
having 
increased 
capacity  and 
means  to face 
climate 
stresses and 
shocks 
(21,455 
people)  
 
 Self-
assessment 
using scoring 
system  
where 80% of 
extremely low, 
low and 
moderate 
capacity LAs 
report higher 
scores and 
capacity to 
plan, manage 
and implement 
adaptation 
sub-projects 
and 
interventions  
 
80% of 
communities/i
ndividuals who 
benefitted 
from the sub-
projects report 
having 
increased 
capacity and 
means to face 
climate 
stresses and 
shocks 
(43,441 
people)  
 
 
 Constructive relations 
for collaboration 
between Government 
state agencies, LAs 
and beneficiary 
stakeholders to 
identify, design, 
implement and 
maintain adaptation 
measures.   
 
The Fund- supported 
tools and activities are 
the training materials 
developed for L As and 
the sub- projects 
financed by the RCGF  
 
Beneficiaries have 
access to and are 
willing to use the 
information provided 
to implement 
adaptation 
interventions  
 
A self -assessment 
questionnaire will be 
administered to 
assess the 
communities’ 
increased adaptive 
capacity


---
*Page 64*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 75 
   
 E.5. Project/ Programme  performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final 
Output 1.1 Local Authorities 
have an increased awareness 
of and capacity to identify and 
prioritize adaptation solutions  No. of adaptation 
planning support 
tools developed   Local Authorities 
websites /offices  0 At least 1 
(Climate 
adaptation 
support 
framework)  4 support 
tools 
(Climate 
adaptation 
support 
framework, 
prioritization 
tool, training 
curriculum 
and 
interactive 
case 
studies)  Absence of 
economic, political 
or health issues 
that would hamper 
the programme’s 
progress  
No. of Local 
Authorities who 
integrate the 
adaptation planning 
support tools in their 
decision- making 
processes  LAs meeting 
minutes and 
official  statements  0 At least 20 
municipalitie
s and/or 
State 
authorities  At least 40 
municipalitie
s/State 
authorities  LAs understand 
the added value 
and benefits of the 
tools for 
adaptation 
planning.  
Output 1.2 Local Authorities 
have increased capacity to 
design and develop viable 
adaptation projects that reflect 
the needs of communities  Number of private 
sector actors with 
increased knowledge 
of challenges and 
opportunities in local 
adaptation planning  Independent 
surveys  
 
Workshop reports  0 At least 10 
entities  At least 20 
entities  Absence of 
economic, political 
or health issues 
that would prevent 
the participation of 
a representative 
cohort of private 
sector actors   
Number of roadmaps  
/ action plans 
developed for the 
recapitalization of 
the RCGF  Workshop report 
from Climate 
change adaptation 
local authorities 
conference  
 0 Implementati
on partners 
identified 
and 
committed 1 roadmap 
or action 
plan 
developed 
and 
implemente
d There are 
sufficient 
participants in the 
conference and 
workshops with 
interest and 
capacity to 
recapitalize the 
RCGF  
 
The number of 
implementation 
partners  will be 
determined within 
the first year of 
implementation  
Output 1.3 Local Authorities 
have access to climate change 
information and data to inform 
decision- making processes  Number of climate 
information products 
developed in line 
with identified local 
needs and priorities  Knowledge 
platform and 
partnering 
knowledge 
platforms (SREP, 
Pacific Datahub 
etc.) 
 
Assessment 
questionnaire  
 0 1 climate 
information 
product 
established 
(knowledge 
platform)  1 climate 
information 
product 
(knowledge 
platform) 
compiles all 
sub-project 
level 
lessons 
learned, 
data and 
results , 
along with 
relevant 
linkages 
with 
partnering 
platforms  Local Authorities 
have been 
successfully 
incentivized to use 
the climate 
information 
products


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 75 
   
 Output 2.1 The RCGF is 
established and enables the 
financing of locally -led 
adaptation solutions   
Recapitalized 
funding volume for 
the RCGF  Co-financing 
letters  
 
Officials 
statements and 
press reports   
0  
USD 0  
USD 12 
million   
It is assumed that 
securing capital for 
the RCGF by mid -
term will be difficult 
until there is 
sufficient data and 
dissemination 
done on the 
results and 
benefits of the 
sub-projects 
implemented  
 
The targets may 
be revised by mid-
term of 
programme 
implementation  
 
There is sufficient 
engagement and 
interest from 
private sector 
actors, 
development 
partners to 
recapitalize the 
RCGF  
Output 2.2 Adaptation 
solutions are selected in with 
identified CC impacts, GCF 
investment criteria and the 
needs of beneficiaries  Number of 
beneficiaries  with 
enhanced  
knowledge and 
capacity to adapt to 
climate change, 
including vulnerable 
groups  Self-assessment 
of sub- projects  
 
Vulnerability 
assessments  
 
Annual  monitoring 
reports  
 0 27,150  
people 54,30 1 
people This indicator will 
be assessed using 
the data collected 
pre- and post - sub-
project 
implementation  
Number of 
municipalities and 
State authorities’ 
officials who report 
increased knowledge 
and capacity to 
prioritize adaptation 
solutions and 
implement them  Organisational 
audit  
 
Capacity self -
assessment  
 
Annual monitoring 
reports  
 0 70 
(35 men and 
35 women)  140 
(75 men 
and 75 
women)  There will be 
effective 
participation in the 
workshop from the 
LAs and other 
relevant 
stakeholders   
 
Absence of 
economic, political 
or health issues 
that would hamper 
the programme’s 
progress  
Output 2.3 Sub- grants deliver 
adaptation results and 
demonstrate the financial, 
technical and economic 
sustainability of selected 
interventions  Number of protected 
(climate -proofed)  
wells  Hydrological 
assessments , 
water balance 
reports  
 
Expert 
assessments 
carried out for 
evaluation of sub-
projects  
 
National water  
supply monitoring 0 1 climate-
proofed 
freshwater 
source  2 climate-
proofed 
freshwater 
source s The freshwater 
sources  will be 
considered to be 
climate -proofed if 
hydrological 
assessments 
reveal overall safe 
drinking water 
levels according to 
national and 
international 
standards , and the 
source(s)  are 
protected from 
contamination 
resulting from 
climate -induced 
sea level rise or 
storm surge.


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 75 
   
 The targets may 
be revised based 
on assessments 
and data to be 
collected at project 
implementation 
phase.  
Number of hectares 
of agricultural land 
with salinity levels 
>1g/l  Expert 
assessments 
carried out for 
evaluation of sub-
projects  0 Reduced 
salinity 
levels in 
20% of ha 
targeted by 
food security 
sub-projects  Reduced 
salinity 
levels in  
40% of ha 
targeted by 
food 
security 
sub-projects  This indicator wil l 
be assessed using 
the data collected 
pre- and post - sub-
project 
implementation  
 
The targets for the 
number of 
hectares to be 
rehabilitated (i.e. 
with decreased 
salinity levels 
below 1g/l) will be 
established using 
the latest available 
data incl. census 
from the MCT SA P 
project  
 
Targets will be 
revised if 
necessary within 
the first year of 
implementation 
with latest 
available data  
Number of people 
who benefitted from 
food security sub-
projects reporting 
increased food 
security  Reports from 
evaluation of sub-
projects  
 
Agricultural 
Census  
 
HIES, MICS and 
Household 
surveys  0 7,927 
people (40% 
of estimated 
food security 
thematic 
area 
beneficiaries
) report 
increased  
food security  11,891 
people 
(60% of 
estimated 
food 
security 
thematic 
area 
beneficiarie
s) report 
increased  
food 
security  This indicator will 
be assessed using 
the data collected 
pre- and post - sub-
project 
implementation.  
 
Targets will be 
revised if 
necessary within 
the first year of 
implementation 
with latest 
available data  
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be 
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Component 1: Local authorities empowered to deliver climate change adaptation services to their populations  
Output 1.1 Build technical expertise to identify and prioritize adaptation solutions  
1.1.1 Develop climate adaptation 
decision support framework and 
training curriculum including 
interactive case studies targeting 
government officials  An interactive, targeted training 
curriculum will be developed to 
support LA to identify/screen for climate change risks and impacts  
Tools and frameworks developed to prioritize adaptation solutions
 Capacity gap assessment of LAs 
and target government officials  
Review of climate change risk 
tools and documents  
Identification of case studies  
Development of tools and 
frameworks  Capacity gap analysis  
Training manual on climate 
adaptation with case studies  
Adaptation measure prioritization 
and risk screening tools and 
national framework  
1.1.2 Climate adaptation decision 
support training for local 
authorities  Training for LAs based on the 
curriculum developed under 
activity 1.1.1. Including awareness 
raisin g of the EDA Grant Facility to 
familiarize local government 
officials with the objectives of the 
facility, the process, eligibility Development of training materials 
for awareness raising of the EDA 
Grant Facility  
 
Training workshops for local 
government officials of state 
agencies (80) , municipalities (140)  Training materials on the EDA 
Grant Facility and thematic areas 
for funding uploaded onto portal


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 75 
   
 criteria, and thematic areas for 
funding  and private sector actors (to be 
identified)    
1.1.3 Develop train- the-trainer’s 
module and conduct training for 
national consultants and/or local 
NGOs in each State to become 
Facilitating Agents  The train -the-trainer’s model will 
be utilized to ensure FSM 
nationals are well trained in the 
development of cli mate change 
projects and in particular as it 
relates to the Programme’ s Grant 
Facility.  Development of training of the 
trainer’s manual and training 
materials  
 
Training of the trainers (20 people) 
in the development of climate 
change projects  Training of the trainer’s  manual  
1.1.4 Facilitating Agents to support 
LAs prioritize adaptation actions 
for Grant Facility  Tailored support to catalyse  
relevant project ideas that will be 
channelled through the Grant 
Facility. NGOs and national 
consultant s will be identified to 
undertake the follow -up with 
agencies  Site visits and workshops by 
facilitati ng agents with government 
officials and private sector actors  Report on recommendations for 
sub-grants and necessary support 
for LAs  
 
Output 1.2. Technica l support on project preparation  
1.2.1 Project Preparation 
Trainings and Mentoring  Trainers to be paired with LAs to 
provide training on eligible 
activities, assessment criteria., 
and other factors related to the 
EDA Programme . Preparation of training manuals  
 
Training workshops and meetings 
with trainers, LAs and States Training manuals  
Output 1.3. Knowledge sharing  mechanisms to develop and foster a network of local government authorities  
1.3.1 Develop a knowledge 
platform and ensure the 
Programme is connected to 
regional platforms across the 
Pacific  Development of web portal to 
provide space for information 
specific to FSM on applying 
approaches, methods and tools 
that facilitate the planning and 
implementation of adaptation 
actions.  Procurement of service providers to develop platform.  
 
Training workshop and webinars
 Web portal with linkage to ot her 
relevant platforms  
1.3.2 Learning exchanges and site 
visits A network of climate change 
advocates and practitioners 
created among local government 
officials across FSM  Plan workshops and site visits.  
 
Sensitize key stakeholders  Directory of climate c hange 
experts, advocates, practitioners 
and expert facilitators  
1.3.3 Climate change adaptation 
local authorities conference  A conference will be organized to 
allow LAs and State government 
officials to showcase implemented 
projects  to donors and the private 
sector  Plan workshop and preparation of materials on the climate change 
projects for the Micronesia 
adaptation project workshop  Workshop report and 
recommendations for funding, 
scaling up and replication of 
project interventions and results  
Component 2: Priority project implementation- EDA Facility for strengthening local community resilience  
Output 2.1 Establishment of Resilient Communities Grant Facility (RCGF)  
2.1.1  Governance structure for 
Resilient Communities Grant 
Facility (RCGF) established and 
formalized  Establishment of an ECU, EPB, 
Grants Technical Evaluation sub-
committee and FAs.  Identify and recruit personnel for 
committees from relevant organizations and plan steering 
committee meetings.  Manual on operations  and 
contractual agreements for ECU, EPB, GTESC and FAs.
 
2.1.2 RCGF guidelines and 
procedures developed and 
finalized  Develop guidance documents and 
forms for LAs to access (based on 
feasibility study and operations 
manual).  Review of guidelines of simil ar 
type projects which provide grants for climate change activities.  
 
Develop guidance documents and 
forms for LAs Procedures,  guidelines and 
templates for operation of RCGF  
Output 2.2 Grant award selection  
2.2.1 Initial call for expressions of 
interest  Launch an initial call of expression 
of interest for LAs and state 
agencies  (and 4 annual calls 
hereafter)  Direct engagement with LAs and 
state agencies to discuss the EOI.  
 
Information on the expression of i
nterest disseminated in local 
media: newspapers, internet 
(social media), radio  Advertisements with the launch of expression of interest
 
2.2.2- Screening of Expressions of 
Interest  Pre-screen sub -grants against the 
GCF investment criteria, eligibility 
under the EDA Facility’s three 
thematic areas and development 
of report for recommendations on Pre-screen of sub- grants EOI 
against set investment and 
eligibility criteria  
 Pre-screening report identifying 
possible adaptation interventions, 
how they meet investment and 
how they can be improved in the 
next round


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 75 
   
 improvements of EOIs to meet 
criteria  Support to failed EOIs to improve  
design against set investment and 
eligibility criteria  
2.2.3 Organizational audit of sub-
national entities/LAs undertaken  Organizational audit of applicants 
to determine whether the applicant 
has the necessary capacity to 
implement the proposed sub-
grant. Includes meetings and 
discussions with applicant, review 
of sub- grant EOI as well as 
applicant capacity assessment for 
financial management, risk 
management, control, and 
governance processes  Conduct organizational audit  
 
Summarize audit reports to inform 
training of sub- national 
entities/LAs  Summarized audit reports to 
inform training manual to improve 
sub-national entity service delivery 
of climate adaptation interventions 
under 2.2.4 and 2.3.1  
2.2.4 Invitations to submit full 
proposal  Selection committee to issue 
invitations to the LAs to submit 
project proposals.  Prepare and share invitation 
docum ents for LAs including full 
proposal document templates and 
guidelines  Full proposal document templates 
and guidelines for sub- grant 
project proposals addressing 
gender sensitive adaptation 
measures  
2.2.5 Sub- grant preparation 
support provided  Project preparation support 
provided to applicants to prepare 
full project.  Selection of consultants to work 
with applicants to prepare projects  
 
Delivery of sub- grant preparation 
support  Sub- grant full project proposals 
addressing gender sensitive 
adaptation measures  
2.2.6 Sub- grant screening and 
selection  Screening of project proposals 
against review criteria by the 
Review committee  Pre-screened by the ECU against 
a set of review criteria  
E&S screening will be done by the 
social and environmental 
responsibility (SER) team from 
SPC 
Further support from FA s to 
strengthen proposals where 
necessary  
Secondary review and selection of sub-grants by SPC  
Final review and selection by the 
EDA Programme  Board  
 Screening reports of sub -grant 
project proposals addressing 
gender sensitive adaptation 
measures  
 
2.2.7 Awarding of grants in the 
three thematic areas, of food 
security, climate- induced disaster 
risk reduction and coastal 
protection, and water security  Inform applicant grant has been 
awarded and announce publicly 
the successful proposals.  
 Posting of grant award winners in 
portal and dissemination in local 
media 
 
Development of initial catalogue of tailored and gender -sensitive 
adaptation measures  Initial catalogue of tailored and 
gender -sensitive adaptation 
measures in the  in the three 
thematic areas, of food security, 
climate -induced DRR and coastal 
protection, and water security 
uploaded to portal  
Output 2.3 Sub- grant award implementation  
2.3.1 Training to improve sub-
national entity service delivery of 
adaptation interventions  Training of organizations as 
required to strengthen governance 
structures including areas such as 
improving the effectiveness of risk 
management, control, and 
governance processes.  
Project management training, 
including reporting, finance, 
procurement where appropriate for 
applicant entities  Development of training material 
for financial management, risk 
management, control, project 
management including reporting, 
finance, procurement and governance processes  
Organization and deliv ery of 
training workshops and meetings  
 Training manual for improved sub-
national entity/LA service delivery 
of climate adaptation interventions  
2.3.2 Grant agreements entered , 
implemented, monitored and 
reviewed  Grant agreements signed for 
successful applicants  and 
dispersal of grants.  
Monitoring and Evaluation of 
projects and progress  
 Prepare grant agreements   
 Transfer of grants   
 
Quarterly site visits and meetings 
with project implementation team  
 
For category B projects, an E&S 
risk monitoring  
 
Monitoring reports  Signed grant agreements  
 
M&E reports  
 
Data on effectiveness and 
efficiency of adaptation 
intervention  
2.3.3 Sub- projects evaluated, and 
lessons gathered  Lessons learned and project 
completion reports  Evaluation of projects  
 Updated catalogue of adaptation 
measures  
 Catalogue with tailored and 
gender -sensitive adaptation 
measures , completed lessons 
learned reports and design 
documents of projects located on


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 75 
   
 Development of lessons learned 
materials/reports  project por tal and other regional 
portals/websites  
2.3.4 Resource mobilization 
strategy  SPC will develop a resource 
mobilization strategy that includes 
an action plan and funding sources 
to recapitalize the EDA Facility , 
including assessing the extent to 
which government expenditure for 
resilience building activities might be re- directed into the RCGF . In 
the last two years of the project, 
SPC will prepare funding 
application requests with the aim 
for acceptance from public and/or 
private actors before or during the 
final year of implementation. The 
plan will build on the initial results 
and lessons learned from the 
Programme  Facility.  Site visits, meetings with bi -lateral  
and multilateral donors , and with 
identified private sector entities  
 
Development of resour ce 
mobilization strategy and action 
plan 
 
Development of funding 
application requests for climate 
finance  Resource mobilization strategy 
including action plan and funding 
streams for re -capitalization  
 
Funding application requests for 
climate finance  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Programme Monitoring  
 
155. In its role as Accredited Entity, SPC will oversee and supervise the implementation of this project in accordance 
with the agreement signed between SPC and the GCF. SPC will be responsible for p roject -level MEL and reporting 
in compliance with approved SPC policies  through coordination between its CFU, Strategy, Performance and 
Learning (SPL) Team and the ECU  to implement tools and methods to monitor , evaluat e and learn from the project  
activities . The logical framework contains performance indicators by component and sub- component, which will be 
jointly monitored by the NDA , ECU  and SPC during program implementation via two six -monthly supervision 
missions  per year (or as needed)  and via regular monitoring and evaluation procedures  that will be established 
during the project’s inception phase.   
156. A Monitoring and Evaluation advisor  (a part time independent national consultant)  will be based in the ECU to 
support MEL across the progr amme. This will include establishing M&E systems that are aligned with GCF, NDA 
and SPC policies and results framework. This advisor will work together with the ECU and FAs to develop a set of 
MEL tools, approaches and reporting arrangements for each of th e sub-grant s. This will include annual 
performance reports and project closure reports. The training, coaching and support provided to grant recipients 
will include capacity development in MEL, with a focus on how this can be used to maximize  grant outcomes while 
building the evidence base for the results and impact of the initiative.   
157. Results and outcomes that result from Programme activities will be monitored in accordance with SPC’s 
Planning, Evaluation, Accountability, Reflection and Learning ( PEARL ) policy (See Annex 4 of the ESMP ). The 
PEARL policy provides a framework for MEL. It is managed by the SPL team who oversees all MEL activities at 
SPC’s corporate level. Monitoring results shall be recorded in the SPC Results Matrix and will be used to learn 
from Programme implementation towards a continuous improvement of the design, assessment, approval, 
administration and implementation within SPC and the EDA Programme itself. Monitoring will enable SPC to make 
adjustments to respond to unexpected events  during the implementation phase as well as to build trust and respond 
to stakeholders and affected communities. The scope, robustness, frequency of Programme  monitoring,  and 
reporting will vary depending on the type of activities and the significance of r isks/impacts identified through the 
screening process and, eventually, assessed before project approval. In addition, monitoring requirements will take 
into consideration the circumstances in which the project takes place and is implemented.  
158. For the indiv idual sub- grants awarded through the EDA Facility, regular M&E  will be the responsibility of SPC 
in coordination with the grantees. Annual performance reports and end of project closure reports will include 
updated information on E&S risks, and this inform ation will be reported to SPC and GCF. M&E of sub- grants will 
be supported by FAs and undertaken in accordance with SPC’s PEARL policy.  
159. For Category B sub- grants, an updated ESMP should be submitted annually and certified by SPC to ensure 
identified risks have been mitigated and that the ESMP is being followed appropriately. As per SPC’s SER 
screening policies, the overall Programme results shall be monitored by SPC to verify if the Programme is 
effectively implemented as approved.  
 
Programme Evaluation


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 75 
   
 160. The following  evaluation exercises will be carried out as part of the MEL Framework under the proposed 
Programme (please see Annex 11 for cost  information):  
• Continuous evaluation of the sub- projects as they are completed (to be carried out by ECU and SPC C FU 
as a self -assessment)  as part of activity 2.3.2  
• A National MEL expert will conduct evaluations of sub- projects with a view to update the catalogue of 
adaptation measures and interventions and develop knowledge products based on the lessons learned . 
The MEL expert will be joined by a national ESS and GESI expert to report on environmental, social and 
gender indicators , as part of activity 2.3.3.  
• An external pool of thematic experts will carry out expert analyses and assessments as relevant to the sub -
project (CBAs, economic analysis, hydrology studies, ecosystem assessments, social assessments etc.) 
to ensure the adequacy and efficacy of adaptation interventions , as part of activity 2.3.3.  
• A Mid-Term Evaluation to be carried out by an independent consultant four years after the start of the 
project implementation  
• Final or Terminal Evaluation to be carried out by an independent consultant and to be completed within 6 
months after the end of project implementation  
 
161. The CFU and SPL Team will be jointly responsible for coordinating the independent interim and final 
evaluations. The evaluations will be conducted using a question- driven approach, and may include assessments 
against the criteria of relevance, effectiveness and sustainability, among others. T he Mid- Term Evaluation will be 
instrumental in contributing – through operational and strategic recommendations – to improve implementation, 
setting out any necessary corrective and adaptive management measures for the remaining period of the project, 
and identifying relevant lessons learned for stakeholders in FSM as well as the broader Pacific region. The final 
evaluation will assess the relevance of the intervention, its overall performance, as well as sustainability and 
scalability of results, different ial impacts and lessons learned. The evaluation should also assess the extent to 
which the intervention has contributed to the Fund’s higher -level goal of achieving a paradigm shift in adaptation 
to climate change in FSM. Both evaluations will contribute t o the evidence base for adaptation to climate change 
in FSM and across the Pacific region, and will be published on the SPC website and other relevant platforms.


---
*Page 71*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 75 
   
 F. RISK  ASSESSMENT  AND  MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages)   
Limited interest o r engagement from Local Authorities   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low High 
Description  
Limited interest of engagement from LAs leads to underdeveloped project pipeline and limited impact for the EDA 
Facility and EDA Programme .  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
LAs have been directly included in the development of the Programme  proposal to date, and through participatory 
governance, focused outreach, engagement, and delivered benefits through trainings and project development the 
Programme will build key leadersh ip and buy -in from LAs and communities.  
Geographic remoteness of certain Local Authorities    
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High High 
Description  
Some LAs are located in outer atolls that are very far from main islands/atolls. Transportation to these remote LAs is a 
significant challenge. Under the Programme, LAs will be engaged in the development of sub- grants for their respective 
communities. This  engagement will include communicating project needs based on the relative geographic isolation of 
their community. SPC has well established and efficient procurement protocols and teams that will adjust to 
transportation needs accordingly.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Under the Programme, LAs will be engaged in the development of sub- grants for their respective communities. This 
engagement will include communicating project needs based on the relative geographic isolation of their community. 
SPC has well established and efficient procurement protocols and teams that will adjust to transportation needs accordingly.  
Local Authorities have insufficient capacity and resources to implement priority projects  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description  
LAs have insufficient capacity and resources to implement priority projects which results in stranded or underperforming 
projects and limited results for local communities.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Existing capacity for LAs is quite limited which is why the EDA Programme  deliberately builds multi -stage training for 
LAs on climate change, project development, and project management as well as sustained technical support, 
guidance, and oversight from project support bodies. In the event LAs need additional support beyond this in order to successfully implement a sub- grant, the LA will either (i) be paired with a State agency that will assist the LA in sub-
grant development/implementation, or ( ii) the ECU would serve as the financial and procurement provider and directly 
support project implementation in collaboration with the LA.  
Local communities and individual households don’t support or engage with local priority projects  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Low 
Description  
Local communities and individual households don’t support or engage with local priority projects stemming from 
misaligned project objectives and priorities and limited stakeholder engagement and co- development.


---
*Page 72*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 75 
   
 Mitigation Measure(s)  
The core principle of the EDA Programme is co-development of adaptation projects tailored to local needs and priorities. 
As part of sub- grant development, the Programme will be working through locally elected officials and leaders to engage 
with the target communities and identify priority proj ect needs. Community engagement and buy -in is a primary focus 
of the sub- grant application and review processes, so extensive due diligence will be undertaken to hedge against this 
risk. Further, the Programme will enlist formal/informal civil society organizations and other groups to help support 
Programme outreach and development.  
Localized data and information are insufficient to help support development of priority projects  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Descripti on 
Localized data and information are insufficient to help support development of priority projects leading to 
underdeveloped projects, sub- optimal design, siting, and implementation of sub- grant activities, and ultimately limited 
climate adaptation outcomes.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The EDA Programme works directly with national and State agencies to catalogue existing climate, vulnerability, and 
other data to help engage LAs to develop projects and importantly identify gaps that need to be sourced.  
Difficulty in sourcing of technology and other inputs for Programme  activities  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Procurement for the EDA Programme in FSM is complicated given the diverse, dispersed geographies of FSM as well 
as constrained supply chains from COVID -19 aftermath.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Existing capacity for LAs is quite limited which is why the EDA Programme  deliberately builds multi -stage training for 
LAs on climate change, project development, and project management as well as sustained technical support, 
guidance, and oversight from project support bodies. In the event LAs need additional support beyond th is in order to 
successfully implement a sub- grant, the LA will either (i) be paired with a State agency that will assist the LA in sub-
grant development/implementation, or ( ii) the ECU would serve as the financial and procurement provider and directly 
support project implementation in collaboration with the LA.  
COVID -19 constraints for engagement and operations  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Depending on the timeline of the Programme, stakeholder engagement could still be constrained by COVID -19 and the 
resulting shifts in staff and protocols.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The EDA Programme has been adaptive and proactive in finding pathways to enga ge with needed stakeholders at the 
local level during the COVID -19 pandemic by leveraging highly effective national consultants and local networks. This 
foundation will help the Programme to proactively plan for alternative pathways for stakeholder engagem ent.


---
*Page 73*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 75 
   
 G. GCF  POLICIES  AND  STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
162. In the development of this funding proposal and its accompanying feasibility study, an initial risk assessment 
for the potential priority adaptation measures has been conducted. In general, all of the sub- grant activities are 
expected to be limited both in scale and risk given the s ize of projects developed, resulting in the overall 
Programme  being classified as Category I -2 according to GCF’s Environmental and Social Policy . 
163. Potential environmental impacts include:  
• Overdrawing of aquifers due to insufficient recharge time  
• Impacts on freshwater resources quantity and quality due to pumping  
• Impact on local and migratory fish stocks and marine environment due to infrastructure projects  
• Erosion and soil degradation due to new building constructions  
• Noise and air pollution  
• Creation of electronic and hazardous waste  
164. Potential social impacts include:  
• Community aversion of sub -grant s 
• Exacerbation of gender inequalities in newly created income opportunities and decision- making processes  
• Risks relating to working conditions (construction)  
• Impacts on cultural resources and heritage  
165. To ensure  the compliance of sub-grant s with best practices in environmental and social protection and risk 
mitigation, SPC developed and adopted in 2020 its SER Policy  which lays out all policies and procedures relating 
to the environmental and social management of SPC’s interventions in the implementation of its projects and 
Programmes. The document contains guidelines, procedures and SPC’s Environmental and Social Management 
System (ESMS) to be used to screen and appraise its activities.  
166. Risks will be mitigated through the provision of technical support to LAs to enable them to undertake the 
required EIA and develop ESM P if required . Annex 6 of this Funding Proposal lays out a list of proposed mitigation 
measures for the potential E&S risks identified above, including provisions to assess adaptation measures using 
the Sub- Grant intake form.  
167. The Sub- Grant intake form includes exclusionary provisions for special risk activities, which lists all activities 
which the EDA Facil ity will not fund either directly or indirectly, in accordance with FSM’s Environmental Impact 
Assessment Regulations and SPC’s SER  Policy . The combination of small -scale interventions, tight controls and 
trainings for LAs and sub- grants, as well as the overarching gender -inclusive and risk management approach 
suggests that the Programme can be effectively implemented in a socially and environmentally responsible manner.  
 
DISCLOSURE  
168. As part of the commitment to inclusive decision- making, SPC recognises the right of people to seek, receive 
and impart information about SPC’s Programmes that have the potential to affect their livelihoods and ways of 
living. As part of the screening process, SPC will determine whether a report needs to be undertaken of the SER 
risks for a project. Where SPC commissions such a report, and where not restricted by its partners’ or development 
partners’ confidentiality requirements, SPC will:  
• publish the relevant report on SPC’s website;  
• ensure that copies of the report are accessible to affected peoples; and  
• provide the report to the development partner in line with their requirements under any funding agreement.  
 
169. In the case of projects that are considered to be medium or higher risk for environmental or social impact, SPC 
will make the report publicly available at least 30 days before SPC or any relevant development partner makes a 
decision that may have an impact.  
 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM  
170. SPC is committed to receiving any concerns or grievances from any affected community, about the 
environmental and social plans or performance of any SPC project. At any time,  an affected member of a community 
may raise their concerns by lodging a complaint  through SPC’s website or to the EDA Programme Board. In 
addition, SPC will develop specific mechanisms for Programmes or projects to allow members of an affected 
community to provide feedback, or raise potential concerns or grievances, where the ESMS screening process 
determines it is appropriate. These mechanisms will be accessible and relevant to the affected communities.


---
*Page 74*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 75 
   
 Communities and stakeholders will be able to access the  grievance complaint form . Such grievances will be 
raised to SPC as the Accredited Entity as well as to the EPB.  
 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  
171. An initial stakeholder workshop took  place in October 2019. The workshop was conducted between SPC and 
representatives from key stakeholder agencies including the FSM NDA, FSM DECEM, the FSM Overseas 
Development Assistance (ODA) office, the FSM Department of Resources and Development, GCF focal points 
representing each state, the Micronesia Conservation Trust, the IOM office, representatives from the municipalities, 
as well as other relevant organizations ( e.g., local NGOs) (please see Annex I of the SEP for the full report).  
172. Following this workshop, the proposal was developed in close coordination with the FSM NDA and continuous 
consultations have taken place from June to November 2020. Due to precautionary measures and preventive 
practices that were in place to prev ent the spread of COVID -19 such as travel restrictions and mandates prohibiting 
group gatherings, these consultations took place either virtually or with one or two people at a time.  
173. During project development, key women’s groups were also consulted to ensure appropriate gender 
mainstreaming and to validate the gender action plan. The Gender Analysis and Action Plan Annex 4 includes a 
summary of the outcomes of these consultations and how they were integrated into project design.  
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )  
174. SPC facilitated extensi ve stakeholder consultations  and data analysis to comprehensively assess the baseline 
in terms of gender gaps and opportunities for gender -inclusive sub -grants preparation and impl ementation. The 
context for each of the sectoral focuses of the EDA Programme was assessed to identify women’s roles and 
responsibilities along with the challenges that they face.  
175. With regards to DRR and coastal protection, t he assessment found that both men and women play a critical 
role in the preparation and recovery process, b ut women may not have the same capacity to influence decision-
making. Men, particularly those with greater levels of power and authority, are usually the ones informed and consulted by response agencies, including governments, and they directly participate in the decision- making and 
management processes for disaster risk management. This could mean that women’s needs,  and priorities are not 
properly addressed in early warning systems, preparedness, and during the recovery process. Further, there is 
evidence of increased violence against women during disaster recovery such as flooding from climate change and 
extreme events.  
176. In terms of water security, results suggest that there is often a clear division of labour  between men and women 
in water resources management. These different roles and responsibilities vary, but in general women are tasked 
with managing household water for drinking, cooking and other uses as well as making sure catchments are clean.  
177. Lastly, with regards to food security, women play a cri tical role in food production both through subsistence 
farming to feed their families as well as growing cash crops for income and cultural ceremonies. Despite this, 
women often face barriers to accessing agricultural land, training, credit and services. T he agricultural production 
that women and girls perform also tends to be considered part of “women’s household responsibilities”. Alongside these challenges, climate change will make it more difficult to make a living from agriculture and women may also 
struggle more than men to find alternative livelihoods, enter the formal employment sector, or migrate due to cultural 
barriers and limited opportunities and education.
  
178. To integrate gender -sensitive planning and considerations , the EDA Programme  will integrate gender 
dimensions into all training and capacity building activities, while target ing at least 50% women in training 
attendees. To address the information gap on gender -sensitive adaptation measures , the EDA Programme  will 
collect and centr alise information and data on the integration of gender -responsiveness in sub- grant design. As a 
result, locally adapted baselines will be developed to promote gender mainstreaming to participating LAs . 
Additionally, SPC will recruit at least two women for  the development of tender documents as part of Activity 2.1.2. 
Lastly, sub-grants will be evaluated using a dedicated Initial Sub- grant Gender Assessment form, which can be 
found in Annex 4.   
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page)  
179. Financial control and procurement processes will be implemented as per SPC rules and regulations, which 
were certified as acceptable to the GCF in the SPC accreditation process. SPC has specific policies for financial 
management including “Finance Regulations”, “Anti -money laundering and counter -terrorism financing”, 
“Procurement” and “Grants and sub- delegation” as well as its “Staff Regulations and Manual of Staff Policies” that 
govern HR and other relevant processes and proc edures. These and other policies are available on the SPC


---
*Page 75*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 73 OF 75 
   
 Intranet and are adhered to in the implementation of all SPC projects . All entities involved in the Programme’s 
implementation will comply with those aforementioned policies.  
180. When under implementation, financial management will also remain in compliance  with the FSM Financial 
Management Regulations. This will support the ongoing sustainability of the programme as it will already be 
operating within the framework of the rules and regulations that will govern the management of the programme and 
implementation of activities after the GCF -funded period.  
181. SPC’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS)  is a Microsoft Dynamics NAV -based enterprise 
resource planning system that has  been deployed to all of its regional offices, which provides SPC  employees  with 
financ ial management  functionalities. Using FMIS improves the flow of financial information, supports financial 
monitoring and reporting, increases transparency and visibility , and strengthens internal control. SPC maintains 
organization- wide separation of income and expenditure by donor and project so that financial and other data can 
be recorded, classified and summarized to facilitate internal management and external reporti ng requirements.  
182. As mentioned in Section B .4., SPC as the Accredited Entity to the GCF will have overall responsibility for quality 
assurance and oversight of co- executing entities. In addition to this, as the sole executing entity for the project , 
SPC will be responsible for the financial execution of GCF funds according to SPC rules and regulations mainly 
contained and detailed in the SPC Handbook (including those referred to financial monitoring, audit and 
procurement).  
183. During implementation, SPC will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and 
procedures. This may include monitoring missions, spot checks and participation at relevant  meetings. The project 
will be subject to SPC’s  audit regime, including the external audit and internal audit functions  with oversight provided 
by SPC’s independent Audit and Review Committee.  
184. SPC’s CFU will be responsible for oversight of project management and financial monitoring,  compris ing a 
GCF Programme Manager , GCF Programme Officer  and GCF Finance and Administrati ve Assistant.  This team 
will interact with and support the work of the ECU (based within SPC’s MRO) , which includes a Programme 
Coordinator, Programme Administrative Assistant, Finance and Procurement Officer and other part time support 
staff.  
185. The financial and operational management of the sub- grants provided through the RCGF will be undertaken in 
line with the provisions of the Operations Manual (please see Annex 21). Disbursement of funds to successful 
grantees will proceed according to SPC’s Finance Regulations (2018), Finance Policy: Procurement (2020), 
Finance Policy: Grants and Sub- delegations (2020) and Finance Policy: Anti -Money Laundering and Counter -
Terrorism Financing (2020). These policies contain contr ols and due diligence to ensure that funds provided to 
grantees are properly disbursed and managed . Disbursements will be conditional on the achievement of milestones 
as outlined in the grants agreements between the ECU and the grantees. Verification of mi lestones and approv al 
of payment request s will be undertaken by the Grants O fficer based on compliance with grant agreement 
conditions. Annual financial reports will be submitted by grantees for the review of the ECU  concerning all activities 
implemented under the EDA facility for the grantees’ financial years. All reports will be reviewed and formally 
approved by the ECU . Grantees are als o required to keep supporting document ation  detail ing expenses incurred 
in achievement of the grant milestones . Specific a udits of grants will be undertaken based on requests made by 
the ECU , with grantees also expected to share details of their regular au dits150. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that  the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and Programme  
funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submi ssion to the Board, subject to the 
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one 
of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the docume nt contains 
specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.   
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
 
150 Noting that inclusion of regular audit details requir ed in the grants application process  as outlined in Annex 21: 
Operations Manual.


---
*Page 76*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 74 OF 75 
   
 ☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding pro posal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including al l annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an 
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 77*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 75 OF 75 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. H. ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ ANNEX 1 NDA no-objection letter   
☒ ANNEX 2 Feasibility study 
☒ ANNEX 3A Economic analys is in spreadsheet format  
☒ ANNEX 3B Economic analys is narrative  
☒ ANNEX 4 Detailed b udget  plan 
☒ ANNEX 5 Implementation  timetable  including  key programme  milestones  
☒ ANNEX 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (I2):   
☒ Environmental and Social Management System  (ESM S) 
☒  ANNEX 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ ANNEX 8 Gender assessment and programme -level action plan  
☒ ANNEX 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ ANNEX 10 Procurement plan  
☒ ANNEX 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan  
☒ ANNEX 12 AE fee request   
☒ ANNEX 
13A Co-financing commitment letter : Chuuk State   
☒ ANNEX 
13B Co-financing commitment letter : Kosrae State  
☒ ANNEX 
13C Co-financing commitment letter : Pohnpei State   
☒ ANNEX 
13D Co-financing commitment letter : Yap State    
☒ ANNEX 
13E Co-financing commitment letter : FSM Government   
☒ ANNEX 
13F Co-financing commitment letter : SPC  
☒ ANNEX 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule  
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ ANNEX 16 Map indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ ANNEX 21 Operations manual  
☒ ANNEX 22 iTAP questions and responses  – first round  
☒ ANNEX 23 iTAP questions and responses  – second round  
☒ ANNEX 24 iTAP assessment


---
*Page 78*
---

Government of the Federated States of Micronesia 
Department of Pinance & Administration 
PO Box PS 158 Palikir. Pohnpei FM 96941 
Date: September 07, 2021 
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF") 
Songdo Business District 
175 Art center-daero  
Yeonsu-gu, lncheon 22004  
Republic of Korea 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by SPC regarding the "Climate change adaptation solutions 
for local authorities in the Federated States of Micronesia" programme  
Dear Executive Director Yannick Glemarec, 
We refer to the programme titled Climate change adaptation solutions for local authorities in the 
Federated States of Micronesia in the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) as included in the funding 
proposal submitted by the Pacific Community (SPC) to us on 7 September 2021. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative, the Honourable Secretary Eugene Amor, the 
National Designated Authority of FSM. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)The government of FSM has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal;
(b)The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
priorities, strategies and plans of FSM;
(c)In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within 
the scope of the programme  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Eugene Amor 
Secretary /National Designated Authority 
Federated States of Micronesia No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 79*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information 
Project  or programme title  Climate change adaptation solutions for Local Authorities 
in the Federated States of Micronesia  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  The Pacific Community (SPC)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I -2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Federated States of Micronesia 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, September 3, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language English is the official language of the Federated States of 
Micronesia.   
Link to disclosure  https://www.spc.int/accountability/spcs -disclosure -of-
relevant -ess-measures   
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  An ESM S consistent with the requirements for a Category I -
2 programme is contained in “ Annex 6: Environmental and 
Social Management System  (ESM S) for the GCF Enhanced 
Direct Access Programme ‘ Climate change adaptation 
solutions for local authorit ies in the Federated States of 
Micronesia ’”. This ESMS contains further detailed guidance 
for environmental and social risk screening and impact 
assessments for sub-project s.


---
*Page 80*
---

Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, September 3, 2021  
Place  https://fsm -data.sprep.org/  
F
SM Department of Finance and Administration  /  N a t ional  
Designated Authority,  PS 158, Palikir, Pohnpei  96941 , 
Federated States of Micronesia 
Pacific Community Micronesia Regional Office, Suite 301, 
One World Plaza, Kapwaresou Street , Kolonia, Pohnpei 
96941 , Federated States of Micronesia 
Pacific Community Headquarters , 95 Promenade Roger 
Laroque , BP D5 , 98848 Noumea , New Caledonia  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, October 4, 2021  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 81*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 81 
 
 
Secretariat ’s assessment  of FP169 
Proposal name:  Climate change adaptation solutions for L ocal Authorities 
in the Federated States of Micronesia  
Accredited entity:  Pacific Community (SPC)  
Country/(ies) : Federated States of Micronesia  
Programme /programme size : Small  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat   
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks:  
Strengths  Points of caution  
The proposed enhancing direct access ( EDA ) pilot 
will operate in the Federated States of Micronesia 
(FSM ), a priority country under the EDA request 
for proposals (small island developing States -  
SIDS) and is the first EDA project in the Pacific 
region.  The project pipeline is yet to be developed based 
on the needs identified by the local communities 
with the list of activities being indicative only; this 
is fully compliant with the EDA approach, 
nonetheless it might pose additional operational 
risks that cannot be assessed at the EDA funding 
proposa l appraisal stage.  
Fully compliant with the EDA requirements 
regarding:  
(a) A robust governance system with detailed 
project selection, review and 
implementation arrangements;  
(b) Empowerment and devolution of decision -
making to subnational actors and clear 
adaptation focus at the community level;  and 
(c) A clearly presented Operations Man ual for 
the proposed Resilient Communities Grant 
Facility, (RCGF) which EDA will capitalize 
(component 2) . Component 1 is crucial to ensure the necessary 
capacity of the local authorities and stakeholders that will be involved in the preparation of the 
subprojects. While an in -depth institutional 
capacity assessment of the local institutions was presented in the feasibility  study , there is 
uncertainty about how rapidly all local actors 
could achieve sufficient capacity  to deliver the 
expected pipeline of su bprojects, and this could 
potentially cause delays in implementation.  
Strong country ownership and long -term vision 
from the FSM state and local institutions to 
maintain the RCGF as an open -ended facility 
serving beyond GCF exit.   
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XVIII, titled “List of proposed conditions and 
recommendations”, respectively.  
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 82 
 
 
2.1 Progra mme  background  
3. The Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) is a widely dispersed archipelago located in 
the North Pacific Ocean. FSM is formed by four states (Chuuk, Kosrae, Pohnpei and  Yap) and 
comprise s 607 islands, of which 74 are inhabited. The distance b etween the eastern -most State 
(Kosrae) and the western -most State (Yap) is 2,700  kilometres . Under the 1979 Constitution, 
FSM has three levels of government: national, state, and municipal. The four State G overnments 
of Chuuk, Kosrae Pohnpei, and Yap are r elatively autonomous. Each State has its own governor, 
judiciary and legislative bodies, along with relevant government departments. As of 2019, FSM’s 
estimated population is 113,815, with an annual  GDP of USD 329 million and a GDP per capita of 
USD 3,400. The majority of the country’s population live in the coastal regions of the high 
islands, with more than half the population living in rural areas.  
4. The Pacific Catastrophe and Risk Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) estimates that it is likely 
that FSM will incur on average USD  8 million per year in losses from earthquakes and tropical 
cyclones.1 In the coming 50 years, FSM has a 50  per cent  chance of experiencing natural disaster 
losses exceeding USD  105 million and casualties greater than 220 people. I n addition, there is a 
10 per cent  chance of experiencing a loss exceeding USD  470 million and casualties of more than 
600 people.2 Damages to public infrastructure and private capital as well as drops in total factor 
productivity would cause a loss to GDP , while higher spending on post -disaster rehabilitation 
and reconstruction of damaged infrastructure would lead to higher fiscal deficit and public debt.  
5. This project will overcome critical barriers to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable 
communities to  the impacts of extreme climatic events as well as long -term water and food 
insecurity as a result of predicted climate change. GCF resources will be critical in strengthening 
the adaptive capacity of local authorities and communities to improve disaster r isk reduction 
(DRR)  and coastal management as well as food and water security for the most vulnerable 
populations of FSM located in the main islands and outer atolls.  
6. The EDA grant facility created under this project  and named the Resilient  Communities 
Grant Facility (RCGF)  will directly contribute to increasing the adaptive capacity of local 
communities and is expected to  deliver a number of economic, social, environmental and gender 
co-benefits. The project is anticipated to directly  benefit 45,019 people, accounting for 40  per 
cent  of the total population  of FSM . Indirect beneficiaries of the proposed project are gauged to 
be 100  per cent  of the population.3 
7. Climate objective:  According to the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative, FSM is the 
fourth most vulnerable country to climate change and the seventy- eighth  in terms of climate 
change readiness in the world (FSM scored 0.640 on the vulnerability scale and 0.360 on the 
readiness scale). The FSM GCF Country Programme concluded that at present, none of the FSM 
States have the  ‘high’ level of adaptive capacity required to ensure adaptation to the effects of 
climate change. The climate of FSM displays considerable year -on-year variability due to the El 
Niño -Southern Oscillation (ENSO). The country has two seasons – a dry season from November 
to April and a wet season from May to October. Rainfall throughout the country and region is 
affected by the movement of the Intertropical Convergence Zone .4  
 
1 Federated States of Micronesia, Country Risk Profile (2011), Pacific Catastrophe and Risk Financing Initiative.  
2 Lee, D., Zhang, H., and Nguyen, C . 2018. The Economic Impact of Natural Disasters in Pacific Island Countries: 
Adaptation and Preparedness. IMF Working Papers , 18/108, International Monetary Fund, Washington.  
3 The numbers provided represent conservative estimates to be understood as the minimum number of beneficiaries 
across all three thematic areas, although some areas have an estimated highe r number of beneficiaries than the 
weighted average. This methodological choice was made to prevent the possibility of double counting as 
beneficiaries of projects in each state may  overlap.  
4 There are no comprehensive studies on freshwater resources and climate change in FSM, and large data gaps 
remain , especially for hydraulic modelling of atoll aquifer systems.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 83 
 
 
8. Approximately 60  per cent  of households in FSM live within 180 metr es of the shoreline, 
with the State of Kosrae having the greatest proportion of coastal -dwelling households (80 per 
cent ) and Chuuk having the smallest  (38 per cent ). Of the FSM p opulation 94 per cent live within 
at least 1  kilometre  of the coastal strip and 100  per cent  live within 5  kilometres . Additionally, 
the majority of  structures in FSM are located near or along the coast , almost all outer island 
islets lie within the 2 -met re zone of potential sea level rise, and all lie within a 5 -met re zone of 
storm surge. This poses a significant disaster risk to the majority of households in the project 
area. Due to the diversity of environmental conditions between States and their respective 
islands and atolls, climate trends tend to differ from one island S tate to another, and between 
island States and atolls.   
9. The climate hazards that this project seeks  to address are mostly sea level rise, increase 
in temperatures and variability in the precipitation levels, as well as extreme weather events .5  
10. There is variation in air temperature trends within FSM. For the state of Pohnpei, the 
greatest trends involve minimum air temperature, whereas for Yap, the greater trends are 
observed in maximum air temperature. Annual maximum and minimum temperatures in FSM 
have increased since records began in 1952, with annual maximum temperatures having  
increased at a rate of 0.18°C per decade in Pohnpei (eastern FSM) and 0.23ºC per decade in Yap 
(western FSM) .  
11. The ENSO phenomenon has a profound effect on the distribution of tropical cyclones in 
FSM . The anomalous ocean -atmosphere conditions during ENSO can induce changes in the 
intensity, frequency and tracks of storms, thereby affecting the generation of extremes such as tides and storm surges. These events cause marine inundation that damages groundwater 
resources, taro beds, soil, and agro forestry resources in coastal settings, especially on low atoll 
islets. On high islands, coastal communities that experience both intensifying storm runoff and rising ocean waters are experiencing increased flooding and other drainage problems . 
12. Financing i nformation  and  environmental and social safeguards ( ESS)  category : 
The total programme cost  is USD 19,790,637 comprising USD 16,591,556 of GCF funding in the 
form of grants and USD 3,199,081 co -finance from the Government of FSM and SPC  in the form 
of in -kind contributions , and the ESS category  of this project is levelled at  B.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis 
13. Component 1 is structured to address barriers to respond to projected climate impacts 
by the local communities and municipalities, as well as identify and prepare the project pipeline , 
while Component 2 is aimed at establishing the financial flows and access through the creation 
of the Resilient Communities Grant F acility  (RCGF)  to support  the protection and resilience of 
vulnerable communities.  
Component 1: Local authorities empowered to deliver climate change adaptation services to their 
population (GC F: USD 1,724,637 ; FSM: USD 70,000)  
14. Under this component, the accredited entity ( AE) will develop an adaptation measure 
prioritization framework, climate risk screening tools and a training curriculum informed by scientific data and analysis that will support LAs to identify and screen for climate change 
adaptation risks and identify appr opriate adaptation measures. In addition, a ctivities under this 
component  will include develop ment  of a climate adaptation decision support framework and 
training curriculum targeting mostly government officials  at the local level.  SPC will train local 
authorities ( LAs) on the framework and resources identified and provide an introduction to the 
 
5 This conclusion is based on analysis of daily rainfall data from a subset of Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 5 
models using a similar me thod to that of  the Australian Bureau of Meteorology and Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organisation ( CSIRO ) (2011) .


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 84 
 
 
enhancing di rect access (EDA) f acility to familiarize local government officials with the 
objectives of the facility, the process, eligibility criteria, and details of the three thematic areas 
for adaptation sub -grants. The AE will develop a train -the-trainer’s module  and conduct training 
for national consultants and/or local non- governmental organizations ( NGOs ) in each State to 
become Facilitating Agents, who will then be responsible for supporting the L As to prioritize 
adaptation actions for the f acility  and train LAs on how to develop adaptation sub -grants .  
15. Lastly, k nowledge -sharing mechanisms to develop and foster a network of local 
government authorities will also be supported under this component, and will include learning 
exchanges and site visits.  A web portal  will be developed together with the database and will 
include sex -disaggregated data at the municipal and subproject level on the three thematic 
areas and on key socioeconomic indicators to inform the design of future adaptation 
interventions.  
Component 2: Priority project implementation : Establis hment of the Resilient Communities Grant 
Facility for enhancing local community resilience . (GCF: USD 13,943,717 ; SPC: USD 91,750 ; FSM: 
USD 2,887,571 )  
16. Under this component, the AE will establish a Resilient Communities Grants Facility 
(RCGF) to address the long -term vulnerabilities identified  in the f unding proposal . Under this 
output, the Facility w ill openly and competitively fund applications for adaptation measures  to 
be submitted by the LAs . It will be established and function as a grants funding mechanism to be 
governed as set out in the Operations Manual developed by the AE and included in this f unding 
proposal. The RCGF will provide sub -grants for prioritized  activities identified  under 
Compo nent 1. The RCGF will award grants and provide targeted technical assistance to LAs and 
State Governments across all four FSM States , including outer atolls. It will support 30–40 sub -
grants in the range of USD 75,000 –USD 1,000,000. An estimated breakdown of size of projects is 
provided in table 1 below:  
Table 1: Estimated breakdown of size of projects 
Number of 
Projects  Sub -grant range (USD per 
project)  Total average 
amount  (USD)  Municipal/State -
implemented  
15–20 75,000 –250,000  2,550,000  Municipal  
10–15 250,000 –500,000  4,500,000  Municipal and State  
5 500,000 –1,000,000  3,750,000  State  
Totals: 30 -40 75,000 –1,000,000  12,000,000   
17. In addition to building climate resiliency, the EDA f acility, through the awarded grants, 
will assist in strengthening the local managerial and financial as well as monitoring, evaluation 
and learning capacities so that the recipient LAs develop sufficient capability to implement 
adaptation sub -grants and su stain the country’s climate -resilient development in the long term.  
18. The robust governance of this project, which includes a set of steps for proposal 
selection, review and approval,  ensures that the projects that are most technically sound and 
well aligned with the GCF investment criteria will be financed by the f acility. The project 
selection will be based on the following steps: (i) submitting the expression of i nterest ; (ii) 
reviewing and shortlisting the projects by the  SPC Implementation Unit ; (iii) invitations to the 
LAs to submit project proposals, which may also result in technical support provided for project 
preparation ; (iv) screening of the f unding proposals by the Grants Technical Evaluation 
committee , which wil l provide an advisory report on both technical and financial sides of the 
proposals ; and (v) presenting the projects to the Board for approval. The expression of interest  
process will allow the project management unit  to pre -screen sub -grants against the G CF 
investment criteria, eligibility under the EDA f acility’s three thematic areas, environmental and 
social  risk level, climate reasoning and rationale,  and level of community input/engagement .


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 85 
 
 
19. Awarded grants will be implemented, monitored and evaluated. To ensure LAs have the 
required project management skills necessary for the implementation of sub -grants, targeted 
project management training will be provided.  
20. Lastly, during this implementation  phase, the AE will engage with development partners 
to identify resources for re -capitalization of the EDA fund, preparing a resource mobilization 
strategy and preparing and securing application funding requests.  The resource mobilization 
activities will include assessing the extent to which regular government expenditure for 
resilience -building activities might be redirected into the RCGF. For example, this would allow 
for funds from the Department of Environment, Climate Change and Emergency Management t o 
be funnelled through the RCGF to achieve the objectives of the Department’s annual workplans. 
Similar engagement with State -level governments will be undertaken. Other activities for 
resource mobili zation will include undertaking analyses to determine th e minimum amount of 
capitalization needed for the viability of phase 2 of the RCGF based on projects under 
implementation as well as scenario planning based on future needs and a capacity assessment 
to determine the optimal extent of funding to scale up th e RCGF.  
21. One of the innovative aspects of this proposal is that under C omponent 2, the project 
will also work with local communities. The i nvolvement of the local communities , such as NGOs 
or other society organizations , in this project  is ensured through t heir p articipation and  
involvement as F acilitating Agents for project preparation and support . Facilitating Agents  will 
be selected through the competitive bidding process and will be assigned to each sub -grant, 
whereby they will conduct a site visit once each quarter to support the reporting and 
monitoring processes.  
III. Assessment  of performance  against investment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                                                                                 Scale: N/A 
22. In terms of the adaptation core indicator, the project has  significant potential at national 
level, as the total number of direct beneficiaries  envisaged  stands at around 40 per cent  of the 
entire country population. Moreover, the intervention has a wides pread scope : all of the 
country’s 75 municipalities will be targeted by the RCGF -supported subprojects , including those 
located in the remote outer islands. As the exact nature and scale of the sub -grants to be 
supported by the RCGF  will be determined at  the implementation stage, estimates for the 
number of direct beneficiaries to be targeted by the p rogramme rest  on the assumption  that at 
least 80  per cent  of the local communities  and local authorities (LAs)  will be targeted for 
different climate adaptation impact  areas  (DRR, ecosystems, food security and water) . This 
assumption look s realistic based on the experience of SPC and FSM in this type of locally -
focused adaptation intervention.  
23. The RCGF will provide grants to subprojects that address at the local level DRR and 
coastal protection adaptation measures . These activities aim at addressing the impacts of a 
changing climate on the livelihoods of the coastal vulnerable population . The specific climate 
relevance of the subprojects financed by the RCGF will be appraised by the SPC project 
management  unit  (ECU) which will administer the RCGF, ensuring that the GCF EDA financing 
will support the total or incremental cost of climate interventions and that the financial resources provided focus on cost -efficiency in achiev ing climate impacts at the local level.  
24. One of the strong point s of the project is the emphasis o n ensuring technical assistance 
to the local authorities and subproject proponents, to ensure that the locally -led intervention 
supported by the RCGF are designed through ( i) specific stakeholders’  consu ltation, including 
the involvement of women, girls and vulnerable groups; ( ii) the information provided by locally -
focused vulnerability assessments; (iii) attention to the avoidance of a lock -in effect and


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 86 
 
 
maladaptation ; and ( iv) a focus on empowering loc al institutions and actors to unleash their full 
involvement as the first driver of transformational changes.  
25. Overall, the capacity of the project to delive r the outputs under Component 1 ( capacity -
building and empowerment of local stakeholders) will greatly influence the full extent of the 
impact of th is EDA intervention .  
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                                                          Scale: N/A 
26. The feasibility study present s a theory of change  for the intervention which is logically 
connected to the GCF Results Impact Areas. The theory of change  reflects the focus of this  EDA 
pilot and its sub -grants are centred  on empowering local communities and States to develop 
and tailor climate change projects based on their specific needs and priorities. The three macro 
impact areas of intervention  – DRR, food security and water security  – are identified by the 
need s asses sments carried out by the stakeholder consultations and the prioritization sectors 
identified in the FSM national adaptation plans. These  are linked with the strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities and threats analysis that identified barriers and the opportu nities 
that the proposed EDA pilot intends to build upon . This is well  explained, but the role of the 
private sector and academia could have emerged more clearly , as well as their involvement as 
active actors to be encompassed during the implementation.  
27. Moreover, in terms of paradigm shift potential the proposed EDA p ilot can:  
(a) Catalyse long -term climate impact and resources beyond the GCF implementation stage . 
The RCGF is designed as a potential open -ended facility with a handover plan for the 
FSM Government. As part of the sustainability plan, there is a resource mobilization 
strategy which intends to coordinate long -term climate donor efforts (beyond the GCF) 
into a coordinated space provided by the RCGF ;  
(b) Build long -term sustainability: the FSM G overnment is strongly supporting the project, 
and it  clearly  emerged that they intend  to sustain the RCGF b eyond the GCF initial 
implementation stage , both as the ultimate owner of the RCGF at the handover phase 
and as coordinator of  a potential donors’ pool , constituting an  open -ended facility , once 
the GCF implementation stage approaches phase -out;  
(c) Scale up t he proposed  approach , to build adaptation, resilience and climate prosperity at 
community level, through a bottom -up approach guided by the local authorities within 
FSM. Also, the overall approach proposed can be meaningfully replicated in other  Pacific 
SIDS , that present similar social , economic and geographical conditions and  the 
presence of climate vulnerable communities residing in outer islands ;  
(d) Creat e an enabling environment: Component 1 of the intervention hinges significantly 
on empoweri ng the local authorities and actors that will be involved in the design and 
implementation of the project  and in the transfer  of knowledge and skills which will be 
pivotal in the design and implementation of the subprojects ; and   
(e) Support the behavioural ch ange of the local institutions and communities involved in 
the project, given the strong bottom -up approach and focus in transferring skills and 
knowledge.  
28. From the point of view of technological innovation, the solutions described in the 
feasibility study  (DRR measures , rainwater catchment systems, use of endemic species,  etc.) are 
known to be effective in producing local -level adaptation results , and some activities , such as 
those that are proposed for agriculture and ecosystem management (mangroves) will build on 
indigenous knowledge.  Overall, it is expected that t echnical knowledge will be generated during 
execution of the sub -grants through the implementation of i nnovative technology solutions to 
identified local constraints. This knowledge will be utilized for selecting appropriate


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 87 
 
 
technologies and approaches in other Pacific communities and will help tailor them to specific 
community needs. SPC will also aggregat e and synthesiz e the lessons learned to help drive other 
projects in their portfolio and operations across the Pacific .  
29. In terms of knowledge -generation it is positively noted that this EDA pilot aims to build 
the capacity of local actors  to understand cl imate change impacts to develop and implement 
their own priority adaptation projects. These efforts will drive community ownership and buy -
in while demonstrating the long -term sustainability of these investments, particularly as it 
relates to long -term mai ntenance (i.e. green/blue/grey coastal infrastructure, rainwater 
systems, etc.) and behaviour change (i.e. fisheries and livestock practices).  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                              Scale:  N/A 
30. The proposed EDA pilot will contribute to the achievement of several Sustainable 
Development Goals , in particular Goals 1,2, 3 and 5.  There are potential economic, social and 
environmental  co-benefits . As the facility  will implement  a broad range of activities at the 
subpro ject level, a large range of co-benefits  are related to DRR, water and food security. F rom 
DRR activities , co-benefits will mostly include  avoided economic losses through enhanced 
disaster resilience and improved recovery timelines . In addition, t he DRR ac tivities are expected 
to lead to improved health outcomes from reduced disaster risk, particularly flooding. Further 
by reducing disaster risk and improving response times, economic and social  community 
recovery can be improved  and recover y from the impact of the Covid19 pandemic  can be 
supported . Finally, DRR activities can also help to preserve cultural sites and resources. 
Watershed management and restoration activities will help to improve water quality, ecosystem 
biodiversity, integrity  and coastal resources.  
31. Social co -benefits from food security activities will focus on improved nutritional 
outcomes, especially for young children, and food security for vulnerable households . The 
activities focused on supporting improved coastal resource  conservation and sustainable 
utilization will help to sustain biodiversity and improve  local habitat.  
32. Economic co -benefits are expected from the enhanced agricultural  productivity and 
reduced disaster losses arising from climate  hazards, as well as the cr eation of jobs from several 
of the subprojects that deal with small -scale infrastructure s and local services.  
33. The intervention has a strong emphasis on gender equality and the inclusion in the 
intervention of the vulnerable segment of the population.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                                                      Scale: N/A 
34. FSM is classified by as low  to middle income SIDS ,6 with over 40  per cent  of the 
population below the nationally determined poverty line .7 It is noted that the EDA p ilot intend 
to prioritize the local authorities whose populations are the most vulnerable  economically and 
most exposed to the effects of climate change.  
35. The type of activities that the RCGF can finance are non -revenue generating and the 
fiscal capacity of the G overnment to support the vulnerable population by provid ing essential 
public goods to support climate adaptation is inherently limited.  
36. The barrier analysis presented in the f unding proposal highlighted a number of capacity 
constraints for FSM.  FSM local, State and national financial and technical capacity is extremely 
 
6 UN Department o f Economic  and Social Affairs. Available at: < https://publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/en -
us/Data/Country- Information/id/111 -Micronesia -Federated -States -of> 
7 World Bank. Ava ilable at < https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/95142451 -550D -4C1B -A389 -
26FD74C6B018QA -2019/Global_POVEQ_FSM.pdf >


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 88 
 
 
constrained, particularly when considering the magnitude of potential climate change impacts. 
Despite some variation in their adaptive capacities, all States are highly vulnerable due mainly 
to an inability to respond to climate impacts in a timely manner and the wide dispersion of the 
islands in FSM which poses transportation, communication and development challenges for the 
nation, particularly for costs of goods and services, costs of energy and transportation, and 
scalability and connectivity of markets.8 Specifically, a previous capacity assessment for FSM by 
USAID9 highlighted that estimated  costing for operationalizing climate change policies and 
action at the State and local levels  currently far outweighs department budgets and that there is 
limited capacity in national and State G overnments to effectively coordinate climate finance and 
adaptation priorities . The total financing required for the identified pipeline of projects and 
programmes is estimated at  USD 1.4 billion  which exceeds FSM’s national GDP five -fold.  
37. Furthermore , the activities proposed are relevant to overcome the financial and capacity 
barriers identified by SPC and FSM in the funding proposal, and the EDA approach proposed  
will further tailor the activities based on the involvement of local actors in the desig n stage of 
each subproject . This approach can further increase the relevance of the proposed intervention 
for the individuals and households  that will be involved  in the subprojects.  
3.5 Country ownership                                                                      Scale: N/A 
38. The intended nationally determined contribution of FSM emphasizes the urgency of  
enhanc ing local capacity to plan, design, implement, manage and operate adaptation projects 
and installed technologies, further demonstrating the relevance of the proposed EDA pilot.  
39. The programme will work to shift the status quo from a pathway of climate 
vulnera bility, elevated health risks and limited socioeconomic development for vulnerable 
communities in FSM to one of improved food/water security, enhanced DRR and recovery, and 
improved socioeconomic development by building local capacity to respond to climate  change. 
The EDA pilot has been designed to deliver on the adaptation goals set out in the FSM National 
Climate Change Strategy and contribute to four of the GCF adaptation results areas .  
40. The GCF Country Programme also specifically identifies the need for  food and water 
security projects, disaster risk management projects, and resilient infrastructure/road 
projects .10 Building on identified priorities, and given the centrality of climate change 
considerations, the GCF Country Programme endorses the sectoral focus of the Joint State 
Action Plan  – food and water security, health and education, and infrastructure climate proofing. 
Further, the Country Programme acknowledges the difficulty in leveraging private sector 
financing for climate adaptation projects in  FSM, due to the limited capabilities of national 
private sector actors.  
41. The accredited entity, SPC, have a relevant track record in implementing community -
driven climate project s in FSM, and has partnered with the relevant actors involved in the 
implemen tation of this EDA p ilot at national and local level.  
42. The FSM n ational design ated authority has been strongly involved in the design of the 
project and will have a pivotal role as the Chair  of the EDA Programme Board. 
 
8 World Bank. 2017. Pacific Possible: Long -term Economic Opportunities and Challenges for Pacific Island Countries.  
World Bank, Washington, DC . Available at: < https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/do cuments -
reports/documentdetail/168951503668157320/pacific -possible -long -term- economic -opportunities -and-
challenges -for-pacific -island -countries >. 
9 Federated States of M icronesia. 2019.  Climate Change and Disaster Risk Finance; https://fsm-
data.sprep.org/s ystem/files/Federated -States -of-Micronesia -Climate -Change -and-Disaster -Risk -Finance -
Assessment_FW.pdf  
10 Green Climate Fund. 2017.  Federated State s of Micronesia Country Programme . Available at  
<https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/mi cronesia -country -programme.pdf >.


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 89 
 
 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness         Scale:  N/A  
43. The project seeks the maximum possible level of concessionality in accordance with 
FSM’s economic, institutional and fiscal constraints and specificities. Although the Government 
of FSM is taking actions to build a policy an d legal framework to enable climate change action, 
structural barriers to accessing finance remain. Public resources, which are largely dependent 
on external development assistance support , are currently insufficient to achieve the 
meaningful reductions in  climate change vulnerability and to improve resilience of LAs and 
beneficiary populations. Therefore the concessionality requested is gauged as appropriate.  
44. An overall economic analysis of the EDA pilot has been performed and it presents a 
positive  net present value and e conomic internal rate of r eturn . 
45. This proposed EDA model has the potential to catalyse long -term additional financing 
for FSM and its LAs, and a resource mobilization strategy has been developed as an output of 
Component 2. Furthermore, the Government has also submitted commitment letters outlining 
its intention to hand  over the facility post project closure, and continue its efforts to secure 
funding for the facility after its initial capitalization is over. T hrough its focu s on capacity -
building for LAs to develop and implement projects, developing a fundable track record of project execution, and crucial capacity/experience in effective project and financial 
management , the likelihood of new financial sources coming into th e facility is potentially high. 
This can help build donor/investor confidence, reduce investment risk, and ultimately unlock 
future projects and investment for FSM and the LAs.  
46. There are no specific risks to crowd -out private sector investments, given the 
intrinsically public- good nature of the activities that the RC GF will finance . By im prov ing the 
overall economic  conditions and livelihoods of a significant part of the FSM population, the 
project has the potential to favour market creation and local entrepreneurs.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards   
47. Programme backgro und. This EDA programme intends to strengthen the resilience of 
populations that are vulnerable to the impacts of extreme climate events through empowering 
local authorities in delivering climate change adaptation services to strengthen the resilience of 
their respective constituents and establishing a grant facility to support the implementation of 
adaptation projects. Activities implemented under the programme aim to mitigate the impacts 
of flooding that will result in environmental co -benefits of avoided  soil loss, improved soil 
structure, improved recharge rate of groundwater reserves, and overall enhanced ecosystem 
functions and services across various agroecological zones. S ocial co -benefits include improved 
access to and quality of water for vulnerable households through new catchment, pumping and 
distribution assets, as well as reduced morbidity related to waterborne disease and unsafe 
drinking water.  
48. Environmental and s ocial risk category and safeguard instruments . The project is 
categorized as medium level of intermediation (I -2) as i t involves financing to sub- grant 
activities of local authorities for DRR and food and water security adaptation technologies and practices. These are expected to have mostly minimal environmental and social (E&S) risks with 
some having potential limited adverse E&S risks and impacts. The Secretariat confirms this 
categorization and that it is within the E&S risk accreditation level of the AE . The programme 
has prepared an environmental and social management system (ESMS) as the safeguards 
instrument for this proposal.


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 90 
 
 
49. Compliance with GCF environmental and social safeguards (ESS) standards. The 
discussions below describe how the project complies with GCF ESS standards:  
(a) ESS 1 : assessment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts . The AE conducted an initial risk assessment on the potential priority 
adaptation measures that will be implemented under the programme and has assessed 
them to be generally expected to have limi ted adverse E&S  risks and/or impacts. The 
potential environmental impacts include the possibility for excessive drawdown from 
aquifers due to insufficient recharge time that could lead to negative impacts on the 
quantity and quality of freshwater due to ov erpumping; impact on local and migratory 
fish stocks and marine environment; erosion and soil degradation due to excavations as 
a result of construction activities; nuisance noise and air pollution; and generation of 
electronic and hazardous waste. Potenti al social impacts result ing from  programme 
implementation may include  the exacerbation of gender inequalities as a result of 
income opportunities that will be created;  and impacts on cultural resources and 
heritage as well as on health and safety of worker s. The ESMS provides guidance and 
procedures that can be used to assess and mitigate these potential impacts. Specific sub -
projects will likewise be required to undergo a detailed environmental and social impact 
assessment (ESIA) and develop an environment al and social management plan (ESMP) 
to mitigate site -specific E&S risks and impacts that will be identified.  
(b) ESS 2 : labour and working conditions . Activities under the programme are expected 
to be small- scale and the physical works are not expected to hav e major occupational 
health and safety concerns. Furthermore, the programme aims to promote non -
discrimination and equal opportunity for work and would comply with national labo ur 
requirements and hiring practices including promoting protection of the fund amental 
rights of workers as guided by the International Labo ur Organization (ILO) conventions.  
(c) ESS 3 : resource efficiency and pollution prevention . The programme will have some 
infrastructure -related activities under the climate -induced DRR and coastal protection 
sub-grants. These include structures such as for cyclone proofing and wave breakers 
that could potentially have localized and temporary im pacts on water, air and land 
quality during construction phase , which will have appropriate mitigation measures. 
The programme is expected to utilize natural resources,  including water and energy , and 
promote sustainable use of resources through promoting the implementation of technology solutions like installing solar rooftop s and  solar water pumps and 
establishing rainwater harvesting systems, among others.  
(d) ESS 4 : community health, safety and security . The programme essentially aims to 
support adaptation interventions that are expected to improve the health, safety and 
security of local communities. Nevertheless, minor impacts are expected to be experienced by nearby communities during construction of these adaptation 
interventions. These includ e potential for nuisance noise and localized air pollution. 
Establishment of the physical interventions will also be evaluated as regards 
infrastructure and equipment design and safety following good international industry 
practices.  
(e) ESS 5 : land acquisitio n and involuntary resettlement . The programme categorically 
excludes supporting any activity that will result in involuntary resettlement. 
Furthermore, mechanisms and stakeholder engagement processes will be in place to 
ensure that the sub -grants do not re sult in involuntary resettlement. Th ese include 
having committees and subcommittees to identify involuntary resettlement risks and exclude such proposals from being financed under the programme.  
(f) ESS 6 : biodiversity conservation and sustainable management o f living natural 
resources. Some activities of the programme could potentially lead to loss of marine


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 91 
 
 
and terrestrial habitats as a result of construction of the adaptation infrastructure. 
However, given the size of the sub -grants, potential negative impac ts are expected to be 
limited. Mitigation measures will likewise be developed in the conduct of the ESIA. 
Activities could also lead to introduction of invasive species that may affect the 
biodiversity of the area. However, this risk is considered low and the programme will 
promote the use of non -invasive species in relation to local environmental context and 
implement biosecurity protocols. The risk of introduction of invasive species vis -à-vis 
local biodiversity and environmental conditions will likewise be monitored.  
(g) ESS 7 : indigenous peoples and GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy. The AE assessment is 
that there will be low risk of negative impacts to indigenous peoples and local communities and that the proposal is designed to provide funds directly to the most 
vulnerable. Within the gender action plan (GAP) and stakeholder consultations, the AE 
demonstrates ways to promote engagement and participation of communities. Consultations undertaken included community chiefs and traditional leaders.  
(h) ESS 8 : cultural  heritage. The programme intends to support traditional cultural 
practices in its interventions as regards food and water security sub -grants through the 
conduct of iterative participatory stakeholder consultations. The programme will likewise not directly  or indirectly fund activities (as part of its exclusionary criteria) that 
would disrupt or adversely affect an archaeological site or a property of historic or cultural significance.  
50. Implementation arrangements . The AE will set  up an ECU to implement the ESMS and 
ensure that the ESIAs and relevant plans and arrangements for safeguards implementation, 
monitoring, supervision and reporting are complied with. Various bodies and committees will 
also be established to serve as policy and governing structure fo r the programme with local 
authorities and facilitating agents as implementors of the sub -grants. Safeguards specialists will 
be engaged at various levels and will include a pool of external and national E&S experts to 
provide guidance on E&S issues includ ing on implementation review and monitoring.  
51. Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure. The programme has 
conducted stakeholder workshops with representatives from key stakeholder agencies,  
including government offices, municipalities and other relevant organizations such as civil 
societ y and local NGOs. It has likewise prepared a stakeholder engagement plan where 
information about the programme will be disclosed to various stakeholders who will be engaged throughout the programme life  cycle. Respo nsible entities for stakeholder engagement 
activities, methods, timing and reporting are also indicated.  
52. Grievance redress mechanism (GRM). The programme will establish a programme-
level GRM in addition to the already existing GRM of the AE. The GRMs will be established to 
receive any concerns or grievances from any affected community as regards E&S  performance 
of any of the activities of the programme. These mechanisms will be accessible, and the 
communities and stakeholders will be able to raise such grie vances to the AE as well as to the 
sub-grant level GRMs that will be established. In line with the Indigenous Peoples Policy, the 
Secretariat’s indigenous peoples’ focal point will be available for assistance at all stages, 
including before a claim has bee n made.  
4.2 Gender policy   
53. The AE has provided a gender assessment and GAP and therefore complies with the 
requirements of the GCF G ender Policy.  
54. The gender assessment provides the context of the enabling environment that will 
enhance gender equality and women’s empowerment in FSM . The country ratified the 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination a gainst Women in 2004 , the


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 92 
 
 
United  Nations  Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1993 and the U nited Nations  
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2016. In 2019, the FSM States drafted 
gender -based violence (GBV) action plans under the national “Policy on the Eliminat ion of 
Violence Against Women and Girls ”. The FSM Strategic Development Plan (2004 –2023) further 
highlights seven specific strategic goals for addressing gender and vulnerable groups as part of 
country -level development . The “National Gender Policy ”, endor sed in 2018, aspires to promote 
gender equity, equality, social justice and sustainable development in the country. The Gender 
Development Office is a lead institution and is responsible for gender issues in the country. In 
the agriculture sector, one of t he seven guiding principles of the food security and agriculture 
planning and implementation is “social and gender equity” with one goal of “Improving farm 
incomes and livelihoods with particular focus on gender and vulnerable groups.”  
55. The gender assessme nt was compiled based on a desk review as well as consultations 
with women’s groups in each of the four S tates in FSM . It indicates that despite the existence of 
the enabling environment, women continue to face significant barriers. Social and cultural 
barriers that consider women’s primary role as homemakers and caregivers to children, the 
elderly and people with special needs create lack of alternative livelihoods for women outside of homebased agriculture. This is compounded by barriers to access ing agri cultural land, training, 
credit and social and financial services. Gender -blind design of options and policies for climate 
adaptation and agriculture continue to disadvantage women due to exclusion of women from 
decision -making and governance at a number o f levels. Around 30 per  cent of households live 
below the basic poverty line, and households that are headed by women are more likely to live 
in poverty and earn less than male -headed households. Women have less income earning 
opportunities than men due to  hiring preferences in the formal sector, and the difficulties 
women face in establishing and sustaining micro and small business ventures. Overall, the number of women who earn wages or salary in FSM is less than half that of men, and men have 
higher rates of employment in all fields, including agroforestry. Economic activities in FSM 
consist primarily of subsistence farming and fishing and , in these sectors, almost 50  per cent  of 
men in the labo ur force are considered skilled, compared to less than 20 per cent  of women. 
Women in FSM are absent from the legislative and executive levels of government and continue 
to be significantly underrepresented in civic affairs. It is also concerning that there is a high 
prevalence of GBV and the vast majority of women who experience abuse do not access formal 
support services or authorities and access to services is also difficult.  
56. Almost all FSM households grow crops for consumption, barter and sale. Women play a 
critical role in food production through subsistence farming to feed their families, as well as 
growing cash crops for income. There are differences between the kinds of crops traditionally 
grown by women versus men, as well as differences in the location of where women and men 
farm. Men tend to work on higher ground. This is significant given that the impacts of climate 
change (i.e. saltwater inundation, flooding and coastal erosion, soil fertility , etc.) are most 
pronounced in  planted  areas close to houses, near streams and coastlines. The asses sment has 
demonstrated the differentiated gender relation s, roles and responsibilities in F SM and 
particularly as they  relate to the farming households. The assessment has been able to identify 
the barriers to equal access and benefit from  the GCF intended  investment. It has on the other 
hand also identified and included in the assessment existing potentials that will further support 
the promotion of gender equality and women’s empowerment. This will be done through the 
identification, assessment and planned engagement of women’s groups and their existing 
capacity in the four  main territories to support the project in mainstreaming gender, engaging 
with the Women Development O ffice and leveraging the support of the United Nations Entity for 
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women ( UN Women) to address GBV issues.  
57. The GAP provides activities that address the challenges faced by women and includes 
baseline  (0), indicators, targets  (30 per cent ), timelines , budgets  and gender expertise (gender 
expert and E SS/gender equity and social inclusion expert).  The project includes sex 
disaggregated collection of key indicators, inclusive consultations of women and other


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 93 
 
 
traditionally marginalized groups, equitable targets for capacity -building with 50  per cent  
targe ts for women’s participation, and outputs that include the development and 
implementation of a gender mainstreaming training module. Activities included are aimed at 
increasing women’s leadership and decision -making in the agriculture sector; increasing 
economic opportunities and monitoring increases in income; strengthening women’s representation in institutional decision -making and coordination; develop ing gender -
responsive and inclusive agriculture and climate change policy ; and ensur ing gender-responsive 
and gender -balanced capacity -building and training are conducted. In addition, activities 
include measures to enhance the food security of vulnerable households (with a focus on 
female -headed households) by leveraging men and women farmers’ knowledge of inputs and 
production systems to better develop climate -smart agriculture practices and seeds, while 
ensuring men and women have equal access to project benefits and participat ion in decision -
making.  
58.  The GAP also includes measures to strength en climate -resilient value  chains and 
market linkages across the agriculture sector and ensure market development takes into 
account differentiated access and availability for men and women farmers, particularly with 
regards to social barriers for access. Activities are designed to empower communities, 
particularly through women’s groups , to promote local consumption of food and ensure food 
processing and preservation techniques are reflective of time, capacity and technological constraints of household far mers particularly women. Since GBV has been identified as a critical 
challenge, the partnership and utilization of already existing tools of UN  Women will contribute 
to a better understanding of violence against women and equip personnel working on the project with ways to reduce GBV. The project has developed measures to ensure that women 
have equal access to the grievance mechanism that will provide all female beneficiaries with a 
clear process for providing comment and raising grievances and ensure women  can report 
grievances anonymously through the establishment of focal points for the project within the 
four  State -level umbrella women’s groups.  
59. In general, the GAP includes measures designed to respond to gender issues, reduce 
gender gaps and support pr ogress towards more gender equality. Women’s access to land is an 
issue that is identified in the gender analysis and the AE is recommended to explore potential opportunities to address the issue of land access and land tenure and incorporate into the GAP 
as appropriate.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall  programme  assessment  (medium risk ) 
60. The project aims to improve food and water security, disaster risk reduction and 
socioeconomic development by strengthening the adaptive capacity of l ocal authorities (LAs) to 
respond to cl imate change. GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 16.5 million. The 
Government of FSM and the AE are providing in -kind contribution of USD  2.9 million and USD 
0.2 million, respectively. With GCF grant, the AE will  provide sub -grants to LAs through the EDA 
programme, to implement climate change adaptation activities.  
61. The FSM is a SIDS. The project activities have high socio -environmental benefits but low 
cash returns and limited potential to attract private sector financing. Therefore, the AE is 
requesting a full grant for this project as little potential for revenue generation is envisioned.  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute (low risk)  
62. SPC, as a direct access AE, will serve as both AE and executing entity for this project. 
Headquartered in New Caledonia, it has been operating in the Pacific over 70 years. Its regional


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 94 
 
 
office in FSM has been implementing a number of climate change adaptation projects financed 
by external donors.   
4.3.3.  Programme -spe cific risks  (medium risk ) 
63. Duplication with other project activities : There have been a number of past and 
ongoing projects including a GCF -financed project ( “Climate resilient food security for farming 
households across the Federated States of Micronesia” – SAP020) which tried to address similar 
climate change challenges in FSM. Given the small size of the country, it is important to 
coordinate among implementing agencies to avoid the overlapping of activities and outputs. The 
analysis of complementarity an d additionality of this project has been provided in the FP. In 
addition, the eligibility criteria for investments should be included in the term sheet to ensure 
the clear focus of the project.   
64. Implementation in remote locations : The AE identified the geographic remoteness of 
certain LAs as one of the risks as some are very far from main islands and in remote locations. 
This also often associates with the high cost of travel and logistics. Some comfort can be derived 
from the AE’s e stablished procurement protocol and experiences that will adjust the 
transportation needs according to the situation. The AE could serve as a financial and procurement service provider and directly support project implementation in collaboration 
with the L As.  
65. Land ownership:  The project identified traditional social structures related to land 
ownership as one of the implementation barriers. As some project interventions may limit 
access to resources, a conflict of interest may arise during the project impl ementation. The AE 
clarified that the land ownership issue will be addressed differently in different States of FSM, 
providing descriptions about the final authority and established procedures to deal with the 
issue in each State. In addition, the p rogramm e will comply with FSM government legislation 
and established practices with regard to land ownership and tenure for sub -grants.  
66. Economic analysis and viability of the project : Given the nature of the EDA 
programme, the economic analysis is based on the mo st probable interventions that would 
reflect the imminent adaptation needs such as water management, agriculture and coastal 
protection. The economic benefits are expected from the saved cost of water, increased yields 
from climate resilient crops and avoi ded loss from coastal management. The analysis results in 
the economic internal rate of return  of 8 per cent . The project is planning to hand over the EDA 
facility to the G overnment of FSM after completion of the GCF funding period. It will include a 
resou rce mobilization strategy and action plan for the recapitalization of the EDA facility. 
However, the G overnment of FSM is unable to make a commitment to recapitalization of the 
facility due to the country’s dependency on the U nited States  Compact of Free A ssociation 
funding. There is limited potential for allocation of taxes and engaging the private sector given 
the public nature of the project activities.   
4.3.4.  Compliance risk  (medium risk ) 
67. The Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) are not subject to targeted United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) resolutions.  
68. The Pacific Community (SPC), as accredited entity (AE), confirm s that no individual or 
entity that is listed on any UNSC sanctions list, including the UN Consolidated Sanctions list, will 
be invo lved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty, 
implementer, or beneficiary. Furthermore, no project activities will be undertaken in any jurisdiction which is subject to or affected by UNSC resolutions.  
69. SPC advises that, at this stage, there has been no due diligence assessment of 
counterparties as they have not yet been identified. SPC has deemed it more appropriate to


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 95 
 
 
follow a fair, competitive and transparent bidding process to select counterparties rather than 
to follow  a pre -selection process. However, as part of this competitive bidding process, due 
diligence and other assessments will take place to ensure the counterparties have adequate 
financial, management, reporting and other capacities that are well established and functioning. 
The procurement of counterparties will proceed according to various finance policies, including 
controls and due diligence processes to ensure entities have the capacity to deliver.  
70. SPC confirms that it has conducted a formal assessment of its procurement, grants, risk 
and assets for the project, complemented by an informal review of the status of FSM according 
to the Financial Action Task Force. Risk factors and mitigation measures utilized are based on 
SPC’s Procurement Capacity Assessment  for Grant Recipients or Sub -delegates for FSM. 
71. SPC’s assessment ascertained that FSM has not been identified by the Financial Action 
Task Force  as having strategic deficiencies regarding anti -money laundering (AML) or 
countering the financing of terrorism  (CFT), and has a low risk for money laundering, terrorist 
financing, or smuggling. Acceptable international principles are being followed, and formal 
guidelines and procedures exist to identify, monitor and address conflicts of interest.  
72. Procedures are n on-discriminatory, provide transparency, equitability, and public 
access to relevant information. There are anti -fraud and corruption policies in place, with 
finances subject to periodic reviews, inspections and audits. Rules and regulations include fair 
and impartial mechanisms to address protests and policy violations, and there are formal 
guidelines and procedures to identify, monitor and address conflicts of interest. Ultimately, 
SPC’s assessment concluded that the severity for risks and vulnerabilities  in the project was 
‘low’.  
73. SPC advises that it has an AML/CFT policy that prevents the funding of prohibited 
activities through any of SPC's projects and initiatives, namely the  “Finance Policy: Anti -Money 
Laundering and Counter ing the Financing of Terror ism”  (effective July 2020). Moreover, SPC’s 
procurement team maintains a full set of documentation for every procurement process 
including purchase orders, contracts, solicitation documents, records of evaluations and 
communications with participants. This is consistent with SPC’s “ Finance Policies: Procurement 
Policy ” (effective July 2020), which includes assessment and mitigation of risks in all 
procurement processes.  
74. Due diligence requirements for vendors are established in the “ AML/CTF Policy, 
Procurem ent Policy ” and “Grants and Sub- delegations Policy ”. SPC undertakes due diligence 
when engaging any entity in activities to ensure the identity of the entity, enabling SPC to assess 
and evaluate risks accordingly. This is further supported by the “ Fraud an d Corruption Policy ” 
as outlined in SPC's “ Manual of Staff Policies ”. 
75. SPC demonstrates its commitment to excluding access to funding for entities that engage 
in certain activities, by exercising general conditions for contracts and grants that permit 
termi nation of such agreements with immediate effect where the other entity is involved in:  
(a) fraud or corruption;  
(b) money -laundering;  
(c) terrorism financing;  
(d) activities non -compliant with child protection;  
(e) activities undermining human rights; and/or  
(f) sexual harassment , sexual abuse or sexual exploitation. 
76. SPC confirms that it does not have any intention to distribute any items of value directly 
to any beneficiaries. The grants disbursed by the RCGF will be exclusively for goods and services 
provided directly by l ocal authorities, facilitating agents or contractors, as per the provisions of


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 96 
 
 
their Operations Manual . This will proceed in accordance with the SPC policies that will be 
followed throughout to prevent prohibited practices, including  the: 
(a) Finance Regulations (20 18);  
(b) Finance Policy: Procurement (2020);  
(c) Finance Policy: Grants and Sub- delegations (2020); and  
(d) Finance Policy: Anti -Money Laundering and Counter ing the Financing of Terrorism g 
(2020).  
77. SPC advises that the disbursement of funds to successful grantees, as well as payments 
to Facilitating Agents and any other entities, will proceed according to the abovementioned 
policies. These policies ensure considerable internal controls and due diligence so that funds are 
properly disbursed and managed, and that funds are not used for prohibited or illicit activities. 
All entities receiving funds under the project will be compelled to comply with these policies.  
78. SPC has established a grievance and redress mechanism to ensure that complaints are 
addressed. Concerns about  conflicts of interest would be received by SPC’s Legal Team who will 
direct them to the Social  and Environmental Responsibility Helpdesk to initiate a conflict 
resolution process and develop an action plan or appropriate redress mechanism. If this is not 
effective, other processes may be followed according to SPC’s “Social and Environmental 
Responsibility Policy” (2020). The EDA programme will also have a dedicated grievance redress 
mechanism.  
79. Allegations of breaches of contract, violation of AML/CFT policies or involvement in 
illicit or unauthorized activities would be a breach of the Code of Conduct and will be investigated under SPC’s Staff Regulations and Manual of Staff Policies. Outcomes m ay result in 
summary dismissal, other action being taken against staff, or termination of contracts with 
cause for grantees, with other actions being taken as required.  
80. Recommended risk rating : The Office of Risk Management and Compliance 
(ORMC)/Compliance  Team has conducted a review of the project in accordance with relevant 
GCF Board approved policies and does not find any material issue or deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the 
ORMC/Comp liance Team have determined a risk rating of ‘medium’ and has no objection to this 
request proceeding to the next steps at this time.  
81. ORMC/Compliance would like to remind SPC, as the AE, of its continuing obligations and 
responsibilities with regard to monitoring and reporting any risks for money laundering, financing  of terrorism , or prohibited practices among the intended counterparties, executing 
entities, beneficiaries, persons involved, or any of the proposed activities.  
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
82. In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6.  Recommendation  
83. It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision . 
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  The AE’s capacity to deal with land 
ownership issues and implement activities 
in remote locations is key to successful 
project implementation.    Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability to implement 
this programme  Low


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 97 
 
 
Programme -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance   
 
4.4 Fiduciary  
84. Pacific Community (SPC) will be the accredited entity and the executing entity for the 
project through a dedicated EDA Programme Coordination Unit (ECU), hosted within the SPC 
regional office in FSM.  
85. SPC’s Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability Division will receive funds from 
the G CF. These funds will in turn flow to the ECU as the e xecuting entity (EE) for the EDA 
programme. The EE in its capacity, and based on the grant applications received , will nter  into 
grants agreements with the LAs following the procedures on disbursement.  
86. SPC will be responsible for financial monitoring and for the financial execution of GCF 
funds according to SPC rules and regulations. As the a ccredited entity, SPC’s CFU within the 
Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability Division will be responsible for the overall 
project management.  
87. Results and outcomes from p rogramme activities will be monitored in accordance with 
SPC’s Planning, Evaluation, Accountability, Reflection and Learning (PEARL) policy. SPC policies 
on financial management including “Finance Regulations”, “Anti- money Laundering and 
Countering the Financing of T errorism”, “Procurement” and “Grants and S ub-delegation” as well 
as its “Staff Regulations and Manual of Staff Policies” that govern human resources and other 
relevant processes and procedures will be followed in the implementation of this project.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
88. As an adaptation programme, the intervention expects to benefit about 54,000 direct 
and 9 2,000 indirect beneficiaries, of which women comprise 49  per cent  of both direct and 
indirect beneficiaries across the three targeted sectors of food security, water security and 
disaster risk reduction.  
89. The programme aims at supporting  different types of adaptation activities which are 
expected to generate impact across the four adaptation result areas. This is clearly 
demonstrated in the theory of change diagram as well as in the annexed t able 4, which, as per 
guidance provided by the Secretariat, details the specific types of interventions supported by 
the programme as well as how they are foreseen to achieve measurable adaptation benefits.  
90. The revised logical framework integrates most of the comments and suggestions 
provided by the S ecretariat and it is assessed to have applied results measurements against the 
GCF Results Management Framework (RMF) and Performance Management Framework (PMF) 
sufficiently for quality at entry considerations. More robust methods of verification ( MoVs ) for a 
few outcome and programme  performance indicators have been  provided as per guidance 
shared with the AE.  
91. The implementation timetable in a nnex 5 is not aligned with the Programme Calendar 
under section 11 of the term sheet , while t he monitoring and eva luation plan in annex 11 does 
not include the full list of the logical framework indicators as requested by the Secretariat. Both 
annexes shall be updated at the FAA negotiation stage.  
4.6 Legal assessment


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add. 01 
Page 98 
 
 
92. The accreditation master agreement (AMA) was signed with the a ccredited entity on 08 
November 2019, and it became effective on 10 April 2020.  
93. The accredited entity has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and autho rity to implement the 
programme.  
94. It is recommended that, prior to submission of the f unding proposal to the Board : 
(a) The accredited entity has obtained all its internal approvals ; and  
(b) GCF  has received a certificate or legal opinion from the a ccredited entity in a form and 
substance satisfactory to GCF  confirming that all final internal approvals by the 
accredited entity have been obtained and that it has the authority and capacity to 
implement the programme.  
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal)  
95. The proposed programme will be implemented in the Federated States of Micronesia. 
GCF has signed a bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities with the Federated States of 
Micronesia on 27 April 2016 and the agreement entered into force upon signature.  
96. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Submission by the a ccredited entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form 
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secr etariat, within 120 days after Board approval, 
confirming that the a ccredited entity has obtained all final internal approvals needed by 
it and has the capacity and authority to implement the proposed programme;  
(b) Signature of the funded activity agreement i n a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the 
accredited entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has 
obtained all final internal approvals, whichever is later; and  
(c) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 99 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP169 
Proposal name:  Climate change adaptation solutions for L ocal Authorities 
in the Federated States of Micronesia  
Accredited entity:  Pacific Community (SPC)  
Country/(ies):  Federated States of Micronesia  
Programme/programme size:  Small  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                Scale:  High  
1. The Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) is an  archipelago located in the North Pacific 
Ocean. There are four States (Chuuk , Kosrae,  Pohnpei and Yap), which are widely dispersed in 
an east -west orientation. The four States are comprised of 607 islands, although habitation is 
found in only 74 of these islands. The eastern -most State (Kosrae) is located at a distance of 
2,700 kilomet res from the western -most State (Yap). The estimated population of FSM was 
113,815 in 2019. The per capita gross domestic product (GDP) was USD 3,400. It is found that 
approx imately 10 per cent of the population across FSM falls below the food poverty line, while 
41 per cent of the population falls below the total basic needs poverty line. The majority of the 
population is engaged in the subsisten ce production system involving  fisheries, agriculture and 
livestock rearing.    
2. The climatology of FSM exhibits strong seasonality  and inter -annual variabi lity. While El 
Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) has a strong influence on overall climate in  the nation, the 
total inter -annual rain fall is significantly affected by the two phases of ENSO, namely El Ni ño 
and La Ni ña. There are two seasons w ith the rainy season occurring from M ay to October. The 
general climatology is also influenced by the presence of the Indian Ocean Dipole and Inter -
tropical Convergence Zone. While the average monthly temperature hardly change s throughout 
the year, the monthly average rainfall amount exhibit s significant changes. The mean annual 
rainfall is around 4,826 mm. In general, the ea stern State s are much drier than the w estern 
States, where high intensity rainfall episodes are common. In sharp contrast, the eastern States 
are more affected due to higher levels of wave interactions along the shorelines, owing to much 
greater influence of sea surface temperatur e (SST) and SST anomalies.  
3. The climatological data density in FSM is commendable. The analysis of historical 
observational data exhibits nominal inter -decadal as well as inter -seasonal temperature change 
since 1950 across the four States. The decadal rate of change in mean temperature is in the 
order of 0.0 to 0.15˚C across seasonal and spatial scales. A n exception is found in the western 
State of Yap  during the wet season , when a gradual decrease (i.e. withdrawal) of annual mean as 
well as seasonal rainfall amount is found, with a considerably high er rate of withdrawal of 
rainfall during the dry season. Based on evidences and thorough analyses of available data, it is 
claimed that the combination of warming and withdrawal of dry season as well as ann ual 
rainfall has resulted in greater loss of moisture from the top soils leading to higher evapotranspiration and droughts. The intensity of drought is further compounded by the La 
Ni
ña phase of ENSO. Current ly scien tific opinion foresees that ENSO- related  influences on 
seasonality will worsen in a warm ing world, wi th a much greater influence on adverse climate -


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 100 
 
 
induced hazards and disasters. Climate change- influenced drought is therefore a great concern 
for FSM.  
4. The rainfall variability is found to be great er in the western State of Yap and its islets 
compared to eastern States. The western State is experiencing an increase in extreme rainfall 
leading to greater susceptibility of floods. Moreover, higher intensity rainfall events tend to 
erode top -soils and increased sedimentation in the downstream areas of the catchment, which 
chokes the available ponds and reduces water availability for irrigation purposes and for 
livestock rearing.  
5. However, a much -pronounced flooding effect is found in the eastern States d ue to 
increasing wave interactions that are caused by a combination of SST and sea level rise  (SLR ). 
Between 1993 and 2010, FSM has experienced a disproportionate amount of  SLR , ranging from 
8 to 12 mm per year, compared to other areas in the Western Pacif ic. Brunn’s equation of 1962 
suggests that increased sensitivity of cyclonic speed with increasing temperature translate s into 
an asymptotic increase in storm surge height with increasing SST. As a result of all these, there 
has been higher intensity of cyclonic events and associated coastal floodings across FSM. There 
is firm proof that the northern Pacific Ocean region is experiencing high SST and anecdotal 
evidence suggest s that there have been increased levels of inundation, particularly in the 
eastern islets.   
6. The compounding effects of rising SST and increasing sea level have resulted in much 
greater vulnerability of the coastal zone s due to increased flooding and inundation. 
Infrastructure including road networks, standing crops and water supply syste ms are heavily 
impacted. Transportation and communication between islands become increasingly difficult, 
while transportation of goods and services are severely constrained during such events. The 
destruction of road networks prevent s transfer of patients to health -care facilities. Saline 
inundation is often found to affect aquifer system s, making it difficult to collect non -saline 
potable water. Loss of income from fishing, cropping and livestock management increases food 
insecurity, especially among food impoverished households.  
7. Future climate change projection has used models that are validated with observational 
data. Even considering results based on a  low climate change scenario ( applying the 
Representative Climate Pathway 4.5 scenario, as defined by the I nter -governmental Panel on 
Climate Change), the frequency analyses of very high intensity hazardous events , such as 
droughts, floods and storm surge s, exhibit significant increase while extreme events will 
become increasingly frequent with time. The projection results clearly highlight that under 
climate change, even during a 2011 –2040 time frame, adverse impacts will be much aggravated. 
Due to an increase in rainfall, floods will occur more fr equently . Despite a general increase in 
projected rainfall, the seasonal withdrawal of rainfall in the dry seasons will aggravate seasonal 
drought. The continued rise in sea levels and ENSO -induced effects will have much aggravated 
impacts in relation to h igh intensity cyclonic storm surge. Such impacts  warrant  a portfolio of 
location -specific projects and adaptive activities primarily in the inhabited islets, if not in all the 
islands and atolls.  
8. The project does not present a portfolio of location -specific projects. Rather it takes 
advantage of the e nhanced direct access (EDA) option to mobilize a significant amount under a 
proposed EDA Grant Facility for the creation of a portfolio of locally relevant adaptation projects to be administered by local author ities (LA s). However, the project took note of a barrier 
analysis and simultaneously focused on institutional capacity -building so that State 
governments and municipalities can enhance their capacities to design and deliver on -the-
ground adaptation activit ies. 
9. The project has two components. Component 1 deals with empowerment of LAs to 
deliver climate change adaptation services to their population, while Component 2 focuses on 
priority project implementation by creating an EDA facility for strengthening local co mmunity


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 101 
 
 
resilience. The m ajority of the proposed fund (i.e. USD 12 million out of a total of USD 19.71 
million) is earmarked for the proposed  EDA grant facility. The project , including a host of EDA 
grant sub -projects , will be implemented within seven year s after  inception at a total estimated 
cost of about USD 19.71 million.    
10. Coverage of the project in terms of reaching direct beneficiaries is commendable. About 
47 per cent of the FSM population (53,639 people) will benefit directly.  Indirect benefits are 
likely to reach up to 80 per cent of the population (91,052 people) across the four States of FSM. 
Based on the initial screening and triangulation through stakeholder consultations, the 
vulnerable islands are identified. However, th e list of vulnerable islands thus created will not be 
the only criterion for the mobilization of EDA grants. The capacity of LAs will also be considered 
in awarding EDA grants. E fforts will be made to build cap acity of the weak but highly vulnerable 
munici palities so that they will also have  a fair opportunity to participate in the grant 
application processes and utilize the EDA grant support.  
11. The available information clearly suggests that the impact potential of the proposed 
project is high.   
1.2 Paradigm sh ift potential              Scale:  High  
12. The project identifies t he following two components to deliver the intended benefits: (a) 
Component 1: Local Authorities (L As) are empowered to deliver climate change adaptation 
services to their population; and (b) Component 2: priority project implementation – EDA 
facility to be created for strengthening local community resilience. While the focus of 
Component 1 is to strengthen local- level capacities , including that of local institutions,  through 
capacity -building , Component 2 is aimed at disbursement of financial resources to LAs with 
capacity and the need to address local -level climate change adaptation challenges. The project 
was conceived under the EDA window and therefore its central activities will be supported 
through deliver y of EDA grant s to LAs.  
13. The LAs seeking EDA grant s are primarily at municipal level and will be selected on the 
basis of willingness to participate in the EDA grant programme. Higher preference will be g iven 
to LAs that have proven capacity to deliver local- level activities and to those that exhibit high 
fiduciary standards in disbursing resources. Vulnerability to climate change at local level will not be the primary  criteria for selecting likely grant -recipient LAs. However, clear preference 
will be given to those LAs that can exhibit capacity to deliver and willingness to develop a 
climate change adaptation project according to specific criteria and following GCF investment 
criteria. It may be apprehend ed that LAs with relatively weaker capacity and higher climate 
vulnerability could fall behind in accessing adaptation finance under such selection approaches. 
To address this, the project management unit will offer institutional and technical support to 
LAs with proven high climate change vulnerabilities in order to enhance  their capacit ies and 
enable them to deliver adaptation services to the most vulnerable islets and people.  
14. Implementin g a combination of the above two components will not only create de mand -
driven access to adaptation finance, bu t will also build the capacity of weak but climate -
vulnerable  LAs to have greater access to much needed finance to administer local level 
adaptation. The approach is innovative and will lead to a paradigm shift away from constrained 
institutional and technical capacities to increased knowledge and technical ability . This will 
enable local communities  to translate their needs into viable climate adaptation sub -projects 
based on local -level vulnerabilities. The stre ngthening of institutions’ and communities’ 
capacity to discuss, document and plan for climate change adaptation will pave the way to a 
systematic approach to adaptation actions at local levels, representing a shift from an ad hoc 
approach to sustainable d elivery of community -based adaptation process es.


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 102 
 
 
15. The EDA grant sub -project delivery is innovative at local level, because it draws on the 
good practices of GCF and aims to customize the m to suit local realities. There are parallels 
between the proposed grant endorsing body and the GCF Board ; the proposed programme 
management unit and the GCF Secretariat ; and the establishment of a non -biased body, similar  
to the i ndependent Technical Advisory Panel ( TAP)  to apply the custom ized criteria f or EDA 
sub-projects  to assist with judicious selection based on technical merit . These approaches are 
innovative at the national level, providing ample opportunities to learn from and replicate in 
other countries.  
16. In addition to the replica tion potential of sub -project delivery processes, the proposed 
combination  of institutional capacity -building and subsequent assistance with applications for 
much -needed dedicated funds also has replication potential in other small island developing 
State s (SIDS). The demand -driven structure for  accessing financial support, on the basis of a 
clear understanding of local -level vulnerabilities and clear identification of adaptation 
measures, can be replicated in many countries. It is expected that all program me outputs and 
results will be collated and archived in centralized data portals, which will be a source of 
updated information on climate change vulnerability and adaptation involving multiple islets 
and atolls located a cross the four Federated States of Micronesia. The information data base is 
expected to be open source to guide scaling up of adaptation activities in municipalities that will 
remain outside the EDA grants programme.  
17. Under Component 2 , dedicated activity 2.3 is expected to focus on finalizing a resource 
mobilization strategy to secure funding sources to recapitalize the EDA f acility and prepare 
handover of its management. It is also anticipated that additional finding from both public and 
private bodies will b e secured to encourag e the extension of the EDA f acility to a second phase 
in which a number of LAs could be engaged .  
18. It is perceived that EDA grant -seeking efforts will be based on local -level understanding 
of three aspects: disaster risk reduction, wate r security and food security. The local -level 
responses will be based on these aspects, taking into consideration understanding and 
knowledge o f issues such as rainwater catchment management and storage of water to address 
drought ; cyclone proofing through  mangrove enhancement and the creation of breakwaters ; 
ecosystem services and management of endemic species;  marine protected areas ; and 
management of small- scale livestock and fisheries, etc. Knowledge o f the  causes of 
vulnerabilities and of targeted resp onses is key to identif ying specific response measures, which 
will be central i n justifying grant for sub-projects. The project, therefore, is focused on 
knowledge, while leaving ample opportunity for learning.  
19. Component 1 of the project has been specifica lly designed to create pathways to 
facilitate the generation and subsequent dissemination of knowledge through the learning 
exchanges. There are opportunities for local actors , including communit ies and institutional 
actors , to engage in trainings. Lessons  learned in the design and implementation of the capacity -
building activities as well as trainings,  is likely to help inform the development of future EDA 
and local -level capacity -building projects. The cross- learning opportunities are likely to help the 
development of EDA grant sub -projects in other atolls and islets through replication of 
processes and methodologies. The targeted capacity enhancement support from the project 
delivery side to relatively weak LAs will have lasting impacts in conceiving loca l adaptive 
actions and delivering responses upon receipt of EDA grants. The proposed data hub, web 
portals and periodically organized workshops will further enable cross -learning involving 
actors representing various municipalities and state governments across FSM.  
20. Based on the effective implementation of small -scale, locally relevant and community -
centric adaptation projects, the budgetary allocation for such activities will be incentivised and 
simultaneously it is expected to cataly se local and national policy change in view of institutional 
integration of adaptation. The processes of highlighting local adaptive actions and needs for


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 103 
 
 
budgetary allocations will feed into national policies, eventually contributing to the creation of 
an enabling environment.  
21. Under Component 1, the capacity of LAs will be built towards a greater understanding o f 
climate change impacts to develop and implement their local -level priority adaptive activities. 
The integration of local communities in to the planning process and prioritiz ation of adaptive 
actions  will also contribute to an enabling environment by incent ivising community ownership, 
which will in turn leverage local contributions and supervision of operation and maintenance 
(O&M) activities – these aspects being vital for long -term sust ainability  of the adaptive actions.  
22. Analyses on local (participatory) vulnerability assessments and updated analyses of 
adaptation actions including their local -level effectiveness , are expected to enable local 
institutions to incrementally extend adaptive actions.  This knowledge will enable institutions to 
serve the populat ion under their jurisdiction. The service delivery frameworks envisaged within 
the project purview are likely to support bottom -up advocacy at both state and national levels, 
thereby further strengthening local enabling capacities.     
23. The overall objectiv e of the project is to build local adaptive capacities by strengthening 
stakeholders’ cap acities , plans and adaptive infrastructure involving green, grey and blue small -
scale infrastructure. Most of these deliverables are locally suited, tested for their effectiveness, 
and generally are no regret options. As a result, the y are likely to contribute to incrementally 
build ing adaptive capacities that are easy to replicate at micro -scale . If finances are streamlined, 
and O&M procedures are not complicated they will  therefore be sustainable in the long run. The 
simplicity of approaches and people -centric execution of measures are expected to enable the 
local institutions to deliver climate -resilient pathways for the island nation.  
24. In view of the above discussions , the i ndependent TAP is of the opinion that the 
paradigm shift potential of the proposed project is high.   
1.3 Sustainable development potential             Scale:  High  
25. The project relies heavily on EDA grant sub -projects, which are awaiting development. It 
is therefore premature to decisively forecast the potential contribution of the project to single 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG s). Since the project has gone thro ugh an initial scoping of 
potential vulnerable municipalities and their climate change -related adaptation needs, there 
exists a rough understanding regarding potential adaptive capacity -building and interventions. 
This understanding on adaptation responses  may be organized under three broad categories: 
(1) disaster risk reduction (DRR); (2) water security including provision for drinking water; and 
(3) food security. There will be adaptive responses involving mangrove enrichment, natural 
resources managemen t involving terrestrial and marine environments, and biodiversity 
conservation. Based on these responses, it may be inferred that the proposed project will 
contribute to a number of SDGs, the most notable being : (a) SDG 1: No poverty; ( b) SDG 2: Zero 
hunge r; (c) SDG 3: Good health and well -being; (d) SDG 6: Clean water and sanitation ; and ( e) 
SDG 14: Life below water. In addition, contributions to two other SDGs are most likely in terms 
of SDG 5: Gender equality ; and SDG 13: Enhanced climate actions.  
1.3.1.  Enviro nmental co -benefits  
26. Blue and green infrastructure for achieving disaster risk reduction by means of 
establishing marine safe havens through breakwaters and mangrove protective belt s, 
respectively, have potentials for providing significant environmental co -benefits  in terms of 
biodiversity refuge and conservation. Slope protection in undulated terrains will tend to reduce soil erosion, thereby enhancing soil conservation. Potential infiltration of water in irrigated 
lands will tend to strengthen the recharge  potential of aquifers. Watershed management and 
restoration activities are likely to improve water quality and reduce pollution load in the marine


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 104 
 
 
environment. Micro -scale air quality improvement may be envisaged from the use of solar 
water pumps. On a similar note, miniscule mitigation benefits (not estimated as such) may be 
accrued through agroforestry activities, pumping water using solar pumps instead of using 
fossil fuel -based technologies and by sequestering carbon in the mangroves.  
1.3.2.  Economic co -ben efits   
27. Reducing the loss and damage burden s that are arising from climate change -induced 
extreme weather events and strengthening livelihoods will offer the most significant economic 
co-benefit. The protection infrastructure will help avoid direct damages that occur during high 
intensity adverse weather events. The small- scale ponds will tend to ameliorate drought 
impacts by replenishing top soil moisture during the critical growth stage of crops, th us help ing 
to maintain crop productivity. The investments in micro -scale community roads will help 
maintain physical communication during cyclonic storms and floods, thereby contributin g to 
smooth mobilization of goods and services. The micro -scale livestock and fisheries activities will 
help to creat e employment  through a robust production system, while the assistance in 
establishing a value chain f or local products will help producers to gain economically from their  
activities.  
1.3.3.  Social co-benefits   
28. Reducing the risks that emanate from invigorated weather events i s already beneficial to 
communit ies in any country. The structures to be put in place will reduce disaster risks. The 
restoration of road networks will help speedy mobilization of goods and services in the 
aftermath of disastrous events, allowing patients to be taken to health care facilities and 
restor ing social cohesion following disasters. The increased income from productive activities 
will have positive social outcomes in terms of enhanced employment and reduction of poverty.  
29. The water tanks will direc tly serve potable water, which will have significant health care 
benefits. The livestock and fisheries sub -programme, in conjunction with enhanced availability 
of marine fisheries due to mangrove conservation and refuge protection through breakwater 
creati on will have significant positive outcomes in terms of availability of protein. Meanwhile, 
the micro -scale water retention ponds to reduce drought effects will tend to contribute directly 
to attain greater food security, which will have social co -benefit p otential.  
1.3.4.  Gender -related co -benefits  
30. In any society where community -based DRR efforts are judicously considered, it is often 
observed that women almost automatically benefit from such activities. Such benefits are 
generally optimized when women’s voice are duly included in project design. The  gender action 
plan of the project indicates that women’s particular concerns  are embraced and provisions for 
advancing the cause of women  are included . The project envisages that sub -grants will consider 
gender -focused activities, while giving priority to  voices in favour of gender equity during sub -
project design. Women and men will benefit equally fr om many of the outcomes highlighted 
above, especially where social co -benefits are significant. Integration of women in local -level 
production system s and va lue chains , and inclusion of women in various committees and 
decision -making bodies will help advance gender concerns.  
31. Based on the various attributes that bring different types of co -benefits, the independent 
TAP finds the sustainable development potenti al of the project is high.  
1.4 Needs of the recipient               Scale:  High


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 105 
 
 
32. As discussed under the section on impact potential, FSM is a country vulnerable to 
climate change. A combination of highly variable rainfall, the influence of ENSO, the ever -
increasing surface , as well as sea surface , temperature and rising amplitude of extreme tides 
that are compounded by rising sea levels , have resulted in m ore intense incidents of high 
intensity extreme weather events such as cyclonic storm surge s, droughts and floods. The low -
lying islets and atoll system and the high density of inhabitants living within met res of the sea 
make the system highly vulnerable to climate change -induced hazards. FSM’s poor state of 
readiness to deal with climatic hazard s is also noteworthy. In terms of climate change 
preparedness FSM is currently ranked 78th  least ready country the Notre Dame Global 
Adaptation Initiative identifies it as the fourth most vulnerable country to climate change. These 
rankings demonstrate tha t the country is indeed highly vulnerable and therefore the need for an 
early response is critically important.  
33. Even when  island economies are integrated with the global economy, such integration 
often comes at a high cost. The vast majority of the populat ion in FSM is reliant on 
underdeveloped as well as subsisten ce agriculture, livestock and fisheries value systems. 
Consequently, 41 per cent of the population l ives below the poverty line, where an average of 
USD 1.84 per adult per day is needed to meet es sential calorific requirement s.1 The subsisten ce 
production system results in 10 per cent of the population below the food poverty line in the 
FSM. The economy of FSM i s not self -reliant  and is highly dependent on Compact of Free 
Association ( COFA ) financi ng. The COFA currently funds 80 per cent of the State s’ budgets and 
over 90 per cent of its funding is allocated for health and education. The overall financial 
outlook against  the backdrop of uncertainties regarding COFA financing appears bleak, 
especially after 2023 when the current COFA financing phase will  expire. This indicates that 
FSM is in dire need of international support to finance its much -needed adaptation -related 
activities in the wake of climate change -induced vulnerabilities.  
34. The current technical and financial capacities of FSM at local, State and national levels 
are severely constrained in view of growing vulnerabilities to climate change. A study  financed  
by USAID highlights that the estimated costs for operationalizing cli mate change policies and 
actions at State and local levels far outweigh the budgetary provisions of relevant organizations 
operating at various tiers. F inancial support from development partners is found to be 
inadequate compared to the overall financing g ap. Moreover, over 60 per cent of the funds are 
uncoordinatedly mobilized by national decision -makers, which results in widening the  financing 
gap for climate adaptation. It is found that the financial requirement for advancing adaptation in 
FSM is in the order of USD 1.4 billion, which exceeds FSM’s national gross domestic product 
(GDP) five -fold. Moreover, there is a significant capacity gap in terms of human resources to 
understand and assess climate change -related vulnerabilities and to devis e plans at different 
governance tiers to address such vulnerabilities. All these have left a significant capacity void as 
regards mak ing any headway towards climate resilience in FSM.  
35. The project proposal is supported by a barrier analysis, which highlights a number  of 
capacity barriers including institutional barriers. It is found that the FSM State and municipal 
authorities generally do not have institutional capacities to respond to the adverse effects of 
climate change. In fact, the generic inability to analyse v ulnerabilities and respond to the m, 
compounded by lack of coordination, information  and adequate human resources, severely 
constrain delivery of adaptation services through institutional approaches. The proposal claims 
that the level of climate -related und erstanding among decision -makers is generally high. Yet, 
due to the inability of institutions to deliver adaptatio n services they remain  inaccessible to the 
population . Component 1 of the proposed project aims at fostering the transfer, receipt and 
integra tion of knowledge across LAs  thus recognising the need to strengthen institutions which 
have a mandate at the national and State level s to deliver adaptation -related services.    
 
1 Based on 2013 –2014 estimation.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 106 
 
 
36. Adaptation responses at community level work better if incremental fit -for-purpose 
steps are designed and gradually delivered by involving the community -level stakeholders. 
However, if there is a capacity constrain t at community level, generally adaptation at the 
grassroots become s ineffective. The project rightly acknowledges the capacity gaps prevailing at 
community level and focuses on building capacities to implement local -level adaptations in 
cooperation with local institutions. Not only will the financial needs be addressed, but the 
project will also enhanc e knowledge and tech nical know -how through trainings, includ ing for 
women a nd institutional actors. Since the sub-grant selection processes will follow GCF -style 
investment criteria w ith an emphasis on training, learning opportunities and capacity -building, 
it is expected that the sub-grant proposals  will highlight these aspects, recognising the 
importance of community capacity needs. It is anticipated that such capacity -building efforts at 
community levels will revolve around DRR, water provisioning and water security and also 
sustainable agriculture and food security.  
37. Although the project focuses on EDA grant support to LAs and communities, it exhibits 
high sensitivity to various needs of t he recipients at both institutional and community levels 
across the four States of FSM. The i ndependent TAP therefore rates the needs of the recipients 
as high.  
1.5 Country ownership               Scale:  High  
38. The project , along with its deliverables , is in full conformity with climate change policy 
(2013), and the specific objectives are in alignment with the nationwide integrated disaster risk 
management and climate change policy (2013) of FSM. Two of the strategic objectives of the 
latter policy should be h ighlighted : 1) strategic objective #2 aims to “Promote, facilitate and 
develop training programs focused on disaster risk management and climate change for 
scientific, technical, managerial personnel and policy makers ” and strategic objective #7 aims t o 
“Reduce and manage the risks associated with more frequent, severe and unpredictable 
extreme weather events” . The climate change adaptation objectives are in alignment with the 
second national communication of FSM to the United Nations Framework Conventio n on 
Climate Change, where emphasis is placed on achieving food and water security and protection 
against coastal flooding , both of which are aggravated by climate change. The approach of 
mobilizing institutional stakeholders and communities also finds con formity with the 
community -based adaptation approach of both the climate change policy and second national 
communication of FSM.  
39. The nationally determined contribution to achieve objectives of the Paris Protocol 
highlights priority adaptation actions that are in line with the project deliverables. The document emphasizes the urgency o f enhanc ing local capacity to plan, design , implement, 
manage and operate adaptation projects, which are at the core of the proposed project.  The FSM 
Climate Change Act (2014) provides for the regulatory functions and directives on climate 
change in FSM, whereas the project finds great overlaps in approach and delivery.  
40. In addition to having national -level policy alignment, the project is also exhibiting good 
alignment with Sta te-level Joint State Action Plans for disaster risk management and climate 
change that refer to Chuuk, Kosrae, Pohnpei and Yap States. These State- level action plans are 
focused on regional differences and needs in terms of DRR, f ood and water security, an d take 
into consideration the  spatial dynamics of vulnerability to climate change -induced hazards and 
disasters.  
41. The municipalities of FSM have developed local early action plans (LEAPs) as part of the 
International Climate Initiative where causes of spec ific vulnerabilities and adaptation needs 
are highlighted. It is expected that the EDA grant sub -projects will find inputs from respective 
LEAPs, verify them through stakeholder engagement and be integrated into EDA sub -projects.


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 107 
 
 
This will ensure integrati on of existing policies while also devising and delivering adaptation in 
all tiers of governance in FSM.  
42. The FSM country programme submitted to GCF identifies the need for achieving food 
and water security, initiatives on DRR and resilient infrastructure a nd ecosystem strengthening. 
Therefore, it may be inferred that the project builds on identified priorities  that are already 
shared with G CF. The same country programme recognizes the difficulties in leveraging private 
sector financing for climate change ad aptation projects, while highlighting the general need for 
financing assistance to advance adaptation activities in FSM. The EDA Grant Facility has already 
been identified as one of the key mechanisms to mobilize finance for implementation of 
adaptation pr ojects. The involvement of LAs in the delivery of adaptation and for providing 
leadership for O&M in the continuous monitoring and mentorship of adaptive infrastructure has been part of the country programme, and is the central consideration of the proposed project.  
43. The Pacific Community (SPC)2 is a regional inter -governmental body operating in the 
Pacific region to foster scientific and technical cooperation for regional development. The SPC 
has been operational since 1947 and has strongly influenced the Pacific islands’ development. 
The SPC embraces 26 member countries and  advances sustainable development through the 
application of its knowledge base, science and technology in addressing cross -cutting issues 
such as DRR, climate change adaptation, food se curity, gender equality, management of non -
communicable diseases, human rights and employment of youth. The SPC is an accredited entity 
(AE) to GCF  and has already implemented a few small- scale adaptation projects by mobilizing 
finance received from international development partners. In the context of adaptation delivery, 
even beyond the regional scale in the Pacific, SPC has the right exposure and experiences to 
deliver adaptation at community levels involving national and State actors in FSM.  The SPC has 
a regional office based in Pohnpei, which has administered a number of adaptation projects in 
FSM including the G lobal Climate Change Alliance Plus project for  scaling up adaptation in the 
Pacific and small island developing States . 
44. The FSM Department of Finance and Administration  is the executing entity (EE) and also 
the national designated authority (NDA) for FSM. The NDA has received two readiness supports 
from GCF and successfully implemented the support projects. The NDA has been instrumental in  
designing a p revious  GCF approved project , the Pacific Islands Renewable Energy Investment 
Programme  (FP036 ). It is expected that the NDA will remain the focal point in provid ing 
guidance and decisions on EDA grant awards, while the four States will be fu lly involved and are 
expected to play key strategic roles in the programmatic implementation. It is expected that a 
national decision -making body consisting  of representatives from key stakeholders will endorse 
key milestones and lead key programme implementation including the selection of sub -grants. 
As already planned, resources will be mobilized through the NDA and LAs to foster the 
partnerships between the SPC and the channels mobilizing funds and to ensure ownership.  
45. The SPC has taken the lead to devi se the EDA project in cooperation with the NDA. The 
SPC mobilized strong support f rom  the NDA to engage stakeholders across FSM, including all 
four States , which hav e also engaged civil society organizations and women ’s groups. This has 
allowed the NDA and  SPC to combine  scientific knowledge and awareness of climate change 
adaptation with social adaptation priorities.  These factors played a significant part in the 
planning of the EDA grant sub -project together with the expected  institutional capacity -
building.  
46. In view of the above discussions, it appears to the independent TAP that country 
ownership of the project is high. 
 
2 Previously known as the South Pacific  Commission. It has retained its acronym.


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 108 
 
 
1.6 Efficien cy and effectiveness              Scale:  High  
47. The project will be implemented over  seven years at an estimated cost of USD 19.71 
million. The project proposes a total  of USD 16 .59 million  in the form of grants. Considering the 
nation’s status as s mall island developing State, the request for full concessionality is justified. 
The greater share of the finance for the project will be dedicated to provid ing grant support to 
LAs under a n EDA grant window, which accounts for about 71 per cent of the total budget. The 
co-financing amount is about USD 3.12 million, most of which is provided by the FSM 
Government. The co -financing ratio with respect to GCF financing is about 0.19 ∶1. 
48. As indicated in the earlier sections, there is a dearth of financing for climate ch ange 
adaptation in FSM. Neither national budgetary allocations nor private sector financing are 
available for building resilience in FSM. Since the majority of financing is earmarked for 
community -drive n, small -scale , and incrementally contributing no regret adaptation actions, 
there will not be any interest from the private sector to leverage adaptation financing. Therefore, the need t o mobiliz e GCF grant financing through the involvement of public sector 
institutions is critically important.  
49. The project presents budgetary allocation that identifies high value for money, as the 
estimated transaction cost in an island setting is comparable to projects financed by GCF in 
other countries where actual unit costs for variou s adaptation services do not require 
significant transportation and other costs. Since many of the activities will be accomplished by 
local communities and will be directed by LAs, the re is very little  requirement for engaging 
expatriate support and consultants compared to most GCF financed projects.  
50. The long distances between islands , at times unfavourable weather, logistics and high -
cost challenges of inter -island transportation in FSM make it particularly difficult to deliver 
goods and services . Any ana lysis of economic performance must take into consideration  the 
context of project delivery in FSM. Yet t he proposed financial structure of the  EDA grant  facility 
is deemed adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the p roject’s objectives while 
minimizin g transaction costs, in particular given the high complexity of targeting all 
municipalities in each of the States in order to include particularly vulnerable populations living 
in rural areas and outer  islands. It is found that the cost of delivery of sim ilar grant programme s 
in other Pacific islands per direct beneficiary is far  above the proposed cost of delivery per 
beneficiary under the proposed project (ranging from USD 436 to USD 8,415 as against USD 370 
for the proposed project).  
51. The incremental adaptation benefits present the basis for conducting the economic 
analysis of the project. The economic benefit -cost analysis consid ers a cash flow model over a 
20-year period as well as the accrual of DRR benefits from coastal infrastructure for a period of 
50 years. However, the analyses assume most probable adaptive responses under EDA grant sub-projects, on the basis of past interventions in various atolls and islets a s well as best 
practices from past projects. Since actual activities for the EDA grant window cannot be 
ascertained upfront, resorting to such analytical methodology is justified.  
52. The overall economic performance of the proposed project under the above 
assumptions appears effective and economically high ly desirable. The economic net present 
value (ENPV) appears to be not only positive, but the estimated ENPV is almost twice the amount to be spent in FSM. Moreover, the economic internal rate of return appears  to be  11 per 
cent, which indicates that the proj ect’s economic performance is likely to be attractive. The 
economic soundness looks even more attractive with the realization that about 30 per cent of the budgetary allocation is earmarked for non -investment budget costs for which no direct 
benefits may be accrued. However, the inputs for institutional and community -wide capacity -
building will eventually result in non -tangible benefits, which are  expected to contribute to 
long -term sustainability as well as replication of adaptation actions on the ground.


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B. 30/02/Add. 01 
Page 109 
 
 
53. The micro - and small -scale adaptive responses are yet to be defined in an  EDA  financing 
arrangement. However, the broad categories of responses against most known hazards are 
identified, and will form the basis for developing atoll - and islet -specific adaptations under EDA 
grant sub -projects. Since the responses will be evaluated against a set of criteria, as in the case 
of GCF investment criteria, it is anticipated that small -scale responses are most likely to be 
designed involving industry best pr actices. Moreover, the nature of small grants under the EDA 
grant facility does not allow for the choice of over -sophisticated technologies at exorbitant 
prices, but instead encourages the adoption of industry best practices.   
54. Based on the above findings, the i ndependent TAP is of the opinion that the effectiveness 
and efficiency of the project are  high.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
55. The proposed EDA project is a good  example of this kind of  project and the independent 
TAP r ecommends the Board to approve the project.


---
*Page 110*
---

  
       GCF/B.30/02/ Add. 01 
Page 110 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment (FP 169) 
Proposal name:  Climate change adaptation solutions for L ocal Authorities in the 
Federated States of Micronesia  
Accredited entity:  The Pacific Communit y (SPC)  
Country:  Federated States of Micronesia  
Programme size:  Small 
 
Impact potential  
SPC is glad to note that the iTAP is in agree ment  that the project has “High” impact potential.  
Paradigm shift potential  
SPC is glad to note that the iTAP is in agreement that the project has “High” paradigm shift 
potential.  
Sustainable development potential  
SPC is glad to note that the iTAP is in agreement that the project has “High” sustainable 
development potential.  
Needs of the recipient  
SPC is glad to note that the iTAP is in agreement that the needs of the recipients are “High”.  
Country ownership  
SPC is glad to note that the iTAP is in agreement that there is “High” country ownership . 
Efficiency and effectiveness  
SPC is glad to note that the iTAP is in agreement that the efficiency and effectiveness of the 
project are “High”.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
SPC is glad to note that the iTAP is in agreement that the proposed EDA programme is a good 
example of this type of project and recommends that GCF Board approve the proposal.


---
*Page 111*
---

  
       GCF/B.30/02/ Add. 01 
Page 111 
 
 
 Furthermore, SPC would like to note that its correct name is the Pacific Community rather 
than “Pacific Communities” as reflected in the iTAP assessment report .


---
*Page 112*
---

An
nex 4: GCF Gender Assessment 
and Action Plan (GAAP)  
GAAP for GCF Enhanced Direct Access Programme “Climate 
change adaptation solutions for local authorities in the 
Federated States of Micronesia”  
Lat
est version June  2021 Gender documentation for FP169


---
*Page 113*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
Overview  ....................................................................................................................................................... 3 
Methodology  .................................................................................................................................................. 3 
Gender Analysis and Assessment  ................................................................................................................ 4 
Legal and Policy Framework  ..................................................................................................................... 4 
Existing Gender Inequality – Statistical Overview  ..................................................................................... 9 
Women in Public Life and Decision- Making  ............................................................................................ 11 
Agricultural Income and Participation  .................................................................................................. 12 
Violence Against Women  ..................................................................................................................... 13 
Comparison to the Region  ....................................................................................................................... 15 
Gender Mainstreaming Considerations for Sub- grant Activities  ............................................................. 15 
Recommendations  ................................................................................................................................... 18 
Gender Action Plan  ..................................................................................................................................... 20 
Implementing R oles and Responsibilities for Gender Mainstreaming  .................................................... 20 
Gender Action Plan  .................................................................................................................................  22 
Initial Sub -grant Gender Assessment  ...................................................................................................... 29 
Annex I –  Women’s Group Consultations Summary  .................................................................................. 31


---
*Page 114*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview  
This Gender Analysis and Action Plan (GAAP) provides the overall context and framework for 
mainstreaming gender into the Green Climate Fund  (GCF) project “ Climate change adaptation solutions 
for local authorities in the Federated States of Micronesia. ” Accordingly , it has been developed in line with  
the GCF Gender Policy and the GCF Gender Mainstreaming Guide and includes the following sections:  
• Overview of the legal and policy framework related to gender in the Federated States of 
Micronesia ( FSM ) including a look at the Gender Stocktake Report for FSM  
• Analysis of population, household, education, and income data from the 2010 Census and 2013/2014 Household Income Survey  
• Description of income and employment in the agricultural sectors by gender from the FSM 
Agricultural Survey  
• Overview of v iolence against women issues in FSM  
• Overview of the SDG Voluntary National Review of national priorities and progress assessment for gender equality
1  
• Comparison of gender indicators for FSM and other Pacific Island Countries    
• Assessment of gender considerations for priority sector areas  
• Recommendations for sub -grant s mainstreaming gender  
• Description of sub- grant  implementation roles and responsibilities with regards to gender 
mainstreaming  
• Overall Gender Action Plan for the sub- grant  activities  
• Framework for gender mainstreaming in sub -grant s 
Methodology  
This GAAP was completed through a desk review of FSM’s legal and policy framework and publicly 
available gender data pertinent to this assessment. Consultations with women’s groups for each of the four 
States in FSM were additionally undertaken through November –December 2020 . The women’s 
groups /representatives  consulted were the following:  
1) Pohnpei Women’s Council  
2) Yap State Gender Support Officer representing Yap women’s groups  
3) Kosrae Women’s Council and  
4) Chuuk Women’s Council  
The consultation for the Pohnpei Women’s Council was completed in person; however, due to the ongoing 
COVID -19 pandemic, the remaining consultations were completed via virtual meetings led by the national 
consultant.  
The consultations focused on how gender vulnerabilities manifest within the three thematic areas covered 
by the proposed EDA programme (disaster risk reduction and coastal protection, food security and water 
security) and how the sub -grants cou ld be designed and implemented in a gender sensitive manner.  
Through the consultations, food security projects and assisting women farmers and gardeners were 
deemed as priority measures for the EDA programme to reduce gender vulnerabilities in FSM. Please see 
Annex I for the full summary of women’s groups consultations  completed .   
 
1 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/26668VNR_2020_Micronesia_Report.pdf


---
*Page 115*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender  Analysis and Assessment  
Legal and Policy Framework  
International and Bilateral treaties and agreements that FSM is party to and supports: 
• Article X of the Federal Programm e and Services Agreement between the Government of the 
Federated States of Micronesia and the Government of the United States where the US Agency for 
International Development (USAID) is responsible for providing disaster assistance and coordinating 
the US  Government’s response to declared disasters in the FSM.    
• Chapter 24 of Agenda 21 (United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, 1992).  
•  Convention on Biodiversity (1992).  
• Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action ( 1995, Fourth World Conference on Women).  
• the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation of the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development.  
• the 2000 Millennium Declaration.  
• the 2015 Paris Agreement of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).  
• the Agenda 2030 for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
• Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2018 – 2030.  
• Ratification of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) in 1993, UN Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Agai nst Women (CEDAW) in 2004, and the UN Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) in 2016.    
• The FSM Government presented its combined Initial & First to Third CEDAW Report in 2018 and the 
CRC Report in 2020.   General observations and recommendations have been tabled to the FSM 
Government for consideration in follow up actions by the review panel of experts under CEDAW and CRC.  
• FSM Government participated in the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) and presented its report and progress in the imp lementation of human rights obligations and commitments during the 3
rd Universal 
Periodic Review (UPR) process in January 2021. A list of Recommendation had been tabled by the 
member governments of the HRC on matters pertaining to gender and social inclusi on issues including 
climate change and disaster risk management, food, and water.  
 
Examples of Recommendations include the following:  
• The submission to the UN of the initial report on the implementation of the Convention on the Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities.  
• Withdraw of reservations to the UN CEDAW.  
• Implement a national development plan to provide a strategic and coordinated framework for 
informing climate change mitigation efforts and building the country’s climate resilience.  
• Create a national development plan to mitigate the effects of climate change and increase funding 
and resources for emergency preparedness and response facilities as part of the ongoing 
strengthening of its overall climate resilience and mitigation efforts.  
• Ensure that the Nati onal Climate Change Policy considers efforts to alleviate the disproportionate 
impact of climate change on women and children.  
• Ensure that the National Policy on Climate Change considers the impact of climate change on 
children and women and the role they should have in the actions implemented in their favour.


---
*Page 116*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
• Ensure that women, especially rural women, children, persons with disabilities and indigenous and 
local communities are meaningfully engaged in the development and implementation of climate change and disaster risk reduction frameworks.  
• Allocate sufficient resources to FSM Department of Environment, Climate Change and Emergency Management (DECEM).  
• Consider becoming a member of the International Labour Organization with the view to ratifying its 
core c onventions and bring its labour legislation in line with international standards.  
• Improve national data collection by completing a census by 2022 and ensure that disaggregated data 
supports national programming and decision- making in the field of climate c hange, domestic violence, 
gender -based violence, universal health coverage, universal access to sexual and reproductive 
health and rights, and empowerment of young people.   
Sub-Regional and Regional Agreements  
 SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (S.A.M.O.A.) Pathway (2014).  
 Pacific Youth Development framework (2014 –  2024). Key Outcome 4 is on Climate Change.  
 In June 2020, the FSM Government endorsed the Pacific Principles of Practice of National 
Mechanisms for implementation, Reporting and Follow  up (NMRIF) . 
 Pacific Leaders’ Gender Equality Declaration (2012) . 
 Jined Kiped Declaration by the Micronesian Women’s Conference in Republic of Marshall Islands 
(2017) . 
 Pacific Platform for Action for Gender Equality and Women’s Human Rights (2017 – 2030) adopted 
in Suva, Fiji (2017) during the 13th Triennial Conference of Pacific Women and the 6th Ministers for Women’s 
Meeting . 
 Boe Declaration (2018).  
 Kainaki II Declaration (2019).  
 Framework of Resilient Development in the Pacific (FRDP).    
 Outcomes and Recommendations of the 14th Triennial Conference of Pacific Women and the 7th 
Pacific Ministers for Women Meeting (May 4,  2021) focused on Women’s Economic Empowerment, Gender 
Based Violence and Gender Responsive Climate Justice.      
 
National  policies  and institutional arrangements  
According to the Pacific Women FSM gender situation analysis , the country is in the early stages of 
implementing a legislative and supporting policy framework to promote gender equality and women’s 
human rights, including co mmitments made under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women ( CEDAW) . It has a National Strategic Plan on Gender Development and 
Human Rights in place and a National Gender Policy . In 2019,  FSM states drafted gender -based violence 
action plans under the national Elimination of Violence Against Women and Girls policy (with support from 
the United Nations Population Fund) . The Pohnpei State Family Protection Act was passed in November 
2017  (although has yet to be enacted) , and Kosrae State Family Protection Act was passed in 2014. Chuuk 
and Yap States have yet to pass family protection legislation.2 
 
2 Pacific Women FSM Country Plan Summary; Available at: https://pacificwomen.org/key -pacific -women -resources/fsm -country -
plan- summary/ https://pacificwomen.org/key -pacific -women- resources/fsm -country -plan- summary/


---
*Page 117*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
The FSM Strategic Development Plan (2004– 2023) further highlights seven specific strategic goals for 
addressing gender and vulnerable groups as part of country level development:3 
• Strategic Goal 1:  Enhance and promote the cultural, economic, legal, political and social 
development of women and children throughout their life cycles  
• Strategic Goal 2:  Enhance the leadership c apacity and roles of women  
• Strategic Goal 3:  Mainstream gender issues into decision making, policies and strategic 
development plans  
• Strategic Goal 4:  Maximize women’s contribution to and participation in democratic and 
development processes by creating op portunities for women’s active involvement.  
• Strategic Goal 5:  Strengthen the institutional capacity of the women’s programs in FSM  
• Strategic Goal 6:  Strengthen the institutional capacity, effectiveness and impact of youth 
organizations  
• Strategic Goal 7:  Strengthen youth development through social, economic and political 
participation  
The National Gender Policy, endorsed in 2018, has six strategic goal s, linked with other gender equality 
commitments including the S ustainable Development Programme, CEDAW, Pacific 
Leaders  Gender  Equality Declaration  and the SDGs :  
• Goal 1: Better representation of women in decision- making  
• Goal 2: Elimination of gender -based violence  
• Goal 3: Equitable education outcomes  
• Goal 4: Address barriers facing women in the workforce  
• Goal 5: Women have better health care and improved choices over their fertility  
• Goal 6: FSM and State Governments mainstream gender  
The Policy recognizes climate change and disaster risk reduction (DRR) as priority cross -cutting issues , 
noting that adaptation can avoid exacerbating existing gender  inequalities and vulnerabilities by planning 
for population and cultural impacts. The short -term prioriti es include gender -based violence (with the FSM 
Elimination of Violence against Women policy a key outcome of work to date) , women in decision making, 
women’s economic empowerment, sexual and reproductive health and rights, (girl) child protection and 
gender mainstreaming, with links to other development partner initiatives and programs.  
The principal driving policy framework for the issue of food security and agriculture in FSM, the National 
Agriculture Policy, also highlights a specific goal for improving gender equity outcomes, namely to “Improve 
farm incomes and livelihoods with particular focus on gender and vulnerable groups.”  
Additional policy frameworks, laws and programmes supported include:  
• The FSM Constitution Article IV, section 4 ensures equal protection, which guarantees 
fundamental rights and freedom regardless of gender, sexual orientation, race, ancestry, national 
origin, religion, language, and social status.  
• FSM Environmental Protection Act (2012).  
• Kosrae State passed its Family Protection Act in 2014. Pohnpei State passed its Domestic 
Violence Act in 2017.   
• In 2019, Chuuk State Government raised the Age of Consent from age of 13 to 18 (C.S.L No. 6-
66). 
 
3 FSM Strategic Development Plan (2004– 2023); Available at: https://fsm -data.sprep.org/datase t/fsm -strategic -development -plan-
2004- 2023 .


---
*Page 118*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
• In 2019, Pohnpei State Government raised the Age of Consent from age 16 to 18 (S.L. No. 9L-
105-19). 
• FSM Disability Policy (2009 -2016).  
• FSM Youth Policy (2017- 2023).  
• FSM Nationwide Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change Policy (June 2013). At the state 
level, there are four state action plans (for Chuuk, Kosrae, Pohnpei and Yap States ), for Disaster 
Risk Management and Climate Change. Actions plans and policy are linked to the Sendai Framework and global commitments.  
• FSM Agriculture Policy 2012- 2016 The results of the 2016 Integrated Agriculture Census are 
being used to update the Agri culture Policy.    
• FSM Government endorsed the N ational Ending Violence against Women (EVAW) Policy in 
2018. State and National implementation plans of the EVAW policy (2018) are being developed . 
• The Pohnpei State Law No. 9L- 128-19 (Pohnpei Disability Act):  Enacted in 2019. In Yap, Yap 
State Law No. 9- 63 was passed for the purpose of addressing the special needs and accessibility 
provisions for the Yap State building codes. In Kosrae, State Law No. 8- 24 was amended to 
provide persons with disabilities better  accesses to government facilities and for other purposes.   
 
The FSM Gender Stocktake
4 in 2012 highlighted the following key issues for gender governance and 
mainstreaming gender into policy and legislative frameworks in FSM:  
• Budgets for the national and state programs cover only operational costs, including salary, travel 
and office suppli es, but no funds are allocated for development programs. Most development is 
through funds secured from development partners and the US Federal Funding system.  
• Participation of women at the highest levels of decision making remains very limited in FSM. 
Wom en continue to be absent or grossly under -represented at the legislative and executive levels 
of government.  
• Historically FSM is a matrilineal society where ancestral descent and land is passed down 
through maternal tribal lineage. In the modern age however, this historical lineage cannot be 
generalized. Currently, each family’s land agreements are differing from one family to another5. 
Sub-projects will be required to undertake a gender analysis and E&S screening to ensure these 
issues are embedded in complete risk analysis and community buy -in from both women and men 
is secured through multiple  entryways for stakeholder consultations through the EDA grant 
mechanism.    
• Other barriers to full participation in public decision making and participation at the higher 
government level include the lack of opportunity to undertake leadership training and the lack of 
support for women wanting to move into roles that have traditionally been dominated by men.  
• Lack of awareness  of the issue of gender equality  was highl ighted by FSM departments as a 
major barrier to higher political commitment to gender mainstreaming.  
• Lack of sex disaggregated data to inform policy developments  
The Department of Health and Social Affairs hosts the Gender Development Office ( GDO ) as the f ocal point 
for gender issues in FSM, and the  CEDAW Committee , with the FSM Gender Stocktake6 highlighted critical 
challenges, including:  
• GDO is not strategically located within the central government structure to influence the 
integration of gender across the policy, programming and resource allocation spectra.  
 
4 Stocktake of the gender mainstreaming capacity of Pacific Island governments –  FSM . Available at: 
https://www.spc.int/sites/default/files/wordpresscontent/wp- content/uploads/2017/03/web_2- FSM_gender_stocktake.pdf  
5 Discussions with women’s groups –  see Annex 1  
6 Stocktake of the gender mainstreaming capacity of Pacific Island governments –  FSM .


---
*Page 119*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
• GDO has few resources and no process to facilitate the mainstreaming of gender and women’s 
human rights across the whole of government.  
• GDO lacks expertise and experience in gender and human rights  analysis and integration, 
particularly when it comes to research and statistical support, gender -related planning and 
analysis, sub-grant  management, information management and dissemination and evaluation  
Further it should be noted that in addition to the GDO, FSM National government funds some gender 
positions, with Pohnpei and Yap having state- funded ‘women’s interest officers’ (or equivalent), but gender 
equality work in Chuuk and Kosrae is largely the responsibility of CSOs including the state women’s umbrella organizations.  These CSOs and women’s organizations will be engaged throughout the 
programme implementation and in particular through the sub- grant process, where community engagement 
is embedded in each step of the EDA grant facility (see  Section 11 of the feasibility study).  
Since the publication of the FSM Gender Stocktake, the Department of Health and Social Affairs  and GDO 
have  made significant progress including:  
• Actively engaging in policy, programming and resourcing spectra to inc orporate gender 
equality considerations in national government processes (for example the SDGs and the 
Voluntary National Review (V NR)), 
• Increased budget allocation for gender equality  
• The National E nding Violence Against Women  Policy and State Action Plans (action plans 
not yet endorsed)   
• Mobilized resources to support women’s economic empowerment , sexual reproductive health 
rights  and ending violence against women  
The Pacific Women Country Plan for FSM highlighted some progress in addressing these gaps, but many 
of them still remain significant barriers for FSM mainstreaming gender.
7 
The FSM Women’s Council  comprises office bearers from the four State women’s councils or associations, 
umbrella groups for all the women’s groups in the state: Chuuk Women’s Council (CWC), Kosrae Women’s Association (KWA), Pohnpei Women’s Council (PWC) and Yap Women’s Association (YWA). These 
women’s councils are key players in advocating for gender equality in their own states to support the six 
strategic goals in the National Gender Policy as well as implementing projects and programs identified by 
members. At the 2014 National Women’s Conference in Pohnpei, the women’s councils resolved to form 
an FSM Women’s Council. That body was legally established prior to the 2016 conference in Yap. The 
Women’s Councils completed the process to formally establish the FSM Women’s Council in January 2018 
and is now the coordinating body or national voice for women; and has received funding support from 
National Government through the GDO. The 2020 conference in Kosrae has been postponed and a key 
outcome of that meeting was the endorsement of the FSM Women’s Council Strategic Plan.  
The VNR notes that “it is in the civil society sector where women have an outsized impact on the collective 
consciousness and development of the many islands in FSM. More organized support and public -private 
and private- private partnerships should be sought as a matter of policy”.  
Women’s groups have been consulted in the development of the GAP and will continue to be part of the 
stakeholder engagement process as they are an integral part of communities across FSM.  
 
7 Pacific Women FSM Country Plan Summary .


---
*Page 120*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
The EDA programme will include  dedicated gender capacity support during programme implementation to 
ensure the GAP is carried out as well as ensure women’s groups and government gender officials are fully 
incorporated and engaged throughout the life of the EDA programme.  
Existing Gender Inequality – Statistical Overview  
The poverty profile for FSM highlights that at the national level about one- fifth of the population lives in 
female- headed households (17.8% -20.7% range across the states). These female- headed households are 
also on average larger and have more children ac ross all states except Yap. Further, at the national level 
over half of female- headed households live in poverty compared to 40% of male- headed households ( Table 
1).8 
Table 1: Male vs. Female-Headed Households Summary  2013/2014 HIES  
Household Type  Percent of Population  Poverty Incidence  
Yap Chuuk  Pohnpei  Kosrae  Total  Yap Chuuk  Pohnpei  Kosrae  Total  
Male Headed  79.3 82.2 78.7 81.7 80.6 37.3 43.3 36.7 18.8 38.9 
Female Headed  20.7 17.8 21.3 18.3 19.4 47.3 55.9 48.2 31.3 50.5 
Overall  100 100 100 100 100 39.4 45.5 39.2 21 41.2 
Household Type  Average Household Size  Average No. of Children under 15  
Yap Chuuk  Pohnpei  Kosrae  Total  Yap Chuuk  Pohnpei  Kosrae  Total  
Male Headed  7.4 8.5 7.7 6.7 8.5 2.6 3.5 2.7 2.7 3.1 
Female Headed  6.3 10.3 8.5 8.8 9 2.1 4 2.9 3.3 3.3 
Overall  7.2 9.7 7.9 7.1 8.6 2.5 3.6 2.7 2.8 3.1 
 
In 2013/2014, male- headed households across all states had higher average annual income than female-
headed households. At the national level, female- headed households earned 9% less on average than 
male- headed households, but that differential varied signifi cantly across states with male -headed 
households in Kosrae earning 2% more than female- headed households compared to a 42% differential in 
Chuuk. Breaking this down by income groups there isn’t much of a difference between male-  and female-
headed households earning less than USD  5,000 (37.4% of male households and 36.7% of female 
households), but the distribution of high- income households (> USD  30,000) shows higher percentage of 
male- headed households (10.2% vs. 6.7%) ( Table 2). 9 
Table 2: Average Annual Income Males vs. Females HIES 2013/2014  
State  Average annual income  
Male (USD)  Female (USD)  Difference (USD)  Difference (%)  
Yap 16,103  15,085  1,018  7% 
Chuuk  8,858  6,197  2,661  43% 
Pohnpei  17,033  15,517  1,516  10% 
Kosrae  15,190  14,896  2,94 2% 
FSM  13,311  12,208  1,103  9% 
 Source of income across male and female headed households is consistent for the most part, with the 
major differences being that male- headed households are on average 11% more based on cash income 
 
8 HIES Poverty Profile 2013/14; Available at: https://www.fsmstatistics.fm/wp -
content/uploads/2019/02/2013_FSM_Poverty_Profile.pdf  
9 HIES Main Analysis Report 2013/14; Available at: https://www.fsmstatistics.fm/wp -
content/uploads/2019/02/2013_FSM_Poverty_Profile.pdf


---
*Page 121*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
and female headed households saved 9% more than male headed households.10 While the expenditures 
breakdowns for male-  and female- headed households is pretty similar with food and non- alcoholic 
beverages accounting for 34.4% and 34.5% of monthly expenditures, respectively, there is a substantial 
difference in the level of expenditures with male- headed households spending on average 12% more than 
female- headed households.11 
In the workforce, similar disparities exist. Across the States, 62.7% (Chuuk) to 70.3% (Pohnpei) of the male population 15+ years old were in the w orkforce with 51% of that labor force engaged in formal work and 
48% engaged in home- based work (45% subsistence, 54% market -oriented). For females, only 43.3% 
(Chuuk) to 65.7% (Yap) of the population 15+ years old were in the workforce with 42% of that labor force 
engaged in formal work and 57% engaged in home- based work (58% subsistence, 41% market). Roughly 
a quarter of male and female households were employed in agriculture, but nearly 30% of females were employed in private households compared to just 10% of males. The other major differences are that 14% 
of males were employed in fishing compared to just 2% of females and 15% of males were employed in public administration compared to 9% of females. These differences highlight that income opportunities  for 
females in FSM are limited compared to those for men, and the income activities available to women tend 
to be more home- based work, particularly for subsistence.
12 
The gender differentials in labor force preparticipation are further evident in the FSM Social Security 
Administration statistics . In 2016, women represented 39% of Social Security contributors in FSM, and on 
average women social security contributors had 11% lower annual average gross earnings than their male 
counterparts. While this  ‘gender  earnings gap’  has reduced substantially over the last 20 years (19% since 
1997), it still highlights a significant issue to be addressed for gender equality. At the state level, Chuuk 
social security contributors were 40% female and the earnings gap was about 14%. For Pohnpei, 38% 
women and an 8% gap; for Yap, 43% women and an 11% gap; and for Kosrae 36% women and 16% gap. 
The VNR noted that women are leading transformative change through civil society. In the civil society 
sector, the FSM Social Security data shows that women’s participation is the same as men, and in addition 
they earn substantially more, on average, than men.  
For education, women in FSM have significantly lower educational attainment than men. At the elementary school level 69% of females  over 25 years and over  in FSM have completed at least elementary school 
compared to 75% of males, but this differential is more pronounced  in Yap and Kosrae where 90.2% and 
90.9% of males, respectively have completed elementary school compared t o only 68.5% and 78.8% of 
females, respectively. Overall,  about 40% of males have graduate high school compared to just 31% of 
females, but that differential is also more drastic in Yap and Kosrae where 72.9% and 68.2% of men had graduated high school, res pectively compared to 46.1% and 42.1% of women. The proportion of men with 
bachelor’s degrees (5.3%) is also about double the proportion of women with bachelor’s degrees (2.8%) at the national level ( Table 3).  
Further the 2012 Fertility Monograph for FSM further documents issues for gender inequality in FSM. In 2012, about 6% of women aged 15- 19 years had given birth , a relatively high rate of teenage fertility . 
Overall,  almost 100 births to women younger than 15 years of age were registered during the period 2000-
2010, and another 1,061 births of women aged 15- 17 years. The census data show that only a small 
proportion of teenage women who gave birth att ended school which creates additional hardships and lack 
of income potential in the future for the young women.  
1314 
 
10 HIES Main Analysis Report 2013/14.   
11 Census 2010, Basic Tables; Available at: https://www.fsmstatistics.fm/wp -content/uploads/2019/02/2010- Basic -Tables.xlsx  
12 Census 2010, Basic Tables . 
13 Census 2010, Basic Tables . 
14 Fertility Monograph 2012, Available at: https://www.fsmstatistics.fm/wp -content/uploads/2019/02/2012- Fertility_Monograph.pdf


---
*Page 122*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
In the 2016 Agricultural Census, most of the people aged 15 and over in households with land used for 
agriculture had not graduated from high school – 58% of males and 59% of females. Twenty percent of 
males and 21% of females reported that they had graduated from high school, and 12%  of males and 11% 
of females reported some college education but no degree.15 
The FSM Education indicators Report  for 2018/2019 highlights that in 2019, net enrollment in FSM schools 
is 82% in elementary level, whereas it is only 65% in ECE and 46% Secondary level and while boys’ and girls’ net enrollment is almost equal in elementary level, boys’ NER is higher in EC E and girls’ NER is higher 
in secondary level. In grade 1, gross intake rate is slightly higher for male students compared to female  
students , whereas in grade 8 female gross intake rate is substantially higher than male gross intake rate. 
Possible reasons for this variation by gender could be associated with late entry of male in grade 1, whereas 
higher GIR for females in grade 8 could be associated with repetition in elementary level.  Most primary 
school survival rates throughout FSM are considered low with female students having slightly higher 
survival rates than male students. The data shows roughly ~45% (39% Male/50% Female) survival rate of cohort starting in Grade 1 and reaching Grade 8 and that same cohort starting and Grade 1 and reaching 
Grade 12 is very low at about ~20% (17% Male/25% Female).
16 These education gaps lead to less 
opportunities in the workforce for women as well as limited leadership/politics roles for women. For the 
specific project, it indicates that stakeholder engagement n eeds to be actively aware of and addressing 
these inequities in designing outreach, communications, and other strategies for the project. Further, 
women’s interest groups, community groups, and civil society might require additional support, capacity 
devel opment and coaching and mentoring to be able to fully and actively engage in the envisioned climate 
adaptation sub- projects.  
Table 3: Comparison of Educational Attainment  2010 Census  
Group  Category  Total  Yap Chuuk  Pohnpei  Kosrae  Male  Percent elementary school graduates  75.7 90.2 70.4 74.7 90.9 
Percent high school graduates  40.6 72.9 30.3 37.8 68.2 
Percent bachelor's degree  5.3 7.3 2.5 7.4 9.2 Female  
Percent elementary school graduates  69.6 68.5 65.8 73.1 78.8 
Percent high school graduates  31.4 46.1 25.3 31.6 42.1 
Percent bachelor's degree  2.8 4 1.1 4.4 2.8 Overall  
Percent elementary school graduates  72.6 78.9 68.1 73.9 84.8 
Percent high school graduates  36 58.9 27.8 34.7 55.1 
Percent bachelor's degree  4 5.6 1.8 5.9 6 
 
The EDA programme should recognize the prevalence of discrimination and unequal participation of females 
in technical and vocational education and training, and ensur e women and girls are equitably represented in 
programme activities, and are recognized for their unique perspectives on DRR, food production, and water 
security. Table 6 below provides a more detailed breakdown of some of the key gender perspectives withi n 
the three thematic areas of the EDA programme; DRR, food security and water security.  
Women in Public Life and Decision- Making  
Until recently, women in FSM have been totally absent from the legislative and executive levels of 
government, and continue to be significantly under -represented in civic affairs today  (see Figure 1). In 2020, 
 
15 FSM 2016 Agriculture Census; Available at: http://www.fsmrd.fm/wp -content/uploads/2020/06/200120_FSM_IAC_2016.pdf  
16 FSM Education Indicators 2018/2019; http://national.doe.fm/index.php/ndoe- public/education- statistics/education- indicators/532-
fsm-education- indicators -18-19


---
*Page 123*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
there were three women serving as legislators in the Pohnpei State Legisl ature, and in Chuuk, there were 
two State female senators.  
In the public service, some women have achieved seniority and are able to influence government policies 
and programs. Statistics show that of all the major formal work sectors (national and state government, 
private sector and civil society), it is civil society where women actually earn more on average than men.  
 
Figure 1. Women in Political Leadership Positions in FSM States, 2020 Data (Source: VNR Report, 2020)  
There ar e no legal barriers to women’s representation in government, but there are significant socio- cultural 
restrictions. Traditionally, matrilineal societies enable women to actively participate in decision- making 
processes related to family, community and natural resource matters, but for the speaker of the family is male, usually an uncle or brother. The EDA  programme will ensure the participation of women in the 
decision -making process for the selection of adaption solutions within the three thematic areas of  the EDA 
Facility.  The active participation of women is embedded in the GAP below as well as in the programme’s 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7) . 
At the local level, women are involved in small businesses, cooperatives, within traditional structures a nd 
within faith -based organisations. Such women’s groups are organised and visible at community level. The  
nature and organization of such groups differ  considerably between groups of different types as well as 
from State to State and from community to community. This is because there is considerable complexity across different islands, communities and ethnic groups within FSM.  There is a Women’s Council in each 
of the four States . 
Agricultural Income  and Participation 
The 2016 FSM Agricultural Census provides a more detailed look at jobs and utilization in the agricultural sector  (crop raising, livestock, fisheries, forestry, and hunting)  which helps prov ide additional  context for 
gender disparities.  These considerations will need to be balanced by the sub- grant s, particularly those that 
are focused on food security . 
Just over 90% of households recorded in the Agriculture census had access to land they used for 
agriculture. Across FSM the householder was male in 80% of households. Yap had the highest proportion 
of female householders with access to land for agricultural activities (26%), followed by Pohnpei (21%), 
Chuuk (18%), and Kosrae (17%). In these households, 30% of males and 19% of females 15 years old or


---
*Page 124*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
older reported paid employment in these fields, but this varied significantly by state : 44% of males and 28% 
of females in Yap, 18% of males and 12% of females in Chuuk, 39% of males and 23% of femal es in 
Pohnpei, and 41% of males and 24% of females in Kosrae. The farming activity main operators were mostly 
males (77%) and when the main operator was reported to be female, about 48% were over 55, compared 
to 32% of male main operators.  Where the main operator was female, nearly 60% received no income from 
agriculture, compared to 48% of households where the main operator was male.  It should be noted that 
subsistence farming tends to be a family enterprise with gendered division of labour, so the earning  
statistics should be understood in that context.  In specific agricultural sectors, the breakdowns are as 
follows:  
• Crop Raising  - 37% of the people participated with males making up 64.3% of the crop workers 
and females just 35.7%. However, this was flipped in some states as Yap had an estimated 62.4% of crop workers female and only 37.6% male.  
• Livestock  - Across FSM, 24% of people 15 and over worked on livestock activities . Gender 
distribution for livestock activities also varied across the states with females accounting for 55% of the workers in Yap, 36% in Chuuk, 31% in Pohnpei, and 14% in Kosrae.  
• Fishing/Aquaculture  - 18% of people over 15 participated in fishing activities with males 
dominating that industry with over 84% of the fishers. This varied ac ross states. In Yap, 5.5% of 
fishers were females, 16.5% in Chuuk, 20.2% in Pohnpei and 20.4% in Kosrae. In aquaculture, 
77% of the main operators and 70% of those that usually worked were males.  
• Forestry and Hunting  - Across FSM, 29% of males and 13% of females aged 15 and over were 
reported to be involved in forestry activities. In Yap, 44% of the people reported engaging in hunting activities were female, compared to 21% in Chuuk, 19% in Pohnpei and 24% in Kosrae.  
Women are involved in natural resour ce management, food security, and resilience initiatives  as stated 
above, through this EDA programme, women must be actively  engaged throughout the implementation of 
the programme. The GAP (below) provides specific activities to undertake to ensure active participation by 
both women and men.  
Violence Against Women  
In October 2014, FSM conducted a National Family Health and Safety Study17 which highlighted the 
major issue of violence against women in FSM including the following significant findings:  
• Almost o ne in three ever -partnered women in the FSM (32.8%) have experienced physical and/or 
sexual violence by a partner at least once in their life and slightly over 18% of ever -partnered 
women have experienced sexual violence by a partner in their lifetime.  
• Nearly one in four ever -partnered women (24.1%) experienced physical and/or sexual violence by 
a partner in the 12 months preceding the interview.  
• Two in five women who ever experienced partner violence (41%) were injured at least once in their lifetime due t o the violence.  
• More than one in three ever -abused women (35%) never told anyone about the violence. Those 
who did disclose it mostly confided in family members and friends. 89% of ever -abused women 
never went to formal services or authorities, such as health centers or police, for support. The most common reason for not seeking support from formal services or authorities was that 
respondents thought the violence was normal or not serious.  
• Almost 10% of all interviewed women experienced physical violence by a non- partner and the 
most common perpetrators were parents and other relatives.  
 
17 FSM National Health and Safety Report; Available at: https://pacific.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub- pdf/FSMFHSSReportweb.pdf


---
*Page 125*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
• Children of women who experienced partner violence were almost three times more likely to have 
stopped or dropped out of school than children of women who never ex perienced partner 
violence  
Some key recommendations for FSM included that national and state level actions are implement ed to: 
• Promote a multi -sectoral coordination between the health system and other public agencies (e.g., 
legislature, judiciary, public s afety, social services) and private organizations (e.g., women’s 
groups, NGOs, private health centers) to address VAW in a comprehensive manner  
• Create shelters and other social services institutions with health, counseling, and security staff 
adequately tr ained to serve abused women and children. Locate those shelters close by a 
respected local leader to provide further security to abused women and children from the abusers.  
• Develop workshops for parents about parent -children relationships, gender roles, and gender 
equality  
• Promote the passing of the Family Protection Act in Pohnpei, Chuuk, and Yap.  
• Give funding priority to existing government programs aimed at addressing violence against 
women, such as the Domestic Violence Unit and the training program for  police officers on 
domestic violence.


---
*Page 126*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Comparison to the Region 
Compared to other nations in the Pacific, FSM is lagging in many gender indicators (as collected by the 
SPC National Minimum Development Indicator Initiative18), particularly representation of women in 
parliament, female participation in the labor force, and proportion of women employed in a non- agriculture 
sector ( Table 4).19 
Table 4: Overview Comparison of Gender Indicators  for Pacific Island Countries  
Indicator  Cooks  FSM  Fiji Kiribati  RMI Nauru  Niue  Palau  PNG  Samoa  Solomons  Tokelau  Tonga  Tuvalu  Vanuatu  
Women 
Representation 
in Parliament  17 0 16 7 9.1 5.3 10 0 2.8 10 2 15 3.6 7 0 
HD-GEN -1.1 
MDG.3.3  2014  2016  2016  2016  2016  2016  2016  2016  2014  2016  2016  2011  2016  2016  2016  
Govt Budget 
Allocated to 
Women’s 
Department (% 
Recurrent)  0.3 0 0.1 0.1 0 0.1 0.1 0 
  2 0.7 
  0.1 0.7 0.7 
HD-GEN -1.4  2011 -
12 2004  2014  2014  2015  2010 -
11 2011 -
12 2014  2013 -
14 2014  2014 -
15 2014  2010  
Tertiary 
Education 
Completion Rate  13.1 9.1 
  4 2.3 3 3.3 16.2 
  13.9 6 19.8 17.5 13.7 4.7 
HD-GEN -1.7  2016  2013  2015  1999  2013  2001  2015  2013  2015  2016  2016  2016  2013  
Female Labor 
Participation 
Rate  58.4 36.2 37.4 55.8 35.4 52.7 63 74.3 60.5 43.5 71 63.2 41.9 35.4 85.7 
HD-GEN -1.8  2016  2013  2017  2015  1999  2013  2016  2015  2011  2013  2013  2016  2016  2016  2016  
Female -Male 
Labor 
Participation 
Ratio  0.8 0.6 0.5 0.8 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 0.6 0.9 0.8 0.6 0.5 1 
HD-GEN -1.9  2016  2013  2017  2015  1999  2013  2016  2015  2011  2013  2013  2016  2016  2016  2016  
Female -Male 
Employment 
Ratio  0.8 0.5 
  0.7 
  0.6 0.8 0.8 1 0.6 0.8 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.6 
HD-GEN -1.10  2016  2013  2015  2013  2016  2015  2011  2013  2013  2016  2016  2016  2016  
Women 
Employed in a 
Non-Ag Sector  48.8 33.1 34 44.7 36.7 37.4 49.3 48.7 32.1 38.5 65.5 44.5 46.3 36.4 41.3 
HD-GEN -1.11 
MDG.3.2  2016  2013  2007  2015  2011  2013  2016  2015  2000  2013  2015  2016  2016  2016  2009  
Prevalence of 
Violence Against 
Women  33 33 64 68 51 
    25 65 65 64 
  40 45 60 
HD-GEN -1.12  2014  2014  2013  2010  2014  2014  2010  2006  2009  2012  2007  2011  
Attitudes VAW  
      76 56.5 
        55.7 65.8 
  26.4 71 59.8 
HD-GEN -1.13  2010  2007  2009  2015  2012  2007  2013  
 
Gender Mainstreaming Considerations for Sub- grant  Activities  
There are three principle sectors for the sub -grant s: disaster response/recovery, food security, water 
security.  Each underlying sub- grant  will have its own anticipated problem tree, but an overarching one 
specific to gender for the three principal  sectors is included below ( Figure  2).  
 
18 SPC NMDI Initiative; Available at: http://www.spc.int/nmdi/gender  
19 Not all of the indicators align with other reported numbers utilized in the baseline for FSM, but the standardized numbers ac ross 
countries provides a good framework for regional comparison


---
*Page 127*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Overarching Problem Tree


---
*Page 128*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
While each of the sub -grant s will need to be tailored to the specific contexts in the local authorities  (Las) , 
the Pacific Climate Change and Gender Toolkit20 highlights the following key considerations for gender in 
climate change, DRR , food security , and water security  in Pacific island states  (Table 5). 
Table 5: Key Gender Considerations for DRR, Food Security, and Water Security sub-grant s 
Sub-grant  
Sector  Context Description21,22,23 Key Gender Considerations24 
Disaster 
Risk and 
Recovery  In FSM, c limate change is likely to lead to an 
increase in the intensity of disasters such as 
cyclones, floods, droughts and severe storms.  
Both men and women play a critical role in the 
preparation and recovery process but women may 
not have the same capacity to influence decision-
making. Men, particularly those with greater levels 
of power and authority, are usually the ones 
informed and consulted by response agencies, 
including governments, and they directly participate 
in the decision -making and management 
processes for disaster  risk management. This 
could mean that women’s needs and priorities are 
not properly addressed in early warning systems, 
preparedness, and during the recovery process.  
Further, women and girls also experience a 
number of secondary impacts, including violen ce 
and trauma, loss or reduction in economic 
opportunities, and an increased workload. 
However, viewing women as victims exacerbates 
their vulnerability; they have unique knowledge and 
practical skills that are critical for climate change 
and disaster adaptation. Women and girls 
represent half the population and their equal 
participation and skills will lead to a more effective 
overall response to climate change  
 • Disasters happen when a hazard -- such as flood, cyclone or sea 
level rise –  occurs in a place where people are vulnerable  
• Men and women have different vulnerabilities and exposure to 
disasters, due to traditional roles and the specific situation or 
context, which we must analyze  case by case  
• Men and women also have a range of different capacities f or 
anticipating and reducing the likelihood of disasters occurring  
• Women’s vulnerability is partly due to lack of mobility, as they are 
often expected to stay close to home to undertake household work 
and attend to family members  
• Men tend to have greater a ccess to resources, such as income and 
vehicles, and due to social roles generally have more mobility which 
makes them less vulnerable to disasters  
• To effectively reduce disaster risk programmes and sub -grant s must 
identify and acknowledge the various capacities and skills that both 
women and men can contribute to risk reduction, such as traditional 
knowledge and practices  
• Initiatives for DRR must also build the capacities of both men and 
women equitably, by training both in the use of new technologies, 
such as early warning systems  
• To be successful, investments in DRR, such as local infrastructure 
sub-grant s or community activities and plans, must consult both 
men and women extensively, to learn about their ideas and 
preferences  
• Leadership by both men and women at the community and national 
level is essential for effective DRR  
Food 
Security  Climate change is expected to have a drastic 
impact on food security and agriculture in FSM 
including by decreasing the availability of local  food 
through a reduction in agricultural yields, reducing availability of arable land and fresh water, creating 
food shortages due to extreme events, and 
straining existing systems due to population 
displacement. In FSM, women play a critical role in 
food production both through subsistence farming 
to feed their families as well as growing cash crops 
for income. Despite this, women often face barriers 
to accessing agricultural land, training, credit and 
services. The agricultural production that women 
and girls perform also tends to be considered part • Women and men are both involved in food security, but have 
different roles and responsibilities, and therefore also different 
needs and priorities for managing climate and disaster risks.  
• Women’s contribution to subsistence food production and income 
generation is critical for food security, and is as important as men’s 
contribution.  
• Women and men have different and complementary skills and 
knowledge about food production and food security that can be 
used to adapt to climate change.  
• Women are often responsible for food preparation and have 
traditional knowledge that can contribute to identifying successful adaptation strategies.  
• Gender inequality – reflected in participation in decision making, 
control over financial resources, land ownersh ip, distribution of tasks 
 
20 UN Women Pacific Gender and Climate Change Toolkit; Available at: https://www.unwomen.org/ -
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2015/toolkit%20booklet%20pages.pdf?la=en&vs=4359  
21 UN Women Pacific Gender and Climate Change Toolkit . 
22 UN Women GENDER EQUALITY, CLIMATE CHANGE AND DISASTER RISK REDUCTION; Available at: 
https://www2.unwomen.org/ -
/media/field%20office%20eseasia/docs/publications/2016/02/ireach_brief_7jan16_email.pdf?la=en&vs=3250  
23 UN Women CLIMATE CHANGE, GENDER AND FOOD SECURITY IN THE PACIFIC; Available at: 
https://www.uncclearn.org/sites/default/files/inventory/unwomen700.pdf  
24 UN Women Pacific Gender and Climate Change Toolkit .


---
*Page 129*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
of “women’s household responsibilities”. Alongside 
these challenges, climate change will make it more 
difficult to make a living from agriculture and 
women may also struggle more than men to find 
alternative l ivelihoods, enter the formal 
employment sector, or migrate due to cultural 
barriers and lack of opportunities and education. 
Further, there is evidence of increased violence 
against women during disaster recovery such as 
flooding from climate change and ex treme events.  within the household, and access to technology and information – 
poses a critical obstacle to food security and climate change 
adaptation.  
• Women are the traditional landowners and are responsible for 
agriculture, however men make decisions about land use  
• Programs that are aimed at strengthening food security and building 
resilience to climate change must allocate resources that are 
equitably accessible for women and men, and should be customized 
to address their respective needs.  
 
Water 
Security  Water availability, access, and security in FSM is 
expected to be impacted by changing climate 
particularly with alterations to rainfall patterns and 
salinization of groundwater from storm surge and 
sea level rise. The causes of water scarcity and 
reduced water quality are not solely climate-related 
and also include unsustainable use of water, lack 
of maintenance of equipment, and pollution of 
underground water because of activities like 
livestock production and poor sanitation and waste 
management. There is often a clear division of 
labour between men and women in water 
resources management. These different roles and 
responsibilities vary, but in general women are 
tasked with water collection and preparation for 
both household and cooking use as well as for 
agricultural activities. Understanding the needs and 
responsibilities of men and women within their 
specific context is very important in identifying and 
addressing climate change impacts on all 
community members. Women have cri tical skills 
and knowledge, which, if used effectively, can 
contribute to the development of more effective 
water management plans, policies and 
programmes. Their contributions to developing 
effective solutions can help governments and other 
stakeholders i mprove the social benefits and 
economic returns from their investments.  • Women and men are both involved in managing and using water 
resources, but they may have different needs and priorities for 
managing and using these resources. For example, men are mor e 
likely to use and manage water for agriculture and livestock 
production, while women are often responsible for household water 
usage and its management.  
• Water -borne diseases affect everyone, but when a community has 
an outbreak of diseases, women are usually tasked as caretakers. 
Therefore, it is vital that women have easy access to information 
about the timing of water shortages and supply disruptions, and 
forecasts of drought. To effectively reduce vulnerability to climate 
change through the improved management of water resources in 
Pacific island countries programmes should be designed and 
implemented to meet the needs of all members of the community, 
including women, men, and people living with disabilities.  
• Sanitation programmes tend to target women b ecause of their roles 
in care and household water management. It is important that men 
are also engaged, so that they understand and actively contribute to 
ensuring household sanitation practices and appropriate 
management  
• Water management policies  plans and actions should consider how 
the proposed interventions provide benefits to different members of 
society, and the ways in which the different members can contribute 
to reducing vulnerability.  
• Information, technology, training and investment in water resources 
management must be equally accessible for women and men, and 
customized  to address their respective needs and abilities.  
• Gender inequality is likely to be reflected in the distribution of tasks 
within the household; in participation in decision- makin g; in control 
over financial resources; in land and resource ownership; and in 
access to technology, training, knowledge, and information. All of 
these factors are important for water resources management, and 
should be taken into account when designing po licies, plans and 
programmes.  
Recommendations  
Given the above context for gender,  disaster risk and recovery,  food security  water security,  and climate 
change in FSM, the following recommendations are provided to help ensure effective gender  responsive 
outcomes for the sub- grant s envisioned in this sub-grant : 
1. Gender Expertise for Screening and Review of Sub -Grants: Given the decentralized nat ure of 
the sub-grant  and limited existing capacity at the LA level, the sub- grant  needs to intentionally 
ensure that strong gender expertise is included as part of th e overall programme. This includes  
having staff within the EDA Coordinati on Unit (ECU) who  have gender expertise –  the ECU will 
be charged with screening Expressions of Inter est (EOI) as well as reviewing sub- projects to


---
*Page 130*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
ensure gender has been adequately incorporated into sub- grant design. In addition, the Grants 
Technical Evaluation sub-committee should include technical expertise on gender mainstreaming 
as the body for technical reviews and recommendations. Gender -awareness and particularly an 
eye for identifying key gender challenges and opportunities will be critical to build into sub-grant  
governance and review structures.  Finally, it will also be critical to integrate gender expertise in 
the roster of technical contractors . 
2. Integration of Gender -Responsive Activities into Sub -Grant Design : The EDA Facility will 
need to deliberately integrate modules for gender -responsive sub-grant  design, localized 
strategies for inclusive priority setting, implementation modalities, gender mainstreaming, sub-
grant  gender selection criteria, and sub- grant  implementation into inception design discussions, 
trainings and workshops for local officials.   
3. Municipal -level Baseline Data: Baseline data disaggregated by gender at the municipality level, 
particularly for focused indicators related to food/water security and DRR is limited at the 
moment, so the EDA Facility  has a critical role to play in collecting this information through its 
stakeholder engagement and collaboration with LAs when developing  sub-grant s. Establishing 
more effective baselines for gender inequality will help to better t arget interventions going forward 
and support the sustainability of gender -balanced results.  
4. Women can provide critical inputs to effectively tailoring of sub-grant  interventions for example 
climate resilient techniques and crop varieties to local communit y contexts, so it is critical for the 
sub-grant s to actively promote and facilitate the integration of women’s knowledge skills 
through direct consultation and forums  to ensure their knowledge can be successfully 
integrated.  
5. Inclusion of Women’s Organizations in Sub -grant Design and Implementation: There is a 
critical need to engage both formal and informal women’s organizations to build awareness and 
create buy -in for  addressing the issue of climate change across LAs . These organizations will be 
critical partners in designing, implementing and sharing the successes and lessons learned of sub-grants.  
6. Ensure Women Access Information: The ability to access information and the ways in which 
information is accessed are likely to be different for women (i.e. access to mobile communication , 
community gatherings ), so in designing dissemination strategies for sub- grant s information, the 
sub-grant  will need to ensure that women have an equal pathway to utilizing the available 
information.  
7. Target Barriers Preventing Women from Participation: W omen are likely to have additional 
barriers to capitalizing on new markets and opportunities for diversified and improved livelihoods 
(i.e. transportation, social barriers, etc.) . During the design of the sub- grant s, attention will need to 
be paid to ensure that sub -grants are designed to address these barriers as they relate to specific 
interventions.  
8. Full Participation of Women in Decision M aking: Given the existing issues  across FSM with  
representation in decision- making both at the government and household/community level, the 
EDA programme will need to proactively work to ensure the full participation of women in 
decision -making, particularly with regards to sub- project /intervention selection and design at the 
LA level.


---
*Page 131*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender Action Plan  
Implementing Roles and Responsibilities for Gender Mainstreaming 
The various entities involved in the EDA Facility  are all responsible for ensuring gender  mainstreaming 
and the effective execution of the gender action plan, but each have unique and complementary roles and 
responsibilities as summarized below:  
• EDA Coordination Unit –  SPC through the setting up of an ECU  is responsible for overall 
compliance with the GCF gender policy and the monitoring/reporting to GCF. SPC also supports 
the creation of the national decision- making body and the Grants  Technical  Evaluation sub-
committee , and will work to ensure that those bodies have gender -balanced representation as 
well as effective operating procedures that support the mainstreaming of gender considerations 
into decision- making and review processes, particularly for specific gender criteria used in the 
review of sub- grants. The ECU will also issue tenders for both the Grants Technical Evaluation 
sub-committee and the Facilitating Agents  and will ensure that both have appropriate gender 
expertise included. The ECU also supervises the selection and implementation of priori ty sub-
grant s and will provide assistance to ensure the sub -grant s are successfully aligning with the 
gender action plan and the GCF gender policy.  
• FSM Department of Finance and Administration (NDA) – The NDA works alongside SPC to 
establish the EDA Facility’s  governing bodies and will also assist in the supervision of sub -grant  
design and implementation. Both of these roles will require close attention to gender considerations. The NDA also plays a critical role in informing LAs of trainings and workshops 
and needs to ensure that this communication is effective at bringing the right people to the table.  
• EDA Programme Board (EPB)  – This body is responsible for the final stage review and approval 
of preselected sub- grant  proposals submitted by LAs , and will therefore act as a backstop for the 
integration of gender into sub- grant s. Onboarding and processes activities will include sp ecific 
provisions to raise awareness on the strategies to prevent sexual harassment and gender -based 
violence, and detailing grievance redress mechanism procedures to be considered in the 
evaluation and implementation of sub- grants  
• SPC Procurement Committe e (PC)  – The PC is responsible for carrying out evaluations of 
proposals, ensuring that SPC’s procurement policy is duly followed (especially the obligations to act ethically and with due diligence), ensuring that a consistent and equitable method has been 
used for evaluation and making recommendations if necessary.  This will include o rganizational 
audits of LAs, including gender data and policies and the capacity to integrate gender into sub-
grant design.  
• Local Authorities  – LAs will c oordinate with t he ECU and receive support from Facilitating 
Agents to develop and implement priority sub- grant s. This will necessarily include identifying and 
sharing relevant organizations/people, data and policies for gender -responsive sub-grant  design. 
Additionally, t hey will be key focal points for the collection of gender -disaggregated data as a 
result of sub- grant  interventions.  
• Facilitating Agents  – In their work to provide support for sub- grant  development and design, 
Facilitating Agents will be provided training related to gender mainstreaming and provided with 
specific requirements for gender -responsive design for sub- grant s. Additionally, FAs will be the 
recipients of specific training modules which will include raising awareness on violence against women, strat egies to prevent sexual harassment, equal opportunity polities and detailing 
grievance mechanisms procedures and processes to ensure women’s safety and access to GRM 
is effectively considered and implemented in the design and implementation of the sub- grants.


---
*Page 132*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
The Facilitating Agents  will be providing technical assistance for the design and implementation 
of the sub- grant s, including the specific gender mainstreaming actions as directed by the ECU . 
Lastly, Facilitating Agents, as part of their quarterly site visits to sub -grant project sites, will have 
the responsibility to record any grievances to be raised by women beneficiaries, including relating 
to GBV. Grievances will then be passed on to the ECU .


---
*Page 133*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender Action Plan  
The Gender Action Plan for the ov erall EDA sub -grant  is detailed in Table 6 below. Individual sub -grant s may require specific gender action plans 
as well.  
Table 6: Gender Action Plan  
Gender Action (related 
sub-grant  log-frame 
activities)  Gender -Responsive 
Indicators  Baseline  Targets  Expected Results  Timeline  Responsible Parties  and 
Means of Verification  
(MoV)  Allocated Budget  
(UDS)  
Impact Statement:  Improved resilience FSM communities to climate change by providing local authorities with access to climate finance for prior ity adaptation sub-grant s tailored to the unique 
needs and priorities of women and men in the communities.  
Component 1 – Local au thorities25 empowered to deliver climate change adaptation services to their populations  
Outcome  1.1: Empowerment of local authorities and identification of key gaps and opportunities for gender mainstreaming  to support improved gender equality in sub-grant  design and 
implementation  
Activity 1. 1.1.  Gender 
Responsive design 
incorporated into sub -
grant development training, localized 
strategies for gender mainstreaming, gender  
criteria, and 
implementation  are 
developed  Number of men and 
women attending 
workshops and 
participating in 
workshops, training 
and mentoring 
activities in each 
participating State and 
municipality  
 Number of 
modules/trainings 
specifically for gender considerations  
 
. N/A At least 1 representative 
from each participating 
municipality/stakeholder is 
trained on gender -
responsive sub-grant  
design/implementation 
and the sub -grant  specific 
gender criteria  
 50% of workshop/training 
participants are women  
 
At least 1 module for gender -responsive sub-
grant  design and localized 
strategies for gender mainstreaming, gender  
criteria, and 
imple mentation 
incorporated into sub -
grant development training.  
 Municipalities and 
stakeholders are trained on gender -responsive 
sub-grant  design and 
equipped to 
design/support EDA 
sub-grant s that promote 
gender equality  Year 1  for the 
specific grant training and 
ongoing for the 
application of 
training material 
and gender 
mainstreaming  ECU  
Gender Specialist  
 
MoV: 
Training attendance  
Pre-post tests for training  
Sub-project M&E  reports   12,000 
(design of gender 
module)  
 
25 Local authorities broadly are an official organization responsible for governing an area of the country. For the purposes of this programme, local authorities encompass both 
munici pal and State- level agencies across FSM.


---
*Page 134*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1. 1.2. Resilience 
training, includes training 
on gender -
mainstreaming for 
climate resilience, for local authorities’ staff 
and elected and 
appointed officials  Number of men and 
women trained on 
climate resilience 
planning in each 
municipality  
 
Number of workshop 
participants with 
increased knowledge 
of gender 
mainstreaming for 
climate resiliency  
 
Number of women 
hired as Facilitating 
Agents  N/A 50% of workshop/training 
participants are women  
 
 
At least 80% of workshop 
participants demonstrate 
understanding of gender 
mainstreaming for climate 
resilience post -training 
 
 
 
 
At least 25% of the 
Facilitating Agents corps 
will be comprised of 
women / members of 
women’s groups  Local authorities and 
officia ls have developed 
a greater understanding 
of gender 
mainstreaming for climate resilience and 
have increased capacity 
to integrate gender 
considerations into their local resilience planning 
and sub-grant  
development  
 
The training corps 
comprises women 
agent s to increase 
representation and 
capacity i n local 
resilience planning  
 Year 1  
Year 2  ECU  
Facilitating  Agents  
Gender Specialist  
 
MoV:  
Training materials, 
Training attendance  
Training reports  6,000 
(Integration into 
training materials ) 
Activity 1.1.3 Develop 
train-the-trainer’s module 
for gender -
mainstreaming support 
to be provided by FAs  Number of men and 
women trained on 
climate resilience 
planning in each 
municipality  
 
Number of workshop 
participants with 
increased knowledge 
of gender 
mainstreaming for 
climate resiliency  
 NA 50% of workshop/training 
participants are women  
 
 
At least 80% of workshop 
participants demonstrate 
understanding of gender 
mainstreaming for climate 
resilience post -training FAs have developed a 
strong understanding of 
the gender-
mainstreaming needs of 
local authorities and 
have the capacity to 
deliver basic gender 
support during sub-
grant development  Year 1  
Year 2  ECU  
Facilitating Agents  
Gender Specialist  
 
MoV:  
Training materials, 
Training attendance  
Training reports  6,000  
(Integration into 
training materials)  
Activity 1.1.4 Integration 
of gender considerations 
into support LAs prioritize adaptation 
actions for Grant Facility 
and the development of 
sharing mechanisms and Number of men an d 
women participating in 
knowledge sharing mechanisms (e.g. 
workshops, meetings, 
information exchanges) 
per each municipality  
 N/A At least 50% of formal 
workshops participants 
are female  
 
 
 
 
 Community of practice 
and other dissemination/sharing mechanisms 
incorporate gender 
mainstreaming and 
provide opportunities for 
effective knowledge Year 3 -6 ECU  
 
MoV:  
Workshop attendance  
Workshop reports  
Annual progress reports  
 
 6,000  
(ensure gender 
integrated into KM)


---
*Page 135*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
a community of learning 
and practice  Inclusion of gender 
equality reflections and 
learnings into forums 
and workshops  
 Report on 
recommendations for  
integration in sub-grants 
design  capture and sharing 
with regards to gender 
equality.  
 
LAs officials 
demonstrate a clear 
understanding of 
gender -sensitive 
adaptation planning  Report on 
recommendations for sub-
grants  
Survey of workshop 
participants  
Activity 1.2.1a Capacity 
support to local authorities to strengthen ability of staff to integrate 
gender considerations 
into project design and 
gender -responsive 
project design in local authorities based on 
audits  Policies, procedures, 
and new capacity established to help  
mainstream gender 
considerations into 
local sub-grant design  N/A All grant proponents are 
equipped with the 
necessary supporting capacity and procedures 
to support gender 
responsive outcomes in 
individual sub -grants  As a result of the audits, 
appropriate activities to 
support gender mainstreaming and 
gender -responsive sub-
grant design targeted 
and tailored for local 
authorities.  Ongoing  ECU  
Facilitating Agents  
Gender Specialist  
  
MoV:  
Annual progress reports  
Audit recommendations  6,000 
(Targeted gender 
support for sub-
grant design)  
Activity 1.2.1b Ensure 
inclusive stakeholder 
consultations for 
identifying adaptation 
priorities  Number of men and 
women from local 
communities engaged 
in identifying and 
selecting adaptation 
priorities for their 
commu nity  
 
Number of women from 
local communities engaged in identifying 
and selecting 
adaptation priorities for 
their community  N/A 100% of consultations 
successfully support 
inclusive decision making  
 
 
 
 
 
50% of participants in 
stakeholder consultations 
will be women, including 
25% from most vulnerable 
groups (such as women-
headed households)  Stakeholder 
consultations for 
identifying and 
prioritizing adaptation 
priorities/solutions 
include representative 
participation from the 
community incl uding 
women and other vulnerable groups  
 
Stakeholder consultations reports 
and surveys 
demonstrate all 
stakeholders have a 
clear understanding of 
gender -sensitive 
adaptation design  Ongoing  ECU  
Facilitating Agents  
Gender Specialist  
 
MoV:  
Stakeholder consultation 
reports  
Stakeholders surveys  
 
(To be assessed against GCF Gender safeguards 
by the ECU’s Gender 
Specialist and the 
National Gender Expert)  NA 
 
Activity 1.3.1 The 
programme web portal 
and database include Inclusion of sex -
disaggregated data 
collected at the N/A Sex-disaggregated data is 
compiled on the web 
portal  The data informs the 
design of future 
adaptation interventions Ongoing  ECU  
 N/A


---
*Page 136*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
sex-disaggregated data 
at the municipal and sub-
project level on the three 
thematic areas and on 
key socioeconomic indicators to inform the 
design of future 
adaptation interventions.  municipal and sub -
project levels in the web portal  to promote gender 
inclusion by providing sex-disaggregated data 
in the food security, 
water security and DRR thematic areas  MoV: Web portal and 
database  
Activity 1.3.2 Learning 
exchanges and site visits 
promote gender -
sensitive cross-learning 
between climate change 
practitioners, local 
officials and private 
sector actors  Number of women -
owned businesses invite d to participate in 
the learning exchanges  N/A At least 25% of private 
sector participants to the learning exchanges will be 
women / women-owned businesses  Women and women -
owned entities are 
selected and 
represented in the learning exchanges to 
promote gender -
sensitive adaptation 
planning  Year 3  
Year 5  ECU  
NDA  
GCF Focal Points  
 
MoV:  
Attendance lists  
Learning exchanges / 
workshop reports  N/A 
Activity 1.3.3 Climate 
change adaptation local 
authorities conference 
promotes  the inclusion of 
women and women-
owned businesses as 
key agents for adaptation 
planning  Number of women -
owned businesses 
invited to participate in 
the learning exchanges  N/A At least 25% of private 
sector participants to the 
learning exchanges will be 
wom en / women-owned 
businesses  Women and women -
owned entities are 
selected and 
represented in the learning exchanges to 
promote gender -
sensitive adaptation 
planning  Year 3  
Year 5  ECU  
NDA  
GCF Focal Points  
 
MoV:  
Attendance lists  
Learning exchanges / 
workshop reports  N/A 
Component 2 – Priority project implementation of EDA Facility for strengthening local community resilience  
Outcome 2.1:  Establish a gender -responsive sub -grant governance framework that promotes gender equality throughout sub -grant activities  
Activity 2.1.1 
Establishment of 
inclusive and 
representative EDA Programme Board (EPB) and Grants Technical 
Evaluation sub-
committe e Number of men and 
women serving in the 
EDA Programme 
Board  
 Existence of gender 
provisions within 
bylaws/goals of the EDA Board and the Grants Technical 
Evaluation sub-
committee  
  
 N/A At least 50% 
representation, and no less than 30%, from 
women across the 
different stakeholders  
 
Bylaws or other operating 
frameworks includes 
provisions for awareness and review of gender 
considerations in final sub-
grant decisions.  EPB and APhave been 
established with equal representation of 
women and men, and an effectiv e operating 
framework for 
assessing gender 
equality and gender mainstreaming in the EDA sub -grants   Q1, Year 1  ECU  
NDA  
EPB  
MoV:  
Roster for EPB and 
Technical Evaluation 
Committee  NA


---
*Page 137*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 2.1.2. 
Refinement of gender 
review criteria for sub-
grant selection  Sub-grant review 
criteria include specific 
gender considerations  Initial 
baseline indicators 
provided 
below  Sub-grant review criteria 
for gender are refined and 
approved by ECU, EPB 
and the Grants Technical 
Evaluation sub-committee and included into training  Review criteria for sub -
grant selection 
effectively support 
gender -mainstreaming 
into specific EDA sub-
grants in the local 
authorities  Year 1, Q1  ECU  
EPB,  
Grants Technical 
Evaluation sub-
Committee  
 
MoV:  
Review of gender criteria 
for sub -project selection  6,000  
Output 2.2: Gender -responsive sub -grant award selection  
Activity 2.2.1 Inclusive 
sub-grant design process  Number of men and 
women from local 
communities engaged 
in supporting the 
design of the sub-grant  N/A 100% of sub -grants 
include stakeholder 
consultation process with 
active participation of 
women and other vulnerable groups  
 
50% of participants in the 
sub-grant design process 
are women, including 25% from most vulnerable 
groups  Stakeholder 
consultations for design 
of sub -projects include 
representative 
participation from the community including women and other 
vulnerable groups  Ongoing  ECU  
Facilitating Agents  
Grants Technical Evaluation sub-
Committee  
  
MoV:  
Final sub -grant 
process/guidelines  
published  
Stakeholder consultations 
reports and attendance 
lists N/A 
 
Activity 2.2.2 EOI of sub -
grants  reviewed and 
directed technical assistance provided for sub-grants, to ensure 
appropriate gender 
mainstreaming as 
needed  Sub-grant review 
criteria include specific gender considerations  N/A All sub -grants are 
reviewed for gender considerations   Based on the review of 
individual sub -grants, 
appropriate support and 
technical assistance allocated to local 
authorities to improve 
the design of sub-grants 
and support gender 
equality outcomes  Ongoing  ECU  
EPB Grants Technical 
Evaluation sub-committee  
 
MoV:  
Sub-grant review 
documents; gender 
experts work plans  See 2.2.5 below 
for budget  
Activity 2.2.3 
Organizational audits of 
local authorities including 
gender data and policies 
and the capacity to 
integrate gender into 
sub-grant design  Number of audits of 
local au thorities’ 
capacity for gender 
responsive sub-grant 
design conducted   
 
Collection of gender -
disaggregated data for N/A 100% of audits of local 
authorities include gender 
data and policies and the 
capacity to integrate 
gender into sub-grant 
design  
 
 Local baselines for 
gender mainstreaming, 
and particularly 
capacity/frameworks for 
supporting gender -
mainstr eaming, are 
established for Year 1, Year 2  ECU,  
SPC Procurement Committee  
 
MoV:  
Audit reports  
Data collection reports  6,000 
(ensure gender 
aspects integrated 
into audit process)


---
*Page 138*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
audit indicators and 
municipal -level data 
(e.g. number of men 
and women actively 
involved governance processes , number of 
food insecure 
hous eholds, number of 
water safe households, 
number of assets at 
high risk of climate 
impacts number of 
women- owned 
businesses, 
cooperatives and 
women’s groups etc.) N/A (lack of availability of 
municipal -level data to 
inform the design of 
adaptation measures)  participating local 
authorities.  
 A database on 
municipal -level data 
and information 
disaggregated by 
gender is established  
Activity 2.2. 5 
Technical assistance 
support to local 
authorities to strengthen 
gender in sub- grant    Sub-grant review 
criteria include specific 
gender considerations  N/A All sub -grants are 
reviewed for gender considerations   Based on the review of 
individual sub -grants, 
appropriate support and 
technical assistance 
allocated to local authorities to improve 
the design of sub-grants 
and support gender 
equality outcomes  Ongoi ng ECU  
EPB 
Grants Technical 
Evaluation sub-committee  
 
MoV:  
Sub-grant review 
documents; gender 
experts work plans  18,000 
(set aside for 
targeted technical 
assistance as 
needed)  
Activity 2.2. 6 
Screening of sub-grant 
proposals for effective 
gender considerations 
and design  Number of funded sub -
grants with effective 
gender considerations 
and design  0 All sub -grants have 
effectively integrated 
gender into their sub-grant 
design (30-40)  The portfolio EDA sub -
grants are effectively 
supporting gender 
mainstreaming across 
FSM  Ongoing  ECU  
EPB 
Grants Technical 
Evaluation sub-committee  
 
MoV:  
Sub-grant portfolio 
reviews  NA 
Activity 2.2. 7 Portfolio of 
gender -responsive sub-
grants funded by 
granting mechanism  Number of funded sub -
grants with effective 
gender co nsiderations 
and design  
 
Number of sub-grants 
awarded to women-
owned businesses, 0 All sub -grants have 
effectively integrated 
gender into their sub-grant 
design (30-40)  
 
25% of sub-grants will be awarded to women-run 
businesses, cooperatives The portfolio EDA sub -
grants are effectively 
supporting gender mainstreaming across 
FSM  Ongoing  ECU  
EPB 
Grants Technical 
Evaluation sub-committee  
 MoV:  
Sub-grant  portfolio 
reviews  NA


---
*Page 139*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
cooperatives or 
women’s groups  and/or 
applications that target 
women as primary 
beneficiaries  or women’s groups  and/or 
applications that target 
women as primary 
beneficiaries  (10 sub-
grants in total by the end 
of programme 
implementation)  
Output 2.2: Gender -responsive sub -grant award implementation  
Activity 2. 3.1 
Capacity support to local 
authorities to strengthen 
gender governance structures   Support to develop 
capacity to help 
mainstream gender 
considerations into local sub-grant 
implementation  N/A All grant proponents are 
equipped with the 
necessary supporting 
capacity and procedures to support gender 
responsive outcomes in 
individual sub -grants  Training materials to 
support gender mainstreaming and 
gender -responsive sub-
grant design targeted 
and tailored for local 
authorities.  Ongoing  ECU  
Facilitating Agents  
Gender Specialist  
 
 
MoV:  
Annual progress reports  
Audit recommendations  6,000  
(Targeted gender 
support for 
strengthening governance 
structures)  
Activity 2.3. 2 
Implementation, 
monitoring, and evaluation of priority 
adaptation sub-grants to 
track gender elements  Number of sub -grants 
implemented and 
reported on according to gender -sensitive 
design  
 
Collection of gender -
disaggregated baseline and post -project data 
at the sub-project level 
according to the 
thematic area covered 
(e.g number of food 
(in)secure  households, 
number of water 
(un)safe households, 
number, type and value 
of assets highly 
exposed to climate 
change risks  etc.) 0 All sub -grants (30 -40) 
have effectively been implemented and their results have been gender -
disaggregated and shared 
along wit h key lessons 
learned and best practices 
for gender mainstreaming  
 
The data collected at the 
sub-project level informs 
the future design of adaptation measures by 
providing insights into the 
baseline, and enables the 
assessment of results of 
the relevant a daptation 
measure  Implementation and 
M&E of sub -grants 
highlights effective documentation, 
compiling and sharing 
of gender -
disaggregated data and 
lessons learned to 
support ongoing gender 
mainstreaming efforts in 
FSM.  Ongoing  ECU  
EPB Grants Technical Evalu ation sub-committee  
 
MoV:  
Annual sub-grant reports  
Data collection reports  30,000 (targeted 
gender support for 
implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation)  
      Total  102,000


---
*Page 140*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Initial Sub- grant  Gender Assessment  
The sub-grant  selection criteria specific to gender will be refined as part of the gender action plan above, 
but an initial framework based on a simplified version of the UN Women template combined with the GCF 
gender mainstreaming guide is provided in Table  below. Given the nature of the sub-grant  and limited 
capacity of local authorities in gender mainstreaming, sub-grant  gender criteria will need to effectively 
balance the need for detail to ensure effective gender balanced outcomes that are meeting differentiated 
needs for men and women with the need for simple, approachable frameworks for potential proponents . 
Sub-grant s that can’t initially detail specific gender  aspects of the sub- grant  will require focused sub- grant  
support . Ultimately , the local authorities/designated organizations will work closely with SPC and the 
Consortium of Empowerment Contractors to develop the sub- grant  gender components  and SPC will 
ensure that they are aligned with the GCF Gender Policy Requirements .  
Table 7: Initial Sub -grant  Gender Assessment  
Guiding Questions  Response  
1. What are the main sources of 
livelihood and income for men 
and women? If survey data are 
available, they  should be 
included;  otherwise qualitative 
descriptions are helpful.   
2. What, if any, policies or plans 
related to gender are in place in 
the sub-grant ’s local authority?   
3. With regards to the specific  sub-
grant  adaptation priority 
(disaster risk, food security, water security) what are the key vulnerabilities being addressed 
by the sub -grant ? How do these 
differ for men and women?   
4. How is the sub-grant  
addressing the gender 
considerations for the priority 
sectors provided in Table 5 
above?   
5. Based on initial stakeholder 
engagement, what are the needs and priorities related to 
the envisioned sub-grant  
activities? Are men’s and 
women’s needs/priorities 
different?   
6. How are women and men 
expected to benefit from sub-
grant  activities?   
7. What speci fically will the sub-
grant  do to ensure that women 
and men have equal opportunity to benefit from the sub -grant  
activities?   
8. Are sub-grant  outcomes/results 
gender disaggregated? If so, describe the specific indicators 
and how they will be monitored


---
*Page 141*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
9. What  are the biggest risks for 
achieving gender -responsive 
outcomes? How will the sub-
grant  work to overcome these?   
10. Who within the local 
authority/designated 
organization is the focal point 
for gender in the sub-grant ?  
11. What budget is being allocated 
for sub-grant  gender 
work/capacity?


---
*Page 142*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex I – Women’s Group Consultations Summary  
Consultation with Pohnpei Women’s Council  
December 04, 2020 - Meeting with Pohnpei Women’s Council Interim President, Ms. Maria Donre.  
The meeting started out with a brief introduction followed by an overview of Pacific Community’s (SPC) 
Green Climate Fund (GCF) program “Climate change adaptation solutions for Local Authorities in the 
Federated States of Micronesia”.  
The overall EDA programme was discussed as well as key points from the draft GAP.  
Key takeaways from the discussion included:  
1. Historically this is a matrilineal society where ancestral descent and land is passed down 
through maternal tribal lineage but changed to last name where last name is mostly passed 
down from males in some families. We can not generalize it as strictly matrilineal nor 
patrilineal society as each family’s h ereditary agreements are different from one family to 
another in this modern age.      
2. Although there are different roles for males and females at the household level, both males  
and females  make household decisions. Dominant male head of households are not common 
anymore and most households are now moving towards a more modern family structure 
where both males and females share the same roles and decision making.  
3. Women have  rights to own land and property just the same way as m en do, and being a 
woman does n’t disenfranchise her from owning her own land, property or business.  
4. Women still do a lot of the home gardening but so many other opportunities are available to women these days that not many are interested in strictly doing home gardening but 
something they do in conjunction with other activities.  
5. At his point, what she would consider as a pri ority project small household farms or gardens 
that can help supplement other sources of household livelihood or income.  
 
December 04, 2020 - Meeting with women group representative from Kosrae, Yap and Chuuk  
Conducted a virtual meeting with women group representatives from Kosrae, Yap and Chuuk. 
Participating in this meeting was the Yap Gender Support Officer representing Yap Women’s groups, 
President of the Kosr ae Women’s Organization representing the Kosrae women’s groups and President if 
the Chuuk Women’s Council representing the Chuuk women’s groups.  
The meeting stated out with brief introductions and a brief overview of the SPC’s Green Climate Fund 
(GCF) pro gram “Climate change adaptation solutions for Local Authorities in the Federated States of 
Micronesia”. While discussions of the projects outputs and outcomes  took place, the representative from 
Yap lost connection and could not participate in the rest of the call.  
Prioritization from Kosrae included the following;   
1. Prioritize scaling up food security projects that are ongoing in Kosrae  
2. Local organizations and women groups are in need of capacity building involving adaptation 
project design, proposal development and project implementation and monitoring.  
3. Local government and NGO’s to work with state agencies for adaptation projects to prevent 
project duplication and to collaborate but not compete with each other.


---
*Page 143*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Prioritization for  Chuuk :  food security projects should be prioritized. Prioritize building upon or scaling up 
the small -scale security projects that are currently ongoing. She also mentioned that women’s groups are 
also in need of capacity building.  
The Chuuk representative also read the GAAP an d stated that she supports the action plans and 
reiterated that rights to land is passed down through maternal so owning land and property is not an issue 
in Chuuk. Women do most of the gardening and there’s nothing that will hinder them from participating in 
the project activities. However, she recommended that there should be women group representatives in all the stages of this project to make sure that women’s interests are not neglected in designing and 
selecting priority projects.  
 December 07, 2020 - Meeting with Pohnpei Women’s Council newly elected officials and several of 
its members.  
As an the Pohnpei Women’s Council interim president, Mrs. Maria Donre open ed the meeting with a brief 
introduction and introduced the background of the SPC’s Green C limate Fund (GCF) program “Climate 
change adaptation solutions for Local Authorities in the Federated States of Micronesia”. Winfred went on 
and presented the projects components, explained in detail the outputs from each of the components 
including possib le activities under each output.  
 Concerns on the outputs:  
1. Where would the Pohnpei Women’s Council and its members fit in all these since the primary 
grantees will be municipal governments and state agencies?  
a. The national consultant  addressed this by expl aining that although the executing 
entities will be State agencies and municipal governments, the primary beneficiaries 
will be communities that their organizations represent. Their inputs will be beneficial 
in developing climate change impact mitigation measures that will have a wholistic 
approach. Pohnpei Women’s Council may not directly receive grants under this 
project, however, the activities and projects that they are supporting within their communities that involve climate change adaptation can benef it directly from this 
project. At the end of the day, vulnerable communities are the primary beneficiaries, 
and we all are representatives of these communities.  
2. Training and capacity building for municipalities andS state agencies should prioritize 
inclusion of females not only as trainees but trainers and mentors as well. How can we make 
sure that we these government agencies include females in their selection of those that will 
be directly supporting this project? They felt that when it comes to government priority 
projects, women groups are left out in the development and execution of these projects. Even 
training opportunities that often surfaces neglected the inclusion of women or representatives 
from women groups.  
a. Activities related to this have been included in the Gender Action Plan  
The group mentioned that while i t is customary that the husband or the father of the household is referred 
to as the head of the household, decisions are made by both the man and wom an or the father and 
mother of the household. They have the same rights to property and land as me n and it all depends on 
each family’s preference on who inherits the parents land or property. When it comes to crop raising, 
livestock and fishing, women are not exempt and play a critical role in every aspect of their households 
and their communities.


---
*Page 144*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
The group mentioned that sometimes what is on paper is not what is actually happening on the ground as 
times are changing rapidly and most households are tr ending towards a more modern family structure 
where both males and females share the same activities, responsibilities and the overall household decisions. They were very excited about the gender action plan and would like to be very much involved 
in this project moving forward.  
When asked what they would consider as priority climate change adaptation projects in relation to the 3 
thematic areas, the following were their responses:  
1. Water security projects that include water tanks and all its associated equ ipment to deliver 
water to individual households. Clean running water in all households.  
2. Reliable and safe community or municipal water systems.  
3. Support for women farmer groups  
4. Water security should be a priority for the outer islands as they are currentl y suffering from 
extreme drought.  
There is not a lot of ideas on priority projects, but they all agreed that their communities could benefit from 
food and water security projects. They felt that their groups are often left out or were not included during 
project scoping and capacity building opportunities, so they were all eager to be involved in all GC F 
projects and capacity building.  
There is a consensus with the group that they would like to be involved in every aspect of this project and 
they don’t foresee anything that could hinder them from participating in this project. Being a woman 
presents an opportunity and not an hinderance from participating in projects that promote community 
resilience.   
 
   
________________________