=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20250608202516+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20474
/ModDate: D:20250609183135+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20474
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

  
This document is prepared and transmitted for consideration by the GCF Board at a Board meeting. It is published on the GCF p ublic 
website in that context, which does not imply a presumed outcome. Decisions taken in relation to this document and updates to it, if any, 
will be made publicly available in accordance with applicable GCF policies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
30 June – 3 July  202 5 
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
Provisional agenda item 1 1 GCF/B. 42/02 /Add. 07 
9 June 2025   
Consideration of funding proposals –  
Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package f or FP 265 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled " Climate -resilient landscapes for sustainable livelihoods 
in northern Ghana "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

. 
GCF/B.42/02/Add.07  
Page b 
3 
81 
82 
86 
98 
110  Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
No-o bjection l etter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal  point(s)  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Secretariat’s assessment  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment  
Gender documentation  112  
Disclaimer :  
The designations and the presentation of the materials used in this document, including their respective 
citations, maps and references, have been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Green Climate Fund concerning the legal status 
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers 
or boundaries. Also, the boundaries and names shown, and the designations used in this document have 
been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by 
the Green Climate Fund.


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/Programme title:  Climate -resilient landscapes for sustainable livelihoods 
in northern Ghana  
Country(ies):  Republic of Ghana  
Accredited Entity:  UNEP  
Date of first submission:  2018/06/25  
Date of current submission 2025/04/14  
Version number  [V.000]


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANN EXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60 . Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill o ut information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 15 
 
   
Acronyms and abbreviations  
  
AE Accredited Entity  
AFAWA  Program on Affirmative Finance Action for Women in Africa: Financing Climate 
Resilience Agricultural Practices in Ghana  
AO Administrative Officer  
BMUB  Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear  
CCAP  Community Climate Action Plan  
CCAG  Climate Change Action Group  
CC-DARE  Climate Change and Development — Adapting by Reducing Vulnerability  
CCV  Climate Change Vulnerability  
CIG Common Interest Groups  
CRA  Climate -resilient Agriculture  
CSIR  Council for Scientific and Industrial Research  
DA District Assembly  
DAP District Adaptation Plan  
DACF  District Assembly Common Fund  
DCS  Directorate of Crop Services  
DEMC  District Environmental Management Committee  
DMTDP  District Medium -Term Development Plan  
DoA Department of Agriculture  
DPCU  District Planning and Coordination Unit  
EbA Ecosystem -based Adaptation  
EE Executing Entity  
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment  
EMC  Environmental Management Committee  
ERP Enterprise Resource Planning  
ESES  Environmental, Social and Economic Sustainability  
ESERN  Environmental, Social and Economic Review Note  
ESMF  Environmental and Social Management Framework  
ESS Environmental and Social Safeguard  
EPA Environmental Protection Agency  
FAA Funded Activity Agreement  
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
FBO Farmer -based Organisation  
FDI Fire Danger Index  
FM Financial Management  
FPO Financial and Procurement Officer  
GAP  Gender Action Plan  
GCM  Global Climate Model  
GDP  Gross Domestic Product  
GEF Global Environment Facility  
GEMP  Ghana Environmental Management Project  
GMet  Ghana Meteorological Agency  
GoG  Government of Ghana  
ICA Internal Cooperation Agreement  
INDC  Intended Nationally Determined Contributions  
IP Impact Pathway  
IPSAS  International Public Sector Accounting Standards  
ITCZ  Intertropical Convergence Zone  
LFI Local Financial Institution  
LSC Local Steering Committee  
M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  
MESTI  Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation  
MLGCRA  Ministry of Local Government, Chieftaincy and Religious Affairs  
MoFA  Ministry of Food and Agriculture  
MoFEP  Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning  
MMDA  Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies


---
*Page 6*
---

GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 15 
 
 MSME  Micro Small Medium -sized Enterprises  
MTR  Mid-Term Review  
NAP National Action Programme  
NACAP  National Anti -Corruption Action Plan  
NCAFSAP  National Climate -Resilient Agriculture and Food Security Action Plan  
NCCAS  National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy  
NCCC  National Climate Change Committee  
NCCP  National Climate Change Policy  
NDA  National Designated Authority  
NDC  Nationally Determined Contribution  
NGO  Non-governmental Organisation  
NPV Net Present Value  
NER North  East Region  
NTFP  Non-timber Forest Products  
PCA Project Cooperation Agreement  
PET Potential evapotranspiration  
PHL Post-harvest loss  
PM Project Manager  
PMU  Project Management Unit  
PSC Project Steering Committee  
REMC  Regional Environmental Management Committee  
RMTDP  Regional Medium -Term Development Plan  
RPCU  Regional Planning and Coordinating Unit  
SADA  Savannah Accelerated Development Authority  
SCI-SLM Stimulating Community Initiatives in Sustainable Land Management project  
SDG  Sustainable Development Goals  
SLWM  Sustainable Land and Water Management  
SLWMP  Sustainable Land and Water Management Project  
SPEI  Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index  
TAC Technical Advisory Committee  
TE Terminal Evaluation  
UER  Upper East Region  
UNDP  United Nations Development Programme  
UNEP  United Nations Environment Programme  
UNFCCC  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
UNSDP  United Nations Sustainable Development Partnership  
USAID  United States Agency for International Development  
UWR  Upper West Region  
VSLA  Village Savings and Loans Associations  
WBS  Work Breakdown Structure  
WBSE  Work Breakdown Structure Elements  
WRI World Resources Institute


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)  Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
 
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation  total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Energy generation and access  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Low-emission transport  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Forestry and land use  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
Adaptation total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  Enter 
number 18.26% 23.53  % 
☒  Health and well -being, and food and water security  33.21 % 32.8 % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment  21.78 % 18.29  % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  26.75 % 25.38  % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  N/A A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)  2,861,674  beneficiaries  
691,125  direct 
beneficiaries  
(52% women)  2,861,674  
million indirect 
beneficiaries  
(51% women)  
2.2% of the 
total population  9.3% of the 
total population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance2)   70,198,822 USD   
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested   63,211,141  USD  
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity ) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal.  
2 Refer to the Policy of Co -financing  of the GCF.


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 2 
 A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding   
☒  Grant   63,211,141 USD   
☐  Loan  Enter number  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☐  Equity       Enter number  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  7 years  A.12. Total lifespan  28 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  .  
 
6/8/2018  
 A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards  to assess 
your FP category.  
 
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information   
Government of Ghan a through the Ghana Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)  and 
Ghana Meteorological Agency (GMet) . 
A.21. Executive summary  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
The agriculture sector in northern Ghana — which supports ~80% of the total workforce — is dominated by smallholder 
farmers practising mostly rainfed, subsistence farming , using mostly traditional agricultural practices and minimum 
technology . 
The long duration of the dry season experienced in northern Ghana results in prolonged periods of food shortages .  
High temperatures in northern Ghana already contribute to reduced water -retention capacity and frequent drying of 
water bodies — such as wells, dams, and streams — that serve as sources of water for both livestock and household 
use, including for dry seaso n gardening.   Increased temperatures linked to climate change exacerbat e the problem 
through the expansion of ranges of the weeds, pests and fungi tha t cause food spoilage .  Con versely, e xtreme rainfall 
events often result in severe flooding across many areas of northern Ghana, destroying crops, taking lives and 
damaging assets and public infrastructures , as well as reduc ing storage capacity of reservoirs in northern Ghana, 
caus ing them to dry -up quicker in the dry season as well as increase the risk of dam collapse, leading to downstream 
flooding.  
 
The proposed project objective is to enhance the climate resilience of vulnerable smallholder farming communities in 
northern Ghana by improving food security and enhancing the agro -based rural economy.  The project strategy is three -
fold comprising the improved climate data and early warnings made available to facilitate proactive drought and flood


---
*Page 9*
---

A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 3 
 management,  the  adoption of climate -resilient agriculture  and water storage to enable dry season farming, and 
investments in landscape restoration (such as riverbank restoration, agroforestry, reforestation and fire management) 
to improve soil  health and  integrity , physical and land-based water retention and  protect physical assets from flooding.   
 
The project will work at three levels: community level on planning and implementation systems, at the regional level on 
strengthening weather forecast capability that will serve the Northern Sector, complementing investments in forecasting 
capability in th e South of the country  as well as  national level in establishing a national action plan for drought and 
flood hazard management .  The community level integrated ecosystem -based adaptation approach will inform the 
District level planning and budgeting systems, through building capacity and awareness of District planning officers to  
scale up the project approach. C ombined with associated community training, extension services and awareness -
raising, this will  increase opportunities for knowledge and technology exchange between communities, and thereby 
promote autonomous upscaling of these interventions.  
The proposed project will be implemented in the North  East, Upper East and Upper West Regions of northern Ghana , 
in eight districts in northern Ghana that have been specifically chosen because of their high vulnerability to climate 
change impacts .  Across the eight districts, the project will  provide  agricultural and livelihood support for 120 
communities over seven years  as well early warning advisories for the entire population in the 8 Districts .   
The EPA is the main executing entity, that will work in partnership with Ministry of Food Security and Agriculture together 
with the Ghana Meteorological services and Water Resources Commission to deliver an integrated, ecosystem -based 
adaptation strategy that will transition the smallholder farming communities of northern Ghana more climate -resilient, 
productive and sustainable livelihoods.


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
  
3 For more detail on information in this section and a full set of references to support the arguments, please consult the 
Feasibility Assessment  (Annex 2) . 
4 Please refer to Section 4 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study for a detailed analysis of observed and predicted climate change in 
northern Ghana.  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages ) 
Context3 
Approximately 80% of the 4.16 million people living in 
northern Ghana are smallholder farmers depending on 
traditional, small -scale, rainfed agricultural systems to 
generate household incomes and maintain food 
security. Smallholder farming households in northern 
Ghana , comprising of  Upper West Region (UWR), 
Upper East Region (UER), and North  East Region 
(NER), frequently experience severe food insecurity for 
between three to six months annually during the dry 
season.   They a re highly vulnerable to the degradation 
of natural ecosystems and changes in climate .  The 
main drivers of degradation are inter alia: i) 
deforestation for wood and charcoal production and 
clearing for agricultural activities; ii) wildfires to clear 
natural vegetation for agriculture; iii) overgrazing by 
cattle; and iv) soil erosion and fert ility loss because of 
unsustainable farming practice s. 
 
The results of the climate change vulnerability 
assessment (see Section 2 of Annex 2 — Feasibility 
Assessment) demonstrate that th ese administrative 
Regions of northern Ghana , which have high levels of 
poverty,  are the most climate vulnerable in the country  
(Figure 14 – Annex 2 Feasibility Assessment) , and 
therefore, are a priority target for climate change 
adaptation interventions.  
 
Climate analysis4 
 
Current trends  
Most of the rainfall in northern Ghana occurs between 
June and October; this is also the period with the 
largest variation in total monthly precipitation volume . 
Historical trends show a substantial change in rainfall 
patterns  with a reduction in the amount of rainfall during the early wet season (~ -8 mm April, ~ -8 mm May, ~ -17 mm 
June ~ -9 mm July, ~ -12 mm August in the 2010 decade) and an increase during the late wet season (~+5 mm 
September and ~+17 mm October in the 2010 decade). In northern Ghana , rain fall patterns  have  become increasingly 
erratic with the start of the wet season becoming more difficult to predict. In the past, the wet season started in April 
and ended around late September or early October. However, in recent times, the wet season starts in June or July  
with extremely heavy rainfall in September or October, indicative of a shortening of the historical rainfall season. 
Similarly, t he number of rainfall days (days with 0.1 mm or more) has decreased by 5.3 days per year in the peak 
precipi tation months April to September  from the 2000s , with a decreasing trend of 2.6 days per decade.  The overall 
trend has been prolonged dry seasons , an increased frequency and intensity of drought conditions, and a shorter rainy 
season with increased occurrence of extreme rainfall events with severe consequences for smallholder farmers.  
 
Climate change projections  
Temperature :  Under RCP 8.5, the annual average temperature of Upper East Region is predicted to increase from 
28.2 ̊C to 33.1  ̊C (an increase of 4.9  ̊C) by 2085 , higher than the national average of 4.5° C. Annual minimum and 
maximum temperatures are also expected to increase in all the regions of Ghana, with northern Ghana again expected 
to experience the largest changes. The annual maximum temperature of the Upper East Region is expected to increase Figure 1: Ghana ’s 16 Administrative Regions , including the project 
Regions North East, Upper East and Upper West


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
  
5 Defined as the amount of evaporation that would occur if a sufficient water source were available.  
6 Annual moisture index = Mean annual rainfall / Potential evapotranspiration.  
7 Please see Section 5 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study for a detailed assessment of climate change impacts in northern Ghana.  
 from 34.1  ̊C to an extreme 38.8  ̊C by 2085 under RCP 8. 5.  In summary, m aximum and minimum temperature will 
increase throughout the year , and h eatwaves will become more frequent.  
 
Potential evapotranspiration :  GCMs suggest that potential evapotranspiration (PET)5 will increase across Ghana 
throughout the 21st century under both RCP scenarios . This increase will be most apparent in northern Ghana where 
PET will increase by 8.5% by 2085. The predicted increase in PET will be marginally greater than the predicted minor 
increase in annual rainfall, resulting in a decrease in the annual moisture in dex6 in most regions of the country.  
 
Rainfall :  Ensemble climate projections suggest that in northern Ghana the change in rainfall to include a reduction in 
early wet season rainfall (April to June) and increase in late wet season rainfall (July to September). The projections , 
under RCP 8.5 scenario  estimate an increase of 5mm/month in April and July/August, increasing per decade towards 
the end of the century. By contrast, the wet season onset and cessation months of March and October are estimated 
to experience a decrease in rainfall per decade of 10mm/month.  For both RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5, there will be a reduced 
occurrence of low -volume rainfall (<11mm) events and an increased occurrence of high -volume rainfall (11 –21mm) 
events.   In summary, t he rainfall profile in northern Ghana will change  where the wet se ason will be shorter and rain 
will be more likely to occur less frequent ly but more intense ly during high  volume events.  
 
Extreme events :  Extreme rainfall events are likely to become more frequent over  time, with events that historically 
occurred 1 in every ~100 years predicted to occur 1 in ~73 years and 1 in every ~80 years under RCP 4.5 and RCP 
8.5 scenarios, respectively. Furthermore, extreme rainfall events are predicted to become more intense over  time, with 
1 in 10 -year events projected to be ~8.3% more intense (under both RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios) .  
 
The increased occurrence of higher rainfall events is associated with an increase in flood risk, while the overall reduction 
in the number of rainfall events is associated with more frequent dry spells. T he number of dry days per month is 
predicted to increase above the historical average throughout the year under both the RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios, 
with the largest increases occurring in the dry season months of November to February. Noteworthy is the  increased 
frequency of dry days in the wet season o nset and cessation months of March (increasing by 2.8 –5.6 days per month) 
and October (increasing by 1.4 –1.7 days per month).  An increasing number of dry days per month will increase the risk 
of droughts occurring in northern Ghana.  
 
Climate change impacts7  
The Guina savanna  and Sudan savanna  agroecological zones of  northern Ghana, on which the livelihoods of 
smallholder farmers rely, are already under considerable stress because of inter alia : i) unfavourable climate conditions  
and trends ; ii) extensive land and environmental degradation related to increasing  population growth rates; and iii) 
unsustainable farming methods.    The effects of future climate change are expected to exacerbate the current problems 
in these systems through the negative impact pathways ( See Annex 2 – Section 5 - Error! Reference source not 
found.  
 
Impact on food systems:   Climate change is impacting dry season food production.   Few smallholder farmers have 
access to irrigation infrastructure and as a result are highly dependent on rain for their livelihoods.   As described above, 
the long duration of the dry season experienced in northern Ghana results in prolonged periods of food shortages. Dry 
season gardening can supplement food production outside of the major growing season, but  can only be practiced in 
areas with a nearby water source, where wat er is available even during the driest months of the year. However, climate 
change is exacerbating water shortages during the dry season. High temperatures in northern Ghana already contribute 
to reduced water -retention capacity and frequent drying of wate r bodies — such as wells, dams, and streams — that 
serve as sources of water for both livestock and household use, including for dry season gardening.  
 
Food security during the dry season is further impacted by the high rate of post -harvest losses (PHLs). Post -harvest 
losses in staple foods in Ghana such as maize, cassava, yam and rice amount to over 35%, 34%, 24% and 7% of 
yields, respectively. Increased temperatures linked to clima te change exacerbat e the problem through the expansion 
of ranges of the weeds, pests and fungi that cause food spoilage — as well as an increase in their multiplication rates. 
In addition to causing food spoilage, an increased rate of fungal growth results  in: i) reduced seed viability; ii) 
discolouration; iii) caking; iv) mouldy smells; and v) the production of mycotoxins in stored food.


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
  
8 Republic of Ghana. Ghana National Drought Plan. Available at https://knowledge.unccd.int/sites/default/files/inline -
files/1%20FINAL_NDP_Ghana.pdf.  
9 Available at: https://weadapt.org/knowledge -base/nature -based -solutions/bush -fires-for-natural -resources -and-
environmental -management -in-ghana -a-review/?utm_source=chatgpt.com   
10 Available at: https://fireecology.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s42408 -023-00198 -z?utm_source=chatgpt.com   Impact on water resources :  Decreasing wet -season length, coupled with rising temperatures, is increasing the 
frequency in which surface water bodies such as dams and streams are drying up. It is estimated that changing rainfall 
patterns in Ghana will lead to a general reduction in an nual river flow by 15 –20% for the year 2020 and 30 –40% for 
20508.  The groundwater system in Ghana is a dynamic system that mostly recharges through direct rainfall infiltration, 
especially in the northern regions.   The shallow aquafer ground water resources are already classified moderately 
vulnerable to flood and drought impacts. Increased temperatures, drought occurrence and potential evapotranspiration 
will reduce the resource recharge.  
 
Inversely, e xtreme rainfall events often result in severe flooding across many areas of northern Ghana, destroying 
crops, taking lives and damaging assets and public infrastructures. Numerous such extreme events have been 
observed over the past 60 years (Figure 4.7 of  Annex 2: Feasibility Study)  resulting in human deaths and displacement 
of 16 million people .   Floods have become increasingly frequent over the past 30 years  and is a significant risk to 
agriculture in flood -prone areas  in northern Ghana.  
 
Fluvial flooding  results in river overbank flow , and there expose crops and livestock to flood damage and loss, especially 
for those farmers farm ing close to the river due to a lack of irrigation systems , and in severe cases also affect houses 
and roads . Pluvial floods, also called flash floods, occur after heavy rainfall, often only in short time periods. Pluvial 
floods play a role in all districts. Flash floods result in crops and fertile soil being washed away. Breaches of small 
reservoir dams cause fl ood risk in all districts, especially when dams are poorly constructed, maintained or treat ed.  
 
The problem of reduced water availability in the dry season is further exacerbated by the increasing frequency and 
intensity of extreme rainfall events which lead to more eroded material and pollutants being deposited into water bodies, 
further decreasing water quality and reducing the reservoir storage capacity . Reduction in storage capacity of reservoirs 
in northern Ghana, in turn cause them to dry -up quicker in the dry season as well as increase the risk of dam collapse, 
leading to downstream flooding.  
  
Impact on local infrastructure and livelihoods :   Extreme climate events may undermine the effectiveness of existing 
rural infrastructure and the impacts on rural livelihoods and agricultural systems will thus also depend on their climate -
resilience and compatibility with changing climatic patterns. Extre me climate events have already caused important 
economic losses. According to EPA, 2007 floods in northern regions affected and displaced more than 300,000 people, 
damaged or destroyed almost 26,000 houses, collapsed 13 bridges, destroyed 1,060 km of feeder roads, contaminated 
634 drinking water facilities, amongst other damages to social infrastructure.  
 
Social infrastructure, including community buildings, are also vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Recurrent 
floods, heavy downpours and long dry spells are the ways in which climatic change can affect social and community 
infrastructure. Houses, school buildings, water and sanitation facilities are infrastructures that are both sensitive and 
vulnerable to climate change.  
 
Impact on ecosystems:  Uncontrolled bushfires in northern Ghana are reducing the capacity of agroecosystems to 
provide critical ecosystem services such as  NTFPs, forage, soil stabilisation and flood mitigation. Bushfire impact 
agriculture through several pathways, including: i) causing extensive damage to crops and fruit trees; ii) reducing the 
fertility of farmlands by removing soil organic matter; and iii) causing vegetation loss  in fallowed/grazing lands and 
woodland.   The frequency and intensity of uncontrolled bushfires in northern Ghana is increasing. While the increase 
is largely driven by rapid population growth and the break -down of socio -cultural norms that used to regulate land in 
northern Ghana, climate change i s exacerbating the problem.  The extent of the impact  of uncontrolled bushfires in 
northern Ghana are estimated as follows : 
• Forest loss:  Research indicates that approximately 30% of Ghana's reserved forest area is destroyed by fire 
each year9. 
• Burned areas : Between 2001 and 2021, the Guinea -savanna and Forest -savanna mosaic zones experienced 
significant fire activity. For instance, in the Guinea -savanna zone, December recorded an average burned area of 
107.539 km² with 59,288 fires detected10.


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
  
11 Ibid. 
12 Please see Annex 2 - Section 10  for information on p ast and ongoing projects and Section 11  on adaptation best 
practices and lessons learned . • Fire frequency : The overall fire frequency was estimated at 60% in the Guinea -savanna and 43% in the Forest -
savanna mosaic zones11. 
 
Scaling up good adaptation practice12 
This project draw on past and ongoing programmes and projects which have generated positive adaptation results for 
beneficiaries in Ghana , the key one being the  sustainable land and water management (SLWM)  project to enhance soil 
and land productivity  and watershed services  for climate resilience in northern Ghana  (evaluation report at Annex 18) . 
 
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages  plus diagram ) 
Problem statement  
The agriculture sector in northern Ghana — which supports ~80% of the total workforce — is dominated by smallholder 
farmers practising mostly subsistence farming. Given that smallholder farms in northern Ghana are almost entirely 
rainfed — using mostly traditional agricultural practices and minimum techn ology — agricultural production is strongly 
dependent on the availability of natural resources, making them highly vulnerable to changes in their environment and 
the climate. The a groecological systems which underpin natural resource -based livelihoods , are notably  already under 
considerable stress because of inter alia : i) unfavourable climate conditions; ii) extensive environmental degradation 
related to high population growth rates, and traditional, unsustainable farming methods and iii) dam spills in Tamne 
reservoir and Bagre Dam in Burkina Faso . These baseline challenges are exacerbated by climate change, including: i) 
decreases in the duration of the wet season; ii) increases in rainfall variability, with less frequent but more intense 
rainfall events; iii) increases in the number of dry days; iv) increases in maximum and minimum temperatures, with 
more frequent heatwaves; v) increased evapotranspiration; and vi) a reduced annual moisture index.  
 
The impacts of these changes to climate on smallholder farmers include:  
• increased frequency and severity of floods — particularly in areas near rivers — that will lead to soil erosion, major 
crop losses and damage to agricultural infrastructure, including post -harvest storage and irrigation /water  facilities, 
and  transport infrastructure and small dams being breached;  
• increased frequency and intensity of droughts  leading to, among other things: i) increased frequency in the drying -
up of surface water bodies such as dams and streams; and  subsequent stress on water systems for both 
agriculture and human use; ii) a decline in agricultural productivity as the ability of small -scale farmers to engage 
in dry season gardening is reduced;  
• shortened agricultural production periods resulting in decreased crop yields and income as the number of 
achievable wet season cropping cycles and harvests of non -timber forest products (NTFPs) from agroecosystems 
are reduced;  
• pushing common northern Ghanaian crop and livestock varieties beyond their optimum thermal limits and 
expanding the ranges of weeds and pests that prefer warmer climates as previously cooler areas experience 
warmer temperatures;  
• increased soil erosion and loss of soil nutrients leading to decreased crop yields and increased pollution and 
eutrophication of water bodies; and  
• more frequent and severe uncontrolled bushfires resulting in the destruction of crop fields — particularly of the dry 
mature crop — and reduced capacity of agroecosystems to provide critical ecosystem services such as NTFPs, 
forage, soil stabilisation and flood mitigation.  
• Increased incidence of climate change induced disasters on the built environment and settlements, ultimately 
resulting in disruptions to normal human activities and economic losses in terms of asset damages.  
These impacts, when combined with the non -climate drivers of environmental degradation and dam spillages, have a 
substantial impact on the livelihoods of smallholder farmers and their households in northern Ghana, with subsequent 
impacts on food security and income generation of the country’s most vulnerable people. Without effective adaptation 
action  supported by access to timely climate information and analysis , northern Ghanaian smallholder farmers will likely 
remain vulnerable to the current and future effects of climate change, with serious repercussions for the northern 
Ghanaian economy, ultimately increasing the north -south divide in Ghana.  
 
An analysis of current drought and flood early warning services in Ghana indicates that the majority have incomplete 
coverage and limited channels for information transfer and dissemination. Several studies — including a gap analysis 
of drought and flood r isk management and early warnings in Ghana , a capacity needs assessment of the Ghana


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 Meteorological Agency (GMet) , a Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Annex 8), and the assessments under the 
UNEP CLIMWARN project  — have also revealed several technological barriers to building the resilience in the 
agricultural sector to the impacts of c limate change, namely relating to information access. Stakeholder consultations 
(see Annex 7h: Stakeholder Engagement Plan) revealed that if women were provided improved technologies and 
financial services, they would likely invest in the land, leading to increased production — and potential increased income 
— which benefits not only themselves, but their families and communities too. Further to this, drought and flood 
information management and early warning systems have been identified as gaps by stakehol der consultations during 
the project development process (Annex 7h).  
 
Preferred adaptation solution  
The preferred adaptation solution would see a reduction in the vulnerability to climate change of smallholder farmers 
in northern Ghana through the implementation and adoption of climate -resilient agriculture, ecosystem -based 
adaptation  approaches, alternative climate -resilient livelihoods   and locally led investments in climate resilient rural 
infrastructure . These three suites of climate change adaptation interventions will complement one another to increase 
the resilience of smallholder farm ing communiti es to climate change impacts.  Climate -resilient Agriculture (CRA) is an 
integrative approach that assists with the reorientation and transformation of agricultural systems to ensure food 
security and environmental sustainability in a changing climate . Climate -resilient agricultural techniques will enhance 
agricultural productivity under future climate changes conditions (both crop production and livestock). Ecosystem -based 
adaptation interventions (such as riverbank restoration, agroforestry, reforestat ion and fire management) will enhance 
the supply of ecosystem goods and services, further increasing agricultural productivity (for example through reduced 
soil erosion and increased fodder for livestock) while also preventing land degradation and thereby red ucing the impacts 
of floods and droughts. The enhanced supply of ecosystem goods and services will, in turn, provide communities with 
options for alternative climate -resilient livelihoods, reducing their need to engage in unsustainable practices such as 
expanding slash and burn agriculture to generate income.   The realization of locally relevant climate resilient 
infrastructure investments will reduce direct losses of damages and indirect costs of disruption, while contributing to 
build and sustain climate -resilient communities and environments.  Investments in key gaps in forecast and observing 
equipment in Northern Ghana will transform the skill of weather forecasts.  Climate advisories for drought and flood 
hazards will support famers to  optimise planting methods and schedules for higher yields . 
These climate change adaptation intervention s — targeted to circumvent and/or disrupt northern Ghana -specific 
climate change impacts — would be introduced to smallholder farmer communities in a coordinated manner throughout 
the three northern regions of Ghana.  The implementation of these climate change adaptation interventions will scale 
up and strengthen EbA, combined with associated community training, extension services and awareness -raising, 
would increase opportunities for knowledge and technology exc hange between communities, and thereby promote 
autonomous upscaling of these interventions. Technical assistance (TA), capacity building and performance incentives  
to District Assemblies will  further promote the upscaling and sustainability of these interventions, adaptation will be 
integrated into regional and district development plans, and the incremental costs for adaptation absorbed through 
earmarked financial top ups to regular districts budgets.  With improved capacity, sub -national administrations, in 
particular District Assemblies, will be better placed to access additional national and international climate finance as 
well. This should in principle lead to integrated climate change responses at the local level and provide the continuity 
and mainten ance capacity that local infrastructure and governance interventions often lack. Overall, these approaches 
would transition the smallholder farming communities of northern Ghana away from unsustainable agricultural and land -
use practices, while promoting m ore climate -resilient, productive and sustainable livelihoods.  
 
Project objective  
The proposed project objective is to enhance the climate resilience of vulnerable smallholder farming communities in 
northern Ghana by improving food security and enhancing the agro -based rural economy.  
 
Project outcomes  
The project ’s outcomes will  strengthen institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and 
development, enabling government agencies and local institutions to effectively integrate climate adaptation into 
policies and strategies. The project supports the adoption of climate -resilient agricultural practices, alternative 
livelihoods, and access to financial resources, ensuring farmers can sustainably adapt to climate impacts. Additionally, 
the project improves knowledge and learning p rocesses, fostering informed de cision -making and empowering 
communities with the tools and information needed to scale up climate adaptation efforts across the region.  
 
Barriers to the adaptation solution and project objective


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
  
13 E.g. extension officers, representatives from District Assemblies and DEMCs.  
14 E.g. staff from regional EPA offices, Regional Department of Agriculture office and REMCs.  
15 E.g. staff from the MESTI, MoFA, EPA, MLGCRA , MoF and the NDA.  Several barriers to the preferred adaptation solution have been identified for northern Ghana but can be categorised 
into three main barriers. These are listed below and explained in detail in Section 7 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study .  
• Barrier 1:  Limited  institutional, technical and financial capacity for planning, budgeting, implementing and monitoring 
climate change adaptation interventions.  
• Barrier 2:   Limited knowledge and awareness  of climate resilient methods and ecosystem linkages in disaster 
impact;  
• Barrier 3: Inadequate access for communities to climate information and best practices for applying early warning 
data in agricultural practices.  
• Barrier 3:  Limited access for local governments and communities to financial resources to finance adaption 
interventions.  
 
Project approach to overcoming the barriers to adaptation  
The proposed project will overcome the abovementioned barriers to increase the climate resilience of smallholder 
farming communities in northern Ghana. This will be achieved through five interconnected outputs, described in detail 
in Section 1 of Annex 2: feasibility Study . The overall theory of change for this project is presented in Figure 1 below.  
 
Barrier 1 will be addressed by strengthening the technical and institutional capacity of regional and district government 
structures in northern Ghana to plan, budget, implement and monitor climate change adaptation interventions. The 
policy work will take place in year 4 -5 of the project, once results can be harvested and used for planning purposes.  
The EPA will execute this output, based on experience gathered in the execution of the country’s National Adaptation 
Planning process, due to be completed in 2025.  
 
Training on climate -resilient agricultural practices, EbA and alternative climate -resilient livelihoods will be provided to 
extension officers (Activity 2.1) and local communities (Activity 2.2), thereby addressing Barrier 2. Extension officers 
and local communities will implement these climate change adaptation interventions, allowing them to gain practical 
knowledge of these practices (Activity 2.4). Thirdly, training materials and knowledge products capturing best practices 
and lessons learned, including  those related to the use of fire by communities from other initiatives such as the SLWMP, 
AF and IFAD projects will be disseminated (Activity 5.1), allowing knowledge of climate change adaptation to be shared 
with institutions and individuals who were not directly involved in project implementation. Finally, the project will conduct  
community -level knowledge -sharing and awareness -raising events ( Activity 5.2) for both beneficiary and non-
beneficiary communities in northern Ghana. By increasing the knowledg e of climate change adaptation in non -
beneficiary communities, these events will promote the autonomous upscaling of climate change interventions 
promoted by the project.  
 
Barrier 2 will be addressed by convening of knowledge -sharing and awareness -raising events (Activity 5.2) with 
participants from: i) district -level government staff13; ii) regional -level government staff14; iii) national -level government   
staff15; iv) climate change adaptation project and programme managers; v) representatives of academic and research 
institutions; vi) NGO staff; vii) representatives of multilateral development agencies; and viii) project beneficiaries. 
These events will promote i nformation sharing and encourage coordination between current and future climate change 
adaptation projects and programmes.  A robust monitoring and evaluation strategy will be put into place (Activity 5.1) 
to future facilitate the generation and dissemination of knowledge products (Activity 5. 2).   
 
Barrier 3 will be addressed by the new data information and management system established under Activity 1.2. The 
existing drought early warning systems in Ghana have limited coverage and inadequate channels for information 
transfer and dissemination. As a result of these limitations, smallholder farmers in northern Ghana are unable to apply 
climate informatio n to their agricultural practices and take proactive measures again drought impacts. By providing 
these farmers with quality climate data and early wa rning against drought, the project will enable a shift away from 
reactive methods for drought management — which currently contribute to crop losses, thereby increasing climate 
vulnerability.  
 
The project will contribute to overcoming Barrier 4 by increasing the capacity of the most vulnerable smallholder farmers 
to form farmer -based organisations (FBOs), strengthening financial management capacity, links to value chains being 
developed in paral lel thereby facilitating linkages to agricultural credit and insurance (Activities 4.1 –4.4).  The 
implementation of climate -resilient agricultural practices (Activity 2.4) will generate consistently higher incomes for 
smallholder farmers, allowing them to finance adaptation interventions once the project has finished. Approximately


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 US$270,000 and US$1.7 million in income is expected to be generated by investments in climate resilient agriculture 
and agroforestry (elaborated in Annex 3a).  
 
Together, the interventions mentioned above overcome the barriers to climate change adaptation in northern Ghana, 
thereby contributing to a paradigm shift within the agricultural sector towards climate -resilient sustainable development.  
 
 
Figure 1: Theory of change diagram  
The project will work at three levels: community level on planning and implementation systems as well as  at the 
Regional and National level regarding investments in weather forecast capability that will serve the Northern Sector, 
complementing investments in forecasting capability in the South of the country  as well as  establishing a national 
action plan for drought and flood hazard management .  The community level integrated ecosystem -based adaptation 
approach will inform the District level planning and budgeting systems. The project will build capacity and awareness 
of District planning officers to  scale up  the project approach. C ombined with associated community training, extension 
services and awareness -raising, this will  increase opportunities for knowledge and technology exchange between 
communities, and thereby promote autonomous upscaling of these interventions.  
Specific efforts will be made to support women farmers and female -led households who are particularly vulnerable to 
climate impacts due to limited land tenure and financial access.  Farmer -based organi sations will be trained in financial 
literacy and savings management with a focus on empowering women and creating equitable access to credit and 
insurance schemes. Through this financial strengthening, FBOs, particularly  those led by women, will enable the farmer 
groups to connect to the local banking sector thereby promoting higher returns that can be reinvested.  
The relevant outputs will be supported by the two executing entities (EEs), namely the: i) Environment Protection 
Agency (EPA)  of the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI) ; and ii) Ghana 
Meteorological Agency (GMet)  of the Ministry of Communication and Digitization .  The EPA will be supported by the 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture as implementing partner (IP) for output 1.  The GMet will be supported by the Water


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
  
16 See ‘Climate rationale and context’ above for more information on sensitivity and adaptive capacity.  
17 Please see Annex 2 ‘Feasibility Study’: Section 3 for a full description of how climate change vulnerability was calculated.  
18 Section 3: Climate change vulnerability of the districts and regions of Ghana.  Resources Commission as implementing partner and by  UNEP -Danish Hydraulic institute (DHI)  to provide technical 
advisory services for o utput 1.   
 
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
 
Output 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2  
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
cities , 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2  
Health, well -
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Output 1 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ 
Output 2 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ 
Output 3 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ 
Output 4 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Output 5  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1 ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
Geographies of intervention and target beneficiaries:  
The proposed project will be implemented in the North  East, Upper East and Upper West Regions of northern Ghana. 
As described above, the five northern regions are especially exposed to negative climate change impacts. Additionally, 
the northern populace is extremely sensitive to climate variability and change and has limited capacity to adapt to any 
changes in climate16. It is for these reasons of excessive exposure, elevated sensitivity and limited adaptive capacity 
that the northern regions of Ghana are considered the most vulnerable regions of the country to climate change17. See 
Section 3 of Annex 2 — Feasibility Study,18 for a detailed analysis that identifies the three northern regions as the most 
vulnerable to climate change impacts.  
 
Within the northern regions of Ghana, implementation of the proposed project will be focused on eight of the 42 districts 
that comprise northern Ghana), namely:  
• Jirapa , Lambussie , Lawra and Wa West in the Upper West Region ;  
• Binduri  and Garu in the Upper East Region; and  
• East Mamprusi and Yunyoo -Nasuan in the North  East Region . 
 
These districts were selected for project implementation using a comprehensive, quantitative assessment of district -
specific vulnerability to climate change — incorporating exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity of communities — 
and a rigorous stakeho lder engagement process (see Section 3 of Annex 2 : Feasibility Study, and Annex 7 h: 
Stakeholders  Engagement Plan).  
 
The districts are partly in the Sudan Savanna Zone, located in the north -eastern corner of Ghana, with the majority of 
the zone located in Burkina Faso and Mali. It is characterised by fire -swept short grasses interspersed with low -density


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
  
19 i.e. high exposure and sensitivity and low adaptive capacity.  
20 <5km  woodland. Grass cover is low, and some areas of land are bare and severely eroded. The Sudan Savanna Zone 
receives the least rainfall of Ghana’s agro -ecological zones (~940 mm per annum) and only one rainfall season. Other 
Districts are in the Guinea Savan na Zone (or Interior Savanna Zone), located north of the Transitional Zone.  This is 
the largest agro -ecological zone in Ghana, covering the northern half of the country. The zone is characterised by 
wooded grassland, consisting of a ground cover of grasse s of variable height, interspersed with fire -resistant, 
deciduous, broad -leaved trees. In general, tree cover and height decrease from south to north along a gradient of 
decreasing rainfall. The Guinea Savanna Zone receives ~1,100 mm of rainfall per year, mostly during one rainfall 
season.  
 
From those districts not currently receiving support, and taking climate change vulnerability scores into account, the 
final project districts were selected by national, regional and district level stakeholders from: i) the National Designated 
Authority (NDA) of Ghana within the Ministry of Finance (MoF); ii) members of the inter -ministerial Technical Advisory  
Committee (TAC) to the NDA; iii) staff of the Directorate of Crop Services from the Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
(MoFA); iv) representatives of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) from the Ministry of Environment, Science, 
Technology and Innovat ion (MESTI); v)  Ministry of Local Government, Chieftaincy and Religious Affairs  (MLG CRA );  
and vi) members of civil society organisations.  
 
 
 
 
Low CCV          High CCV   
 
Figure 2.Target districts of the project within the three northern regions. Districts that are not depicted in this map are receiving 
support from the SLWMP and Adaptation Fund projects and thus were not considered eligible for selection.  
 
Within each district, 15 communities will receive direct support from the project. Each community will receive support 
for three consecutive years (Table 1). Across the eight districts, the project will, therefore, support 120 communities 
over seven years. The direct beneficiary communities will be selected based on a rigorous set of selection criteria and 
comprehensive consultations at the national, regional , district and community levels  (see Annex 7h: Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan ). The selection criteria include inter alia : i) high vulnerability to climate change19; ii) proximity20 to at 
least five other vulnerable communities to promote knowledge and technology transfer to these vulnerable


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
  
21 Consultations with District Assemblies focused on district extension officers, planning officers, disaster risk officers and 
fire services.  
22 Project activities will enhance the agricultural productivity of smallholder farmers, allowing farmers to sell excess produce  
to increase their household income.  communities; iii) a willingness to participate; and iv) favourable land availability and access. Beneficiary communities 
will also be selected to ensure a representative geographic coverage across each district. The selection process has 
and will continue to involve consultations with: i) representatives from MESTI, MoFA and the NDA at the national level; 
ii) EPA and Department of Agriculture staff from the North  East, Upper East and Upper West regional offices; iii) zonal 
EPA officers within target distric ts; iv) District Assemblies (DA)21 from the eight target districts; v) leaders from potential 
beneficiary communities  (including chiefs and chief mothers) ; and vi) beneficiary community members.  
 
Table 1. Timeframe for community support for a single district. A total of 15 communities will be supported in each district.  
 
Community  Year  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Community 1 – 3        
Community 4 – 6        
Communities 7 – 9        
Communities 10 – 12        
Communities 13 – 15        
 
At the time of writing, four communities within each district have been selected based on the criteria described above. 
These communities were selected following detailed community consultations ( see Annex 7 h: Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan and Section E.5.3) that took place during the development of this Funding Proposal. Three of the 
four communities already identified will be selected to receive support during the first year of project implementation. 
The remaining community, as well as the additional communities that will also be identified through the selection 
process described above, will receive support from the second year of project  implementation onwards.  
 
To ensure adaptive lear ning from implementation when moving from one commu nity to the next (Error! Reference 
source not found. 2) lessons learned will be systematically captur ed from each community after the first three years 
of direct support and applying those insights to subsequent communities. The project implementation team will conduct 
evaluations with community leaders, local authorities and participants to assess the effec tiveness of interventions, 
identify challenges and document successful practices, particularly those related to climate vulnerability reduction, 
knowledge transfer, and land access. These findings will inform adjustments to the selection criteria, support strategies 
and community engagement methods, ensuring that the approach evolves and improves as the project progresses 
across the 120 communities. This iterative learning process will foster a dynamic, responsive project implementation 
that becomes more ta ilored to local contexts over time.  
 
Project objective:  
The proposed project objective is to enhance the climate resilience of vulnerable smallholder farming communities in 
northern Ghana by improving food security and enhancing the agro -based rural economy22. 
 
The project will be implemented in eight districts in northern Ghana that have been specifically chosen because: i) of 
their high vulnerability to climate change impacts ( see Annex 2: Feasibility Study, Section 3); and ii) they are currently 
not receiving support from other ongoing initiatives.  
 
The project’s objective will be achieved by the successful implementation of project activities to achieve f ive outputs 
comes as outlined in the Theory of Change and detailed in Section 13 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study  and summarised 
below : 
 
Component 1:   Early warning systems  
 
Output 1: Improved climate data and early warnings made available to facilitate proactive drought and flood 
management.


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
  
23 The nature -based infrastructure mentioned in the text (reforestation efforts through tree planting to reduce soil erosion 
and increase infiltration capacity and establishing riparian buffer zones along the riverside to reduce flood impacts) involv es 
potent ial impact on Indigenous Peoples’, particularly in terms of access to and use of their territories and the natural 
 Ghana’s early warning system will be enhanced by a range of interventions that will collectively facilitate access to 
improved information on floods and droughts (Activity 1.1), expand hydrometeorological and groundwater monitoring 
observation networks and  expand national radar coverage, particularly in underserved Northern region  which will 
significantly improve the accuracy of GMet’s numerical weather prediction model and  capacity to generate high skill 
forecast products  (Activity 1.2) , build capacities   to equip personnel with advanced skills in drought and flood monitoring, 
assessment, and response, incorporating the latest technologies and best practices (activity 1.3) . as well as 
establishing a robust national framework for generating skill advisories and disseminating, inter alia , climate -related 
hazard management information to local communities (Activity 1.4).   These efforts will be supported by a national 
action plan for drought and flood hazard management  (Activity 1.5).   
 
Activity 1.1: Implement a new early warning data information and management system to provide access to improved 
data sources and new datasets on floods and droughts  
Activity 1.2: Enhancing hydrometeorological and groundwater monitoring observation networks  
Activity 1.3: Capacitate key technical staff at national, regional and district levels, including GMet, HYDRO and WRC, 
for drought and flood services delivery  
Activity 1.4: Establishing a robust national communication framework for disseminating DSS and climate -related 
hazard management to communities .     
Activity 1.5: Im plement national action plan for coordinating drought and flood hazard management in the agricultural 
sector  
 
Component 2: Climate -resilient livelihoods  
 
Output 2: Climate -resilient agricultural practices, EbA and alternative climate -resilient livelihoods implemented in 
beneficiary communities.  
The proposed project will strengthen capacity for and implement climate -resilient agriculture, landscape restoration for 
drought and flood management and alternative climate -resilient livelihoods in beneficiary communities.  The proposed 
project will focus on training of 200 extension officers (of which 30% of women) on climate -resilient agricultural 
practices, EbA and alternative climate -resilient livelihoods, and support the implementation of appropriate climate 
change adaptation interventions drawn from a menu  of possible interventions identified from climate risk assessments  
and by  beneficiary communities  with an aim  to reduce their vulnerability to climate change. Each beneficiary community 
will be trained on climate change interventions and will develop/finalise their own Climate Change Adaptation Plan 
(CCAP ). The specific adaptation interventions identified within the CCAP – drawn from the menu of climate change 
adaptation interventions (See section 13, Annex 2: Feasibility Study) – will then be implemented in each community 
with the assistance of district extension officers.  
 
Activity 2.1: Train extension officers on climate -resilient agricultural practices, EbA and alternative climate -resilient 
livelihoods.  
Activity 2.2: Train beneficiary communities in northern Ghana on climate -resilient agricultural practices, EbA and 
alternative climate -resilient livelihoods.  
Activity 2.3: Develop community climate action plans (CCAPs) in collaboration with beneficiary communities.   
Activity 2.4: Implement climate change adaptation interventions, including climate -resilient agricultural practices, EbA 
and alternative climate -resilient livelihoods, identified in the CCAPs in beneficiary communities.  
Activity 2.5: Develop a monitoring and evaluation strategy for climate advisory services in northern Ghana to improve 
the accuracy and appropriateness of advisories for smallholder farmers.  
 
Output 3:   Restoration of landscape to reduce drought and flood risk.  
At the farm level, a variety of nature -based solutions or nature -based infrastructure can be implemented, including 
reforestation efforts through tree planting to reduce soil erosion and increase infiltration capacity and establishing 
riparian buffer zones  along the riverside to reduce flood impacts. Encouraging the adaptation of flood -based farming 
measures to store flood water to be used during dry spells and drain the land after rainfall or floods will preserve 
agricultural production.   During the proje ct lifespan, agroforestry and restoration interventions will be implemented in 
120 communities. Estimating ~1000 people per community, the direct beneficiaries of these interventions have been 
calculated by assuming that all 1000 individuals in each of the  120 target communities will benefit.    In addition, 2000 
hectares of riparian land in the 8 Districts will be restore d to protect against floods23.


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
  
resources, rivers and water points available in the area. Therefore, this component requires measures to ensure access to 
rivers is secured for Indigenous Peoples. During the inception phase of the project’s implementation, UNEP will consult 
Indigenous Peoples in the area to find out their customary use of the area and resources. In case the land and resources 
located in the area in which the nature -based infrastructures would be placed, securing FPIC will be required.   
The proposed project will:  
Activity 3.1 Implement land restoration on communal land in 120 communities as per CCAPs  
 
Output 4: Increased access of smallholder farmers to financial resources and engagement with the private sector.  
Output 4 will bridge this gap by increasing the capacity of the most vulnerable smallholder farmers , such as women  
farmers , to form farmer -based organisations (FBOs ) and manage finances and thereafter access agricultural credit and 
insurance.  The project will connect the local level demand for credit to international blended finance initiatives which 
UNEP is brokering. In doing so, this output will contribute to GCF Outc ome A7.0 — Strengthened adaptive capacity 
and reduced exposure to climate risks. GCF proceeds will not be used to finance credit lines and guarantees through 
financial intermediaries.  
 
Technical assistance will be provided  by GIRSAL a Government non-banking financial institution established to de -risk 
agricultural financing and stimulate increased lending to the agricultural sector,  with the project reimbursement of 
experts’ time and logistical costs (rental of training venue and catering).  GIRSAL confirmed its interest in partnering 
for the project  and agreed to lead the technical assistance to local FIs on the benefits of EBA/CRA for the 
creditworthiness of farmers .  
 
In order to c reate a credit score database on FBOs and their members that are targeted by the project and have never 
borrowed before , an entity such as Financial Access, an NGO with specific expertise in the creation of smallholder 
farmer credit databases  would be partnered with the EPA and the project.  The entity would also train LFIs on its scoring 
methodology and use of the database. Financial Access has already confirmed its strong interest in creating a credit 
score database for both farmers and FBOs targeted by the project, to be made available as an online dashboar d to 
LFIs. Financial Access could also provide technical assistance to LFIs on the Financial Access scoring methodology 
and use of the dashboard.  
 
Activity 4.1: Establish farmer -based organisations (FBOs) and Village Savings and Loans Associations (VSLAs)  that 
can access credit and insurance for farming and non -farming livelihood activities.  
Activity 4.2: Connect FBOs and local financial institutions to improve access of beneficiary communities to credit and 
insurance  products.  
Activity 4.3: Establish a blended finance model to provide credit lines to support climate -resilient agriculture.  
 
 
Output 5: Knowledge and awareness of climate threats to agricultural livelihoods and available adaptation options 
increased to inform the upscaling of climate change adaptation across northern Ghana.  
To promote the upscaling and replication of project interventions, Output 5 will focus on activities that contribute to 
knowledge sharing and awareness -raising at national and local levels. By promoting the upscaling and replication of 
project interventions outside of beneficiary communities, the project will facilitate widespread and sustained behavioural 
transformation in smallholder farming communities in northern Ghana. The project will specifically integrate findings 
and experiences of two other approv ed GCF project : the UNDP -Forestry Commission project  which  does not have a 
knowledge management output and the AfDB project which has a small activity on knowledge management.  The 
proposed pro ject will  increase the prominence of this output in its proposal by adding an economic valuation component 
to measure ecosystem services arising from all three GCF projects, drawing on the methodologies and experiences 
from our Environmental Economics work.  Furthermore, the drought and flood management plan at the national level  
(Output 1)  will feature as part of awareness and training workshops with District Assemblies in order to  mainstream  in 
the 8 District Medium Term Development Plans and will be used as part o f the instruments to guide the preparation of 
the CCAPs at the community level as an integral part of the CCAPs .   
 
Activity 5.1: Generate and disseminate knowledge products capturing best practice and lessons learned to inform the 
upscaling of climate change adaptation across northern Ghana.  
Activity 5.2: Conduct knowledge -sharing and awareness -raising events . 
Activity 5.3 Conduct district awareness and training workshops with District Assemblies to integrate CCAPs and EbA 
in District development plans and District environment plans and budgets


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
  
24 UNEP – 2016 – Stimulating Community Initiatives in Sustainable Land Management (SCI -SLM). Terminal Evaluation, 
Final Report. Available at: https://wedocs.unep.org/rest/bitstreams/10610/retrieve   
25 UNEP – 2011 – Addressing transboundary concerns in the Volta River basin and its downstream coastal area. Mid -term 
evaluation. Available at: https://wedocs.unep.org/rest/bitstreams/806/retrieve   
26 UNEP -UNDP – 2013 – CC-DARE – Climate Change and Development – Adapting by Reducing Vulnerability. Terminal 
Evaluation, Final Report. Available at: https://wedocs.unep.org/rest/bitstreams/818/retrieve    B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
The proposed project will be implemented over a seven -year period . The United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP) will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE)  and the following entities will serve as the Executing Entities (EEs) : 
i) Government of Ghana represented by  the Ministry of Environment, Science and Tech nology (MESTI) delegating to 
the Environment Protection Agency (EPA) , which will provide overall lead coordinating and executing role for the 
project, and  for Activities  2.1 2.2, 2.3, 2.4 , 2.5 , in close collaboration and coordination with the Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture (MOFA) as implementing partner (IP), and lead on Activities  3.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 5.1, 5.2  and 5. 3; ii). 
Government of Ghana represented by the Ministry of Communication  and Digitalization’s  Ghana Meteorological 
Agency (GM ET) for Activities 1.1, 1,2,1.3,1.4,1.5  . with the UNEP -Danish Hydraulic Institute (DHI) providing technical 
advisory services and Ghana’s Water Resources Commission serving as implementing partner (IP)  for national and 
district level engagement and coordination . 
 
 
Accredited Entity  
As the Accredited Entity , UNEP will carry out fiduciary and safeguards oversight and provide the necessary scientific 
expertise and technical support to the project formulation, start up, implementation, evaluations and closure.  In 
addition, a UNEP representative will fulfil the role of Task Manager (TM) , taking responsibility for project oversight and 
supervision , including undertaking at least two missions per year to the project . As AE, UNEP will ensure that the 
project activities are aligned with both GCF and UNEP’s policies. Operating policies and procedures will follow UNEP’s 
programme manual, which includes provisions for financial management and procurement . 
 
UNEP is implementing several large integrated programmes funded by the GEF (the largest being USD98M for the net 
zero, nature positive accelerator integrated programme).   We have also implemented several projects in Ghana as 
part of regional and global pr ojects.   UNEP has extensive experience in the design and implementation of initiatives 
that promote EbA — which delivers adaptation as well as mitigation benefits — and has championed tools and 
methodologies that the proposed project will rely on at a nati onal and global level. These include Vulnerability Impact 
Assessments, Natural Capital Accounting, among others.  An example of UNEP’s operating experience in the region is 
the Stimulating Community Initiatives in Sustainable Land Management project (SCI -SLM, 2009 –2014)24. The overall 
objective of the SCI -SLM was to refine ways of stimulating the improvement and upscaling of community -based 
sustainable land management initiatives and to institutionally embed SCI -SLM approaches at local and regional levels 
in four pilot cou ntries in Africa, including Ghana. UNEP was also active in Ghana under the  Federal Ministry for the 
Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety (BMUB)  UNEP/UNDP/WRI  GCF Readiness 
Programme. Under this programme, UNEP supported Ghana in capacity development with regards to National 
Designated Authority (NDA) capacity and decision -making about project prioritisation. It also supported national entity 
accreditation capacity building, as well as the accreditation application submission and was  selected as an AE for this 
project when it was determined that national accreditation might delay the submission of this proposal. Specific projects 
implemented by the UNEP in Ghana include inter alia : i) addressing transboundary concerns in the Volta River basin 
and its downstream coastal area (2007 –2012)25; and ii) CC -DARE — Climate Change and Development — Adapting 
by Reducing Vulnerability (2008 –2012)26. In addition to the aforementioned projects, UNEP is the Delivery Partner for 
Ghana’s NAP Readiness project GHA -RS-003 “Enhancing multi -sector planning and capacity for effective adaptation 
in Ghana”. UNEP’s central role in Ghana’s NAP process allows for close alignment of the proposed project with the 
country’s adaptation processes, including the central - and district -level systems for adaptation planning being 
established through the NAP Readiness project. Where possible, existing structures established under the NAP 
Readiness project will be used by the proposed project to maximise efficiency and collaboration .  The project will also 
benefit from UNEP’s Regional office for Africa’s participation in the UN Country Team (UNCT) monthly coordination 
meetings, hosted by the UN Resident Coordinator Office, with the aim of ensuring effective coordination of UN 
programmes and projects executed by Government ministries and agencies with support from UN agencies (e.g. 
UNDP, FAO, etc.), and benefit from lesson learned and avoid duplication of efforts.  
 
Executing Entities


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
  
27 The PCA will determine requirements for the disbursement and management of funds to the EE, as well as establish 
agreed upon supervisory roles.  The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation 
(MESTI) will serve as the main Executing Entity  (EE) of the project.  The EPA is the lead institution for UNFCCC 
activities in the country and is the main Country Implementation Institution for the technical coordination of activities on 
climate change and other environmental conventions ratified by Ghana. The EPA has a proven record as an executing 
entity in Ghana, having been instrumental in the imp lementation of large -scale environmental programmes, including 
inter alia  the GEMP and SLWMP.  
 
The Ghana Meteorological Agency (GMet) will implement Output 1. GMet have technical expertise with respect to 
climate variability, climate change, seasonal forecasting and drought assessmen t.  
 
UNEP will sign  separate  Project Cooperation Agreement s (PCA s) with the EPA  and GMet to establish clear roles and 
responsibilities for the execution of project activities27; and to ensure that the project is executed in line with GCF and 
UNEP rules, policies and requirements. The PCAs will establish clear roles and responsibilities for the respective parties 
for the delivery of the proposed activities, the schedule and conditions for instalments, the determination of the 
prevailing fiduciary standards and the terms and conditio ns for arbitrations and termination of contract. The PCAs will 
include specific obligations for the EEs on project execution, financial management, personnel administration and 
reporting, as well as on arbitration and liability terms. The EEs will be requi red to comply with UNEP rules, policies and 
procedures on procurement. The EPA  and GMet will be accountable to the AE for the effective use of resources during 
project implementation . The EEs will supervise, oversee and manage project implementation, as well as report on 
project progress; and to ensure that project activities are well coordinated and aligned with national priorities. UNEP, 
as Accredited Entity for the project, has under taken a capacity assessment of the EPA particularly by reviewing the 
elements of governance and public accountability.  UNEP  is confident that the EPA  has the relevant fiduciary and 
financial management capacity to act as the EE. All operating procedures will align with the UNEP’s programme 
manual, which includes provisions for financial management and procurement.   GMET and EPA will sign an 
Implementation Agreement  that sets out the reporting relationship (GMET to EPA) as well r esponsibilities on delivering 
project targets.  
UNEP will also sign a PCA with the UNEP -DHI Centre on Water and Environment (UNEP -DHI Centre)  which is  a United 
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) centre of expertise. UNEP -DHI Centre is dedicated to supporting UNEP’s 
work in helping national governments improve the management, development and use of their freshwater resources in 
the face of climate chal lenges. The UNEP -DHI Centre is hosted by DHI, an independent, not -for- profit, international 
advisory and research organization. DHI has more than 60 year s of experience in water resources management and 
is represented by over 1,000 staff in more than 25 countries. For the upcoming project, UNEP -DHI Centre will draw 
upon DHI’s cutting edge hydrological and climatic modelling  tools, which are globally recognized and used by 
governments and leading international organizations in many regions of the world.  UNEP UNEP -DHI was the 
implementing partner in the pilot project that looked at the flood and drought early warning system for the Volta Basin, 
covering Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote D’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali and Togo, which ended in 2017.  UNEP -DHI is now providi ng 
technical assistance to a project focused on reversing the deterioration of ecosystems and water resources in the Volta 
River Basin. The goal of the project is to support integrated ecosystem -based development in the Volta River Basin by 
enhancing transboundary governance and restoring and conserving ecosystems to ensure sustainable livelihoods. 
Funded by the Global Environm ent Facility (GEF) through UN Environment Programme and IUCN, the five -year project 
is being implemented by the Volta Basin Authority (VBA) and the Global Water Partnership -West Africa (GWP -WA) 
between 2023 -2028.  
 
 
Structure for implementation and governance  
 
At the national level, the EPA will receive guidance from a Project Steering Committee  (PSC) and technical advice 
from the National Climate Change Committee  (NCCC). The PSC will be responsible for providing project oversight 
and advisory support for project implementation. This includes reviewing annual work plans and project reports, and 
approving changes to project targets, activities or timelines. Bi -annua l PSC meetings — along with ad hoc  meetings 
when deemed necessary — will be held to take management decisions, discuss project performance against indicators 
and provide technical/strategic guidance to the Project Management Unit (PMU). The PSC  will be co -chaired by MESTI 
and UNEP and comprise representatives from the: i) MoFA ; ii) Ministry of Finance (MoF); iii) Forestry Commission; iv)


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
  
28 In 2017, the Government of Ghana began restructuring the SADA  into the Northern Accelerated Development Authority 
(NADA) with the intention of accelerating economic and social development in the Northern Development Zone.  
29 Organisations that may represent Indigenous Peoples on the PSC could include  the Centre for Indigenous Knowledge 
and Organizational Development (CIKOD) and the Pastoral Rights Protection Network Ghana  as these are the foremost 
organisations in Ghana advancing the rights of pastoralists . These organisations would only be included based on a clear 
and formal nomination from traditional traditional authorities respresenting potentially  affected Indigenous Peoples . If IP 
groups prefer representation by other traditional authorities on the PSC, these will be prioritised by the project . Water Resources Commission; v) Ministry of Local Government , Chieftaincy and Religious Affa irs (MLGCRA) ; vi) 
Ministry of Land and Natural Resources; vii) Savannah Accelerated Development Authority (SADA); viii) GMet; ix) 
NADMO; x) Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection (MoGCSP); and xi) Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) 
in Agriculture28. Gender balance will be ensured in the PSC, and women’s associations , ethnic minority  groups  and 
Indigenous Peoples  will be represented  through inclusion of CSOs advocacy groups  that will be selected by them29, or 
directly by traditional authorities nominated during the inception period . National implem enting entities from Ghana 
accredited, or currently seeking accreditation, with the GCF, namely the Social Investment Fund and EcoBank, will also 
be invited to observe PSC meetings. The EPA will be the Secretariat to the PSC.  
 
The Project Management Unit  (PMU) will be in the Regional EPA office located in Tamale.  A Project Manager (PM) 
will be competitively recruited to the PMU, along with a Financial Officer (FO), a Procurement and Administrative Officer 
(PAO), A Monitoring and Reporting Specialist  (MRO)  and Social and Environment Safeguards and Gender Specialist  
(ESS/GS) . The Deputy Executive Director (Technical) of EPA will be assigned the role of Project Director and will be 
the primary focal point in the EPA for the project. A UNEP Chief Technical Advisor , based in the  PMU  will be responsible 
for providing technical advisory support  to the PM and PMU  in the overall planning, implementation and monitoring of 
the project, and ensure programmatic and technical direction of the project to achieve intended objectives, outputs and 
deliverables. PM responsibility will include coordinating with executing enti ties and overall management of the project , 
regional and district staff to ensure efficient execution at the local level. The responsibilities of the FO and PAO will 
include: i) providing administrative, logistical and financial support to the PMU at the n ational level; ii) assisting the PMU 
and the UNEP Finance and Procurement Officer ( FPO) in writing and disseminating project reports; and iii) ensuring 
that project activities and tasks are carried out following government and UNEP best practices and procedures. In 
particular, the FPO — in cooperation with  the UNEP Finance Management Officer (FMO)  — will be responsible for 
managing all financial transactions, assuring alignment with project work plans and national priorities.  
 
National, regional and local stakeholders  
At the regional (sub -national) level, the project will coordinate with  three regional EPA offices and Department of 
Agriculture offices located in Nalerigu  (North  East Region), Bolgatanga (Upper East Region) and Wa (Upper West 
Region). In each region, the EPA and Department of Agriculture will receive guidance from Local Steering Committees 
(LSCs) comprising the: i) Regional Coordinating Council; ii) Regional Planning Of fice; iii) Regional Director of 
Agriculture; iv) Regional Director of the EPA; v) Distri ct Coordinating Directors of project districts; vi) District Directors 
of Agriculture of project districts; vii) Regional Fire Officers; viii) District Forest Officers; and ix) District Planning O fficers 
of the project districts. Additional members may be included in the LSCs if and when required.  
 
The EPA will establish a n Implementation Agreement (IA)  with the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) with regards 
to the management and execution of agricultural interventions.   A Project Implement  Manual will be established that 
defines roles and mandates of the respective parties to execute the project in accordance with the financing proposal. 
The MoFA Agricultural Extension Agents will be the primary link between district government structures and beneficiary 
communities.  This will include capacity building activities from the respective institutions for farming communities, as 
well as feedback and inputs from farming communities to project implementing parties in shaping the information 
services and their delivery modes to target the needs of farmers. Utilising the extension services communication 
channels will be particularly important given their importance in communicating technological advances and available  
resources from the national level institutions to the local community level (further details are provided in Annex 2: 
Feasibility Study). The need to equip extension officers with better climate information that can then be transferred to 
local communitie s has been echoed in community level consultations with farmers. In beneficiary communities, Climate 
Change Action Groups (CCAGs) and Farmer Based Organisations (FBOs) will provide a link between community 
members and district -level government structures and will serve to coordinate community -level activities.  
 
The GM et will establish a n Implementation Agreement (IA)  with the Water Resources Commission (WRC) with 
regards to integrating  hydrological information , in particular groundwater mo nitoring, into early warnings made 
available to facilitate proactive flood and drought hazard management.  A Project Implement Manual will be 
established that defines roles and mandates of the respective parties to execute the project in accordance with the 
financing proposal.


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
  
In establishment of the national actional plan and coordination mechanism, as well as training activities under Output 
1, the project will also seek to include and link to other relevant stakeholders along the agricultural -value chain — such 
as technology providers and insurance actors — where found to be beneficial to the farming communities, to ensure 
that the project max imises its benefits to local communities and agricultural sector as a whole. Further details are 
provided in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7 h) and the Gender Action Plan (Annex 8).  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Implementation arrangements for the project. Black arrows depict reporting lines.


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
  
30 FAO. 2014. Analysis of Public Expenditure in Support of the Food and Agriculture Sector in Ghana, 2006 -2012: A 
preliminary assessment. Technical notes series, MAFAP, by Ghins, L., Rome.  
31 IMF Survey – 2016 – Ghana: The Bumpy Road to Economic Recovery. Available at: www.imf.org/ .  
32 World Bank – 2017 – Trading markets in Ghana – Country Private Sector Diagnostic. Available at: 
http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/ac42c20a -c82c -48b7 -8432 -221c0e066e2a/CPSD -Creating -Markets -in-Ghana -Nov-
2017_v1.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CID=IFC_LI_IFC_EN_EXT.  
33 https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019 -05-28/ghana -s-debt-at-the-highest -in-four-years -as-revenue -undershoots   
Figure 4. Flow of funds and contractual arrangement for the project, green arrows indicate the flow of funds and 
contractual arrangement, while blue arrows indicate contractual arrangement  only between the relevant parties.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Building the climate -resilience of the Ghanaian agricultural sector is vital to protect  the livelihoods of smallholder farmers 
in northern Ghana. Shifting rainfall and temperature regimes are expected to reduce already suboptimal crop yields. 
Consequently, food security and income generation of the country’s most vulnerable people will be negatively impacted. 
These negative impacts will be compounde d by — and further enhance — severe environmental degradation resulting 
from rapid population growth, dependen ce on natural resources and the use of unsustainable agricultural techniques. 
Without effective adaptation action, smallholder farmers will likely become increasingly vulnerable to the current and 
future effects of climate change, with serious repercussion s for both the northern and Ghanaian economy. However, 
climate change adaptation in Ghana is hampered by a lack of financial resources, institutional and technical capacity 
needed to implement effective adaptation interventions.  
 
Without investment into adaptation interventions, the livelihoods of ~ 10 million men and ~ 12 million women  (~75% of 
the population) who are reliant on agriculture will remain at risk to the threats of climate change.  However, the lack of 
financial resources hampers climate change adaptation in Ghana. The agricultural sector in Ghana is reliant on foreign 
funding, with ~65% of total public expenditure in support of food and agriculture funded by external sources. These 
include, among others, the World Bank, USAID an d the European Union30. The need for external funding is because 
of the current state of the Ghanaian economy. Despite a period of rapid economic growth between 2000 and 2013, 
graduating Ghana to lower -middle -income status, the country’s economy has seen a decline in growth ove r the past 
seven years31. Increasing debt, high inflation and currency depreciation have contributed to the deterioration of the 
economy, leading to a current account deficit of -9.3%32 and a debt -to-GDP ratio of 58%33. It is estimated that without 
interventions, the cumulative damages of weather events in four of the eight implementation districts will reach 
US$680.2 million by 2050 (elaborated in Annex 3: Economic and Financial Analysis). These damages will further 
constrain the GoG’s fiscal space for financing adaptation and resilience interventions. Additional challenges to Ghana’s 
economic outlook include high domestic financing costs, technical problems in the oil and gas sectors, energy problems


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
  
34 World Bank – 2017 – Ghana Country Overview. Available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/ghana/overview .  
35 Sova C, Chaudhury AS, Nelson W, Nutsukpo DK, Zougmoré RB. 2014. Climate change adaptation policy in Ghana: 
Priorities for the agriculture sector.  
36 Mosello B, Adamtey R, Obuobie E (eds). 2017. Making water infrastructure investment decisions in a changing climate. A 
political economy study of river basin development in Ghana . Overseas Develoment Institute. London.  
37 Ibid.  
38 Ibid.  
39 Fearon J. 2000. Economic analysis of soil conservation practices in northern Ghana. MPhil, University of Ghana, Accra.  
40 Antwi -Agyei P. 2012. Vulnerability and adaptation of Ghana's food production systems and rural livelihoods to climate 
variability. DPhil, University of Leeds, Leeds.  
41 Gallenstein RA, Mishra K, Sam AG, Miranda MJ. 2019. Willingness to pay for insured loans in northern Ghana. Journal of 
Agricultural Economics  70: 640 -662. related to state -owned enterprises and continued weak commodity prices34. These factors have caused an 
unfavourable fiscal climate for the Ghanaian government, resulting in its inability to fund or secure private -sector loan 
financing for large -scale investments in innovative climate change adaptation measures. Therefore, give n the current 
economic situation in Ghana, the contribution of funds by the GCF is critical for the successful implementation of the 
proposed project. Without investment into climate -resilient agriculture and EbA interventions, the livelihoods of the 
~75% of the population of northern Ghana that are reliant on smallholder farming are at risk to the threats of climate 
change.  
 
Funds are being requested by the GoG in the form of a grant without repayment contingency, given the focus of the 
project on the most vulnerable communities in Ghana. The grant funds will be used to provide the inputs necessary for 
project implementation w hile the EPA and MOFA  will bear a large share of the project staffing costs. Grant finance is 
needed to fund the strengthening of technical and institutional capacity to develop, implement and coordinate climate 
change adaptation at regional and district level in northern Ghan a because of inadequate financial resources35. 
Although District Assemblies generate some revenues on their own (i.e. through district taxation), they barely manage 
to collect sufficient funds to cope with the many development priorities they face36. This is especially so in northern 
Ghana where many of the inhabitants depend on subsistence rain -fed agriculture for their livelihood37. The limited 
budgets are spent on priority projects, such as health, road construction and education with inadequate resources 
available for additional activities such as climate change adaptation38. Given the current economic situation in Ghana, 
the contribution of funds by the GCF is critical for the successful implementation of the proposed project.  
 
Given the  focus of the project on the most vulnerable communities in Ghana , there is currently limited investment from 
the private sector in these approaches. Consequently, northern Ghana has limited access to the financial resources 
necessary for the adoption of appropriate climate -resilient practices to adapt to climate change . Smallholder farmers 
are unable to leverage private sector finance as financial institutions are unwilling to grant loans to them for agricultural 
activities  because of the high -risk nature of rain -fed agriculture in the region39,40. Instead, the banks employ joint liability 
lending structures and lend  to registered farmer -based organisations (FBOs)41.  
 
The sustainable development of northern Ghana’s agricultural sector requires substantial investment into adaptation 
practices such as climate -resilient agriculture and EbA to build the climate -resilience of vulnerable farming 
communities. The initial returns of such investments are largely at the individual level, with returns being re -investe d 
by farmers into agricultural production and used to cover their basic needs, leaving limited scope for cost recovery for 
early investors. A GCF grant is, therefore, being sought by the GoG to invest in climate change adaptation and bring 
about a paradigm  shift in the agro -based rural economy of northern Ghana. Through this project, GCF support will 
accelerate northern Ghana’s transition towards climate -resilient sustainable development, facilitating economic growth 
and securing the livelihoods of vulnerab le smallholder farming communities.  
 
The Government of Ghana has secured co -financing to the value of US$ 6,987,681  through in -kind contributions and 
inclusive of a cash co -financing of US$ 250,000 . In-kind contributions consistent of staff time, offices and equipment 
that will be provided by the EPA and Directorate of Crop Services to implement this project.  
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
  
 The project will work at three levels: community level on planning and implementation systems as well as  at the 
Regional and National level regarding investments in weather forecast capability that will serve the Northern Sector, 
complementing investments in forecasting capability in the South of the country  as well as  establishing a national 
action plan for drought and flood hazard management .  The community level integrated ecosystem -based adaptation 
approach will inform the District level planning and bu dgeting systems. The project will build capacity and awareness 
of District planning officers to  scale up the project approach. C ombined with associated community training, extension 
services and awareness -raising, this will  increase opportunities for knowledge and technology exchange between 
communities, and thereby promote autonomous upscaling of these interventions.  
Fundamental aspects of the project’s sustainability are listed below.  
 
• The project will create capacity in District Authorities  to replicate and maintain climate adaptation activities after the 
initial investment period, through the integration of climate change adaptation into regional and district medium -
term development plans  as well as through the consolidation of a country -based financing mechanism to channel 
climate finance at the local level.   
• Beneficiary communities will receive extensive training on climate -resilient agricultural practices and the 
implementation of on -the-ground EbA interventions. In addition to building the adaptive capacity of these rural 
communities and allowing them to bec ome self -sufficient under climate change conditions,  an enabling 
environment will be created for the long -term maintenance and upscaling of proposed project activities. This will 
be further supported by the introduction of alternative climate -resilient liv elihoods that add value to agricultural 
products, thereby further promoting sustainability. This will include improved storage, processing equipment and 
access to finance.  
• A grassroots approach to building climate -resilience will ensure that activities are needs -based, locally appropriate 
and supported by local communities. An extensive community engagement process — including the development 
of Community Climate Action Plan s — will be carried out. Throughout this process women and youth will be 
targeted, particularly through the introduction of alternative climate -resilient livelihoods, to ensure their participation 
and support for project interventions. This will promote th e long -term commitment of community members after the 
project’s implementation period has elapsed.  
• The project will increase the access of smallholder farmers to financial resources by establishing FBOs that can 
access credit and insurance for farming and non -farming livelihood activities. In addition, the project will provide 
smallholder farmers in the FBOs, training in business and financial management. This enterprise approach will 
ensure that communities are equipped with the financial resources, business knowledge and financial capacity 
required to sust ain and upscale project interventions after the support phase.  The project will develop bankable 
deals for de -risking finance for access by smallholder farmers through the Agri3 Fund currently being established 
as a partnership between UNEP, Rabobank and t he Dutch Government.  
 
An extensive knowledge -sharing programme will support the project’s M&E activities, which will allow non -beneficiary 
communities to learn from the experiences of nearby target communities. In addition, annual knowledge -sharing 
conferences will function as a platform for discussions on the lessons learned and sharing of new ideas and research 
on EbA to ensure the sustainability of interventions under future climate change conditions. Subsequently, this 
knowledge base will be used as a resource to leverage ad ditional funds from public and private sector investors to 
maintain and replicate project interventions after the project’s funding period, while further strengthening cross -
sectoral collaboration.


---
*Page 29*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 23 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi  + vii) Total amount  Currency  
 63.211141  million USD ($)   
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter a mount    Enter  % equity 
return  
(iv) Guarantees  Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants  Enter a mount     
(vi) Grants  63.211141     
(vii) Results -
based payments  Enter a mount     
(b) Co -
financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
6.987681  million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
Government of 
Ghana – 
Environment 
Protection 
Agency  Grant  0.25 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Government of 
Ghana – 
Environment 
Protection 
Agency  In kind  1.988967 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Government of 
Ghana – 
Ministry of Food 
and Agriculture  In kind  2.848714  million USD 
($)  Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Government of 
Ghana – Water 
Resources 
Commission, 
Ministry of 
Sanitation and 
Water 
Resources  In kind  0.5 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Government of 
Ghana – Ghana 
Meteorological 
Agency  In kind  1.4 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
70.198822  million USD ($)


---
*Page 30*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 24 
   
 (d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page)  N/A  
C.2. Financing by component   
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($) GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrume
nt Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrume
nt Name of 
Institutio
ns 
     
Component 
1: Early 
warning 
systems  Output 1: Improved 
climate data and 
early warnings 
made available to 
facilitate proactive 
flood and drought 
hazard 
management.   15.358090    13.458090   Grants   1.900000  In-kind  GMet,  
Component 
2: Climate -
resilient 
livelihoods  Output 2: Climate -
resilient agricultural 
practices, EbA and 
alternative climate -
resilient livelihoods 
implemented in 
beneficiary 
communities.   25.917811    22.819097  Grants   3.098714  In-kind 
 EPA & 
MoFA  
Output 3:  
Restoration of 
landscape to reduce 
drought and flood 
risk. 20.448344  19.823957  Grants  0.624387  In-kind EPA 
Output 4: Increased 
access of 
smallholder farmers 
to financial 
resources and 
engagement with 
the private sector.   1.889342   1.071100   Grants  0.428  In-kind  
EPA 
 0.390242  In-kind 
Output 5: 
Knowledge and 
awareness of 
climate threats to 
agricultural 
livelihoods and 
available adaptation 
options increased to 
inform the upscaling 
of climate change 
adaptation across 
northern Ghana.   2.855148   2.464906  Grants   0.390242  In-kind 
Choose 
an item.  EPA


---
*Page 31*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 25 
   
 M&E Costs   1.392462   1.314414  Grants   0.78048  In-kind EPA 
Project 
Management Costs  Enter a mount  
2.337625  Enter 
amount  
2.259577  Grants  Enter 
amount  
0.78048  In-kind 
Choose 
an item.  EPA  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  70.198822  63.211141  6.987681  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
The proposed project will build the technical and institutional capacity of regional and district government staff 
and local smallholder farming communities to implement and monitor climate change adaptation projects under 
Outputs 1  - 5 of the project . Output 1 will transition farmers to a proactive planning and management approach 
to climate hazards. Under Output 2, 3 and 4 of the project, capacity -building activities will focus on training 
extension officers on climate -resilient agriculture and EbA (Activity 3.1); beneficiary communities on: i) climate -
resilient agriculture, EbA and alternative climate -resilient livelihoods (Activity 3. 2); ii) basic business and 
financial management (Activity 3.2); and iii) processes for applying for credit and insurance from LFIs (Activity 
4.2). Capacity -building activities conducted under Output 3 will allow communities to become financially self -
sufficient, creating opportunities for further investments into climate -resilient livelihoods.  
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
The proposed project will contribute to the GCF’s fund -level adaptation objective of increased climate -resilient 
sustainable development by reducing the vulnerability of smallholder farmers in northern Ghana through the 
implementation and adoption of clima te-resilient agriculture, ecosystem -based adaptation and alternative climate -
resilient livelihoods. The number of direct and indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, and the project’s 
contributions to the GCF’s outcome -level objectives and specific  results areas are described and quantified below42.   
 
Adaptation impact potential through increased resilience  
 
The proposed project will contribute to three GCF adaptation results areas (ARAs), namely: i) ARA1 — increased 
resilience of the most vulnerable people and communities; ii) ARA2 — increased health, well -being, food and water 
security; ARA3 - Infrastructure and built environment  and i v) ARA4 — increased resilience of ecosystems and 
ecosystem services. Specific contributions to these result areas are described in the following sub -sections.  
 
Direct beneficiaries of the proposed project will include the 691,125  rural crop farmers who will benefit from improved 
coverage by Early Warning Systems (Output 1), as well as 6920 farmers benefitting from  improved  climate -resilient 
agricultural practices  and 120,000 farm ers benefitting from agroforestry and restoration  (Output 3)  
 
Indirect beneficiaries comprises the population of the three target regions in northern Ghana — 2,861,674  people — 
who will benefit from the enhanced food and water security and improved resilience to climate hazards delivered by the 
proposed project  through the improvement of climate data and early warnings dissemination (Output 1). This 
information will be used to, inter alia , coordinate national -level drought and flood risk planning and responses, which 
will improve the climate -responsiveness of national planning in the future. For more information on the project’s outputs, 
see Section 13 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
 
ARA1 – Increased resilience of the most vulnerable people and communities  
 
 
42 Detailed information on the assumptions and estimates of the impact potential of the proposed project are provided in the 
project’s results framework and economic analysis (Section E of this document and Annex 3, respectively).


---
*Page 32*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 26 
   
 Ghana’s early warning system will be enhanced by a range of interventions that will collectively facilitate access to 
improved information on floods and droughts (Activity 1.1), expand hydrometeorological and groundwater monitoring 
observation networks and  expand national radar coverage, particularly in underserved Northern region  which will 
significantly improve the accuracy of GMet’s numerical weather prediction model and  capacity to generate high skill 
forecast products (Activity 1.2) , build capacities  to equip personnel with advanced skills in drought and flood monitoring, 
assessment, and response, incorporating the latest technologies and best practices (activity 1.3) . as well as  
establishing a robust national framework for generating skill advisories and disseminating, inter alia , climate -related 
hazard management information to local communities (Activity 1.4).   These efforts will be supported by a national 
action plan for drought and flood hazard management (Activity 1.5). Although the interventions will be primarily 
designed to support direct beneficiaries (e.g., rural crop farmers), indirect beneficiaries —such as local businesses, 
families, and surrounding communities —will al so gain access to early warning data, which will enhance their ability to 
plan and reduce disaster risks, thus improving resilience.  
 
ARA2 – Increased health, well -being, food and water security  
 
Ghana’s early warning system  will be enhanced under Output 1 to facilitate proactive drought and flood management. 
Access to up -to-date climate information, facilitated by the mobile application (Activity 1.4), will benefit 691,125  rural 
crop farmers  (52% women and 48% men),  across the country  who will be empowered to effectively plan for and 
respond to drought and flood hazards, effectively reducing their food  insecurity. Proactive measures that farmers will 
be supported to undertake via this intervention include, inter alia : i) timing crop planting for optimum yields; ii) shifting 
to drought - and flood -resistant crops; and iii) relocation of agricultural efforts to more suitable sites that will minimise 
crop losses.  These proactive measures will reduce the impacts of extreme weather events on food production, leading 
to greater food security for rural households. Additionally, improved management of water resources, coupled with 
climate -resilient agricultural practices, will ensure more reliable w ater availability for both agricultural and household 
use, contributing to improved health and well -being by reducing the risks of food and water shortages during periods 
of climatic stress.  Furthermore, by reducing the risks of crop losses and supporting improved agricultural practices, the 
food security of broader rural populations, including those not directly targeted by the interventions, will also improve. 
Additionally, local ecosystems’ stability from proactive management of agricultural lands will c ontribute to improved 
water security in rural areas.  
 
Food security will also be improved  through activities under Output 2 by the introduction of climate -resilient agricultural 
interventions across northern Ghana , including measures such as crop rotation and intercropping, slash and mulching, 
conservation tillage, contour  ploughing, contour bunding, vegetative barriers, ridging, organic compositing and zai pits, 
cover cropping, introducing climate -resilient seed varieties, adapted planting calendar and dry season gardening . These 
strategies will  benefit 6,920 farms  (and 13, 840 hectares) , representing  an average of 2% population in the 8 Districts.    
 
Investments under Output 3 will improve the integrity of soils, supporting water infiltration to the aquifers, accumulation 
of nutrients and moisture in the soils and preventing soil erosion  which, coupled with heavy rainfall events, leads to 
flooding and loss of physical and natural assets.  
 
ARA3 - Infrastructure and built environment  
 
Investments under Output 2 and Output 3 will impro ve the resilience of the land and livelihoods of households to the 
impacts of extreme weather events on infrastructure and the built environment within the eight districts and 120 
beneficiary communities.   The planned investments in water storage tanks and small -scale water infrastructure under 
Output 2  in the 120 beneficiar y communities will be designed in order to withstand extreme weather events .  The 
restoration activities within the landscape will also serve to mitigate against loss to in frastructure and the built 
environment.  
 
ARA4 – Increased resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services  
 
The site -level restoration efforts implemented under Output 3 — including agroforestry, small -scale communal fodder 
banks, riverbank restoration, flood risk reduction and fire management — are expected to improve the resilience of 
14,000 ha of vulnerable ecosystems and ecosystem services.   A further 120 beneficiary communities, comprising a 
total 120,000 people (assuming an average size of 1,000 people per community), will benefit from land restoration and 
agro-forestry on communal land.  
 
The Economic modelling carried out for the economic and financial assessment estimated that restoration of 14, 000 
ha of degraded land in strategic locations in four Districts would reduce flood risk by 46.7%.  The budget allows for 
restoration of 14,000 ha across the 8 Districts  (Output 3) .  Impacts against this indicator would be verifiable in longer


---
*Page 33*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 27 
   
 time periods than the project grant . The project will reduce the risk of floods, benefiting populations outside the 
immediate target area. Restoration and flood risk reduction will enhance ecosystem services such as  soil fertility  and 
water regulation that are crucial for livelihoods in adjacent communities, resulting in broader resilience to climate change 
impacts.  
 
GCF Outcome -level enabling environment indicators  
The proposed project will be evaluated against several relevant GCF impact assessment factors, as specified in the 
GCF Integrated Results Management Framework . It is anticipated that the project will achieve two Outcome -level 
indicators,  described below43. 
 
• Core Indicator 5: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for low emission climate -resilient development pathways in a country -driven manner; and  
• Core indicator 8: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to effective knowledge generation and learning 
processes, and use of good practices, methodologies and standards.  
 
Degree to which GCF investments contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory frameworks for low emission 
climate -resilient development pathways in a country -driven manner .  
 
The project will build capacity and awareness of District planning officers to  scale up the project approach. C ombined 
with associated community training, extension services and awareness -raising, this will  increase opportunities for 
knowledge and technology exchange between communities and thereby promote autonomous upscaling of these 
interventions.  
At the field level, strengthened institutional development will be achieved by providing REMCs, DEMCs, as well as 
Regional EPA and Department of Agriculture offices with equipment required for effective and efficient delivery and 
monitoring of climate chan ge adaptation and agricultural extension services. Furthermore, the project will train  200 
extension officers (30%  of which  are women) in the target districts on climate -resilient agricultural processes, EbA and 
alternative climate -resilient livelihoods. K nowledge will be extended to smallholder farmers in target communities — 
and other communities not targeted by the project. In addition, , the utilization of grants for purposes that include both 
capacity building and TA aimed at adaptation mainstreaming on the one hand, and a country -based, progressively 
institutionalized local adaptation financing mechanism, create a holistic and integrated  approach to tackle the issue of 
climate finance deployment at the sub -national level and boosting of resleince build ing efforts at the community level .  
  
A monitoring programme will be designed to monitor project progress towards its targets and evaluate the socio -
economic impacts of the various climate change adaptation interventions being implemented. The monitoring 
programme will be designed in collaboration with relevant national research institutions, such as University for 
Development Studies, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Forest Research Institute of Ghana 
Soil Research Institute and Ghana M eteorological Agency. The monitoring programme will build an evidence base for 
the further implementation of climate change adaptation interventions in northern Ghana.  
 
Degree to which GCF investments contribute to effective knowledge generation and learning processes, and use of 
good practices, methodologies and standards .  
 
An awareness -raising campaign will be implemented in both beneficiary and non -beneficiary communities in northern 
Ghana. The campaign will increase awareness about appropriate climate change adaptation interventions and will 
promote the upscaling of these interventions outside of the project target sites. The awareness -raising campaign will 
be develop ed by a suitably qualified national organisation and will utilise locally -appropriate communication and 
knowledge dissemination mechanisms, such as video docum entaries and phone -in radio shows. All of the awareness -
raising activities included in the campaign will be appropriate to local circumstances, taking into account literacy levels 
and access to different types of media.  Various knowledge products detailing best practice and lessons learned through 
the project will be developed. These knowledge products will include inter alia : i) policy briefs; ii) climate change 
adaptation intervention implementation guidelines; iii) training manuals; and iv) reports. These knowledge products will 
then be disseminated to relevant stakeholders, including through the annual knowledge -sharing conferences (Activity 
5.2) and the Ghana Climate Cha nge Data Hub.  
 
 
43 A detailed description of the project activities that will be implemented under each output to achieve the GCF project 
outcomes is presented in Section E.6 of the Funding Proposal.


---
*Page 34*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 28 
   
 Climate data and early warnings against drought and floods will be provided to the crop -farming household either via 
new mobile applications or through local community groups, enabling a proactive response to drought and flood 
management.  
 
At least three national organisations will be empowered to use new data products and the decision -support system to 
strengthen adaptive capacity to climate risks.  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
The proposed project will catalyse a paradigm shift towards climate -resilient agriculture and natural resource -based 
livelihoods in northern Ghana. This will be achieved by facilitating the widespread adoption by smallholder farmers of 
climate -resilient ag ricultural practices, EbA approaches and alternative livelihoods. Details on how the project will 
contribute to GCF’s paradigm shift objective are presented below.  
 
Potential for scaling up and replication  
Decision -support services will be introduced under Output 1 to empower  farmers and planning officials to respond 
effectively to climate change -induced flood and drought hazards in a coordinated and strategic manner. Investments in 
weather forecast capability that will serve the Northern Sector will complement investments in forecasting capability in 
the South of the country  as well as  establishing a national action plan for drought and flood hazard management .  
Finally, a national framework for disseminating climate information to communities will be implemented to promote 
national and grassroots knowledge -sharing.  The plan will include a national coordination mechanism to promote 
collaboration between national and regional stakeholders. A national action plan for coordinating drought and flood 
hazard management in the agricultural sector will be delivered to ensure that EbA interventions can be replicated 
beyond the targeted areas.  
 
Regarding Output s 2 and 3, Within the eight project districts, there is an estimated 240,000 ha of farmland on which 
climate -resilient agriculture and livestock management can be practiced (representing 12 –66% of the district area)44. 
This represents a  potential 10 -fold increase in the  potential impact from this project. Regarding protection from fluvial 
floods, there are 8,700 ha of buffer zone protection concerning riverine forest protection and 9,200 ha of river buffer 
protection.  A monitoring and evaluation strategy will be implemented under Output 5 to enable best practices and 
lessons learned during EbA implementation to be documented and disseminated, further enabling future replication. 
The model can be replicated in 43 districts in the Northern Savannah zone  for drought and flood management .  
 
The Economic modelling carried out for the economic and financial assessment estimated that restoration of 14,000 
ha of degraded land in strategic locations in four Districts would reduce flood risk by 46.7% in the 4 Districts.  The 
budget allows for restoration of 14,000 ha across the 8 Districts  (Output 3) .   
 
The implementation of climate -resilient agricultural practices (Output 3 ) is expected to generate consistently higher 
incomes for smallholder farmers, allowing them to finance adaptation interventions once the project has finished. 
Farmer -based Organisations and their financial management capacity, and by linking to value chains and the 
Ghanaian financial sector for loans and insurance. A monitoring and evaluation strategy will be implemented under 
Output 4 to enable best practices and lessons learned durin g EbA implementation to be documented and 
disseminated, further enabling future replication.  
The knowledge generated will be used as a resource to leverage additional funds from public and private sector 
investors to maintain and replicate project interventions after the project’s funding period, while further strengthening 
cross -sectoral collaboration ( Output 5 ). 
 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
A monitoring and economic valuation programme will be designed to monitor project progress towards its targets and 
evaluate the socio -economic impacts of the various climate change adaptation interventions being implemented. The 
monitoring programme will b e designed in collaboration with relevant national research institutions, such as University 
for Development Studies, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Forest Research Institute of Ghana 
Soil Research Institute and Ghana Meteorological Ag ency. A climate change intervention monitor will be placed in each 
targeted community to collect relevant information stipulated in the monitoring programme. Monitoring and evaluation 
will focus primarily on inter alia : i) the achievement of project targets (see Section E); ii) socio -economic benefits of 
project interventions; iii) changes in crop productivity under different climate -resilient agriculture and EbA scenarios; iv) 
socio -economic benefits and uptake of alte rnative climate -resilient livelihoods;  and v) environmental co -benefits of 
 
44 Tables 5 and 9 from Section xx of the Feasibility assessment.


---
*Page 35*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 29 
   
 project interventions. The monitoring programme will build an evidence base for the further implementation of climate 
change adaptation interventions in northern Ghana.  
 
Based on the results of the monitoring programme, various knowledge products detailing best practice and lessons 
learned through the project will be developed. These knowledge products will include inter alia : i) policy briefs; ii) climate 
change adaptation intervention implementation guidelines; iii) training manuals; and iv) reports. These knowledge 
products will then be disseminated to relevant stakeholders, including through the knowledge -sharing and aware ness -
raising events (Activity 5.2) and the Ghana  Climate Change Data Hub.  
 
Knowledge -sharing and awareness -raising events with participants from: i) district -level government staff45; ii) regional -
level government staff; iii) national -level government staff; iv) climate change adaptation project and programme 
managers; v) representatives of academic and research institutions; vi) NGO staff; vii) representatives of multilateral 
develop ment agencies; and viii) project beneficiaries. These events will promote information sharing and encourage 
coordination between current and future climate change adaptation projects and programmes.   
 
Annual knowledge -sharing conferences will be convened to promote information sharing and encourage coordination 
between current and future climate change adaptation projects and programmes in Ghana. The awareness -raising 
campaign will be develop ed by a suitably qualified national organisation and will utilise locally appropriate 
communication and knowledge dissemination mechanisms, such as video documentaries and phone -in radio shows. 
All of the awareness -raising activities included in the campai gn will be appropriate to local circumstances, taking into 
account literacy levels and access to different types of media.  
 
Knowledge -sharing events will also be organised by district staff and extension officers at each beneficiary community.  
At each knowledge -sharing event, interested community members from five nearby communities (approximately 100 
people), along with extension officers from neighbouring districts, will be brought to a beneficiary community to view 
climate change adaptation d emonstration sites and learn from beneficiary community members. Event participants will 
receive basic theoretical and practical traini ng on climate change adaptation. These events will promote the 
autonomous upscaling of climate change interventions promoted by the project in non -beneficiary communities.  
 
Training on climate -resilient agricultural practices, EbA and alternative climate -resilient livelihoods will be provided to 
District officers, extension officers, local communities.  
 
An improved climate information and early warning services  will be established , focusing on the institutional framework 
and technological delivery system for early warning forecasts. A national coordination mechanism will be established 
to promote collaboration between national and regional stakeholders.  Advisories developed based on early warning 
forecasts and climate data generated by the delivery system will complement the M&E system.  The project will develop 
useful  climate advisories in northern Ghana by facilitating the integration of local knowledge and the experience of end -
users into the production and dissemination processes.  
 
By promoting the upscaling and replication of project interventions outside of beneficiary communities, the project will 
facilitate autonomous and widespread and sustained behavioural transformation in smallholder farming communities 
in northern Ghana.  
 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  including regulatory framework and policies  
 
Climate data and early warnings against drought s and floods will be provided to the crop -farming household either via 
new mobile applications or through local community groups, enabling a proactive response to drought  and flood 
management . The focus will be on enabling local institutions and farmers to shift from the current paradigm of reactive 
planning (disaster response) to proactive planning practices with the help of available early warning information and 
decision support tools for cli mate hazards, droughts and floods. A national  framework for disseminating climate 
information to communities will  be implemented. A national action plan for coordinating drought and flood hazard 
management in the agricultural sector will be delivered to ensure that EbA interventions can be replicated beyond the 
targeted areas.  A national coordination mechanism will be established to promote collaboration between national and 
regional stakeholders.  
 
A monitoring and evaluation strategy will be implemented under Output 3  to enable best practices and lessons learned 
during EbA implementation to be documented and disseminated, further enabling future replication.  The project will 
 
45 E.g. extension officers, representatives from District Assemblies and DEMCs.


---
*Page 36*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 30 
   
 convene knowledge -sharing and awareness -raising events under Outputs 4 and 5, targeting representatives from the 
government, civil society and beneficiary communities. Technical capacity building will be provided to extension officers 
and local communities  under Outputs 1 and 3, respectively, to enable recipients to gain practical knowledge of climate 
change adaptation practices. An economic valuation component to measure ecosystem services will support the 
strengthening of the enabling environment.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
The proposed project will use GCF funding to contribute towards the achievement of 13 of the 17 UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs)46 in northern Ghana, including: 1) No Poverty; 2) Zero Hunger; 3) Good Health and Well -
being; 5) Gender Equality; 6) Clean Water and Sanitation; 8) Decent Work and Economic Growth; 9) Industry, 
Innovation and Infrastructure; 10) Reduced Inequalities; 11) Su stainable Cities and Communities; 12) Responsible  
Consumption and Production; 13) Climate Action; 15) Life on Land; and 17) Partnerships for the Goals. The 
sustainability of contributions to the SDGs will be ensured through a multifaceted exit strategy, as described in Section 
B.6. Furthermore, the proje ct will advance the work of the UN Country Team (UNCT) in Ghana by contributing to three 
of the results areas, namely : i) Inclusive, Resilient and Sustainable Economic Growth and Transformation, ii) 
Accessib le, Equitable, Inclusive, Sustainable Quality Basic Social Services and iii) Durable Peace and Security in 
Ghana and the Subregion (UNSDP, 2023 -2025).  The UNSDP — which is a strategic partnership agreement between 
the UN and the GoG — reflects Ghana’s national goals and its commitments to global development initiatives and sets 
out the UN system’s collective contributions to help the Government and othe r stakeholders achieve these goals.  
  
In addition, the following co -benefits are expected from project interventions:  
• Reforestation through an EbA approach will be achieved through the planting of climate -resilient indigenous tree 
species and natural regeneration47 in previously degraded areas. The reforested areas will provide canopy cover, 
which will reduce soil erosion and capture runoff. Forest restoration through EbA will yield considerable co -benefits 
for local communities such as: i) providing NTFPs; ii) impr oving the dry -season flow of rivers; iii) increasing the 
recharging of aquifers; and iv) reducing community exposure to climate -related environmental hazards. These co -
benefits will  enhance the resilience of local communities to climate change while also diversifying local livelihoods.  
• The project activities are expected to sequester approximately 1.2 million tCO 2e over the lifespan of the project.  
• The proposed project will benefit northern Ghana’s most vulnerable people and least developed regions. This will 
be particularly important in coming decades as the GoG works to attain high -income status, as well as to being 
classified as a newly industrial ised country, by reversing the development divergence between the northern and 
southern regions of the country. The agricultural production of ~142,000 households in northern Ghana will be 
secured against the adverse effects of climate change, which will l ead to increased income generation and growth 
of the agro -based rural economy. Even at  suboptimal levels of production, the agricultural sector accounted for 
~20% of Ghana’s GDP in 201748. Increases in agricultural productivity across a large proportion of northern 
Ghanaian farms as a result of climate -resilient agriculture  and ecosystem -based adaptation interventions have the 
potential to increase the country’s GDP considerably and contribute to economic development. In addition, by 
increasing the resilience of post -harvest storage and processing of agricultural products, th ere will be a: i) decrease 
in wastage and loss of agricultural produce; ii) diversification in products that may be sold, which will include 
products that may be sold nationally and internationally; and iii) decrease in food shortages, as produce can be 
stored for use during the dry season.  
 
At least 50% of project beneficiaries are women. EbA interventions will be focussed on the empowerment of women, 
which is essential to increase their climate -resilience — as well as that of their communities. Shifts in gender roles 
and increases in women’s  contributions to household incomes have been shown to lead to greater respect for and 
recognition of women in Ghana49. Women will be targeted particularly for the implementation of alternative climate -
resilient livelihoods — which will  include value -addition activities such as shea butter production, small ruminant 
rearing, beekeeping and soap making.  Lastly, women and the youth will be considered and  included in the 
dissemination of early warning climate information.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
46 http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable -development -goals/   
47 Natural regeneration will be accomplished by reducing slash -and-burn and indigenous tree harvesting activities.  
48 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NV.AGR.TOTL.ZS?locations=GH  
49 Webb J. – 2015 – Gender dynamics in a changing climate: how gender and adaptive capacity affect resilience. Care 
Climate Change.


---
*Page 37*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 31 
   
 The GoG acknowledges the urgency of adapting to climate change in northern Ghana. The Climate Change 
Vulnerability (CCV) index50 calculated in the Feasibility Study51 confirms the GoGs concerns and indicates that the 
Upper West Region (CCV=0.61) is the most vulnerable in Ghana, followed by the North  East (CCV=0.26) and Upper 
East (CCV=0.26) Regions.  Northern Ghana is particularly at risk because of the substantial development gap between 
the north and the south of the country. This has isolated northern Ghana from the socioeconomic development that has  
been prevalent in the south. As a result, there has been financial instability and a rise in poverty in the north52. 
Smallholder farmers in northern Ghana — who rely heavily on rainfed agriculture and natural ecosystems for their 
livelihoods — are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change.  
 
The GOG is currently unable to fund adaptation projects that can significantly increase the climate resilience of the 
agricultural sector in northern Ghana without external assistance. This is because of the government’s limited fiscal 
capacity caused by, among others, a recent slow -down in economic growth, high inflation, currency depreciation and 
high domestic financing costs53. Indeed, the GOG has indicated that it currently has the fiscal capacity to provide ~6%  
of the funds required to implement the country’s INDCs54. Debt -to-GDP ratio was 64% in 2019. The lack of public 
financing for climate change adaptation has been exacerbated by the limited availability of alternative sources of funding 
from local capital markets. Private financial institutions have been unwilling to provide loan finance to individual 
smallhold er farmers in northern Ghana because of their general lack of collateral and high default risk55. Instead, the 
financial institutions have exclusively adopted joint liability lending structures restricted to servicing only registered 
FBOs56. Consequently, smallholder farmers in northern Ghana — many of whom are not organised into registered 
FBOs — have limited access to local capital markets from which they can obtain loans to finance adaptation 
interventions. The proposed project will contribu te to the financing of climate change adaptation in northern Ghana by: 
i) providing funding for the implementation of climate -resilient agriculture and EbA interventions in target districts; and 
ii) catalysing future private sector funding by organising sm allholder farmers into registered FBOs that can access loans 
from LFIs to finance adaptation interventions, and by increasing their access to international blended finance.  
 
In addition to financial support, the GoG requires strengthening and capacity building of regional and district institutions 
to enable them to manage climate change adaptation projects and integrate climate change adaptation into 
development planning. Presently, most district -level institutions in Ghana have limited capacity to manage and 
coordinate climate change adaptation projects. There is also limited integration of climate change adaptation into 
medium -term development plans in most regions and di stricts of Ghana. The proposed project will strengthen the 
technical capacity of regional and district institutions in northern Ghana to implement and monitor climate change 
adaptation projects by: i) training DEMC members in target districts on managing and c oordinating climate change 
adaptation projects; and ii) facilitating the integration of climate change adaptation into regional and district medium -
term development plans.  
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
The Government of Ghana (GoG) recognises the current and future threats of climate change and has prioritised 
adaptation in the country’s national development strategies. In this regard, the GoG has adopted a National Climate 
Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS,  2010 -2020)57 that is designed to facilitate the protection of Ghana’s current and 
future development from climate change impacts by strengthening its adaptive capacity and building the resilience of 
society and ecosystems. The NCCAS outlines Adaptation objectives in nine development sectors, including: i) 
livelihoods; ii) energy; iii) agriculture; iv) health; v) early warning; vi) fisheries management; vii) land use; and viii) w ater. 
The implementation of the NCCAS will form part of the decent ralised planning and implementation system. Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies ( MDAs) at the national level are responsible for policy, planning, monitoring and evaluation 
of development programmes, with MESTI being the supervisory agency. It  aims to enhance the adaptive capacity and 
resilience to climate change in Ghana through: i) improving society’s awareness of and preparedness for future climate 
 
50 On a relative scale of -1 (low vulnerability) to 1 (high vulnerability).   
51 Please see Annex 2 ‘Feasibility Study’ for details on the calculation of the Climate Change Vulnerability index.  
52 Ashaley -Nikoi J – 2013 – Bridging the Ghanaian Development Divide – Geographical Dual Economy of Ghana. University 
of Ghana Legon, Facalty of Social Sciences. Available at: http://www.egn.org.gh/categories/developmental -economics/51 -
bridging -the-ghanaian -development -divide . 
53 Please see Section B.5 for a rationale for GCF involvement.  
54 Republic of Ghana – 2015 – Ghana’s intended nationally determined contribution (INDC) and accompanying explanatory 
note.  
55 Antwi -Agyei P. 2012. Vulnerability and adaptation of Ghana's food production systems and rural livelihoods to climate 
variability. DPhil, University of Leeds, Leeds.  
56 Gallenstein RA, Mishra K, Sam AG, Miranda MJ. 2019. Willingness to pay for insured loans in northern Ghana. Journal of 
Agricultural Economics  70: 640 -662. 
57 UNEP and UNDP – 2012 – National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. CC DARE


---
*Page 38*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 32 
   
 change; ii) mainstreaming of climate change into national development to reduce climate risks; iii) increasing the 
robustness of infrastructure development and long -term investments; iv) increasing the flexibility and resilience of 
vulnerable ecological an d social systems to enhance their adaptive capacity; and v) fostering competitiveness and 
promoting technological innovation.  The proposed project contributes directly to the NCCAS’s objectives of: i) improving 
awareness and preparedness to future climate change; ii) mainstreaming climate change adaptation into development 
planning; and iii) increasing the resilience of communities and ecosystems to climate change.  
 
In addition to the NCCAS, there are several policies and plans that aim to increase climate change adaptation and 
resilience  in Ghana, including the: i) National Climate Change Policy (NCCP, 2015 –2020)58; ii) Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC, 2020 -2030)59; iii) National Climate -resilient Agriculture and Food Security Action Plan (NCAFSAP, 
2016 -2020); and iv) National Adaptation Planning Readiness Proposal (NAP Readiness Proposal, 2020 –2024). The 
NCCP (2015 –2020) has five main policy sectors which include: i) Agriculture and Food Security; ii) Disaster 
Preparedness and Response; iii) Natural Resource Management; iv) Equitable Social Development; and iv) Energy, 
Industrial and Infrastructural Development. These policy areas have been subdivided into ten progr amme areas that 
address the critical issues of climate change in Ghana. The ten programme areas will include inter alia : 
• developing climate -resilient agriculture and food security systems;  
• building climate -resilient infrastructure;  
• increasing the resilience of vulnerable communities to climate -related risks;  
• improving management and resilience of ecosystems;  
• minimising impacts of climate change on access to water; and  
• addressing gender issues in climate change.  
 
The proposed project contributes to four of the NCCP’s ten programme areas: i) developing climate -resilient agriculture 
and food security systems; ii) increasing resilience of vulnerable communities to climate -related risks; iii) minimising 
impacts of clim ate change on access to water and sanitation; and iv) addressing gender issues in climate change; 
addressing climate change and migration.  
 
The 2018 NDC agriculture chapter is centred around three main agricultural priorities: conservation agriculture, climate 
smart technologies to increase fisheries and livestock productivity; post -harvest management and food processing. 
Complementary actions  on water conservation and irrigation development, agroforestry are highlighted as needing 
government attention. The project aligns with four of the seven priority adaptation actions in the NDC, specifically: i) 
agriculture resilience building in climate -vulnerable landscapes; ii) value addition -based utilisation of forest resources; 
iii) integrated water resources management; and iv) increasing the resilience of women and vulnerable people. Thirdly, 
the proposed project contributes to six of the eight action areas in the NCAFSAP, viz.: i) institutional capacity building 
for research and de velopment; ii) development a nd promotion of climate -resilient cropping systems; iii) adaptation of 
livestock production systems; iv) water conservation and irrigation systems; v) post -harvest management; and vi) risk 
transfer and alternative livelihoods. Lastly, the project will comp lement the  following three priorities in the NAP 
Readiness Proposal: i) training of government officials on climate risk analysis; ii)  development of adaptation plans ; 
and ii) mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into medium -term development plans.   
 
The proposed project is fully country -driven as it was prioritised by the National Designated Authority (NDA) in June 
2016 using a transparent prioritisation tool developed under the GCF Readiness Programme. It will help to achieve 
adaptation priorities in the agricultural sector as well as other wider objectives regarding disaster risk reduction, water 
resource management and ecosystem management in line with various policies and strategies in line with the 
provisions of the  Ghana Strategic Investment Fram ework for Sustainable Land Management (GSIF 2011 -2025). GSFI 
objectives are to: i) mainstream and upscale sustainable land -management decisions; ii) secure ecosystem services; 
and iii) improve rural livelihoods in Ghana. Activities under the auspices of GSIF will be designed to reverse land 
degradation to sustain high agricultural pro duction and ensure food security, whilst at the same time maintaining 
ecosystem integrity.  
 
 
58 Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology (MEST), Republic of Ghana. 2014. Ghana National Climate Change 
Policy. Available at: https://s3.amazonaws.com/ndpc -
static/CACHES/NEWS/2015/07/22//Ghana+Climate+Change+Policy.pdf . 
59 Government of Ghana – 2015 – Ghana’s intended nationally determined contribution (INDC) and accompanying 
explanatory note. UNFCCC. Available at: 
http://www4.unfccc.int/ndcregistry/PublishedDocuments/Ghana%20First/GH_INDC_2392015.pdf .


---
*Page 39*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 33 
   
 In addition, extensive consultations with national, regional, district and community level stakeholders (including local 
government, private sector and civil society representatives, women and other vulnerable groups) were conducted in -
country by the GoG during the development of the proposal (see Annex 7 h). It is important to note that while these 
consultations were extensive, there were challenges in identifying and engaging with Indigenous Peoples present on 
the project landscape. This gap has been identified and will be addressed during the inception period and through the 
operationalization of an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (Annex 6C). The Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) of the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI) will serve as the Executing Entity 
(EE) of the project in close collaboration with the Directorate of Crop Services of the Ministry of Food  and Agriculture 
(MoFA) , the Ghana Meteorological Agency (GM et) and the Ministry of Local Government, Chieftaincy and Religious 
Affairs (MLGCRA) . The EPA has a proven track record as an EE in Ghana, having been instrumental in the 
implementation of large -scale environmental programmes including, among others,  the GEMP and SLWMP (see 
Section B.4). UNEP — which has extensive experience in the design and implementation of initiatives that promote 
EbA — was nominated by the NDA in December 2016 to be the accredited entity for the project.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
The inclusion of GCF funds in the proposed project will overcome the financial barriers to building the climate resilience 
of vulnerable smallholder farming communities in northern Ghana. As described in Section B.5, the GoG lacks the 
financial capacity to  initiate climate change adaptation projects without external financial support. Furthermore, the 
focus of the project on the most vulnerable communities in Ghana limits the potential for private investment into climate 
change adaptation initiatives. Howev er, with GCF support and using the cost -effective approach of EbA, the GoG will 
be able to increase the climate -resilience of the agro -based rural economy in northern Ghana effectively. There is a 
growing body of scientific evidence demonstrating the cost -effectiveness of past initiatives that have included an EbA 
approach to climate change adaptation60;61. 
A financial analysis was carried out (Annex 3a and b) to assess potential financial returns of some of the proposed 
project interventions. Many of the project activities are centred on institutional and technical capacity building, making 
them of a public goods nature. These activities will, therefore, not yield a direct return on investment. The financial 
analysis, therefore, focuses on those activities that involve on -the-ground interventions to improve the climate resilience 
of agriculture, land manageme nt and rural livelihoods. A cost -benefit  study was conducted based on cost estimations 
for the implementation of interventions and the project’s predicted outputs (Annex 3b). The cost estimates were based 
on current market values. A discount rate was then applied to determine the net present valu e (NPV) of each 
intervention. The financial analysis demonstrated positive NPVs for proposed project interventions such as: i) maize -
soybean crop rotation (NPV = US$563); ii) Cassia -maize intercropping (NPV = US$465 ); iii) mango -maize intercropping 
(NPV = US$463); and iv) Shea nut processing (NPV = US$4 -US$84 ). An additional analysis was conducted to 
determine the discounted Benefit to Cost Ratio (BCR) of both NBS and hybrid interventions for the period 2024 –2050 
(Annex 3a). This assessment revealed that both interventions are economically viable, with an estima ted BCR ranging 
between 2.09 and 3.44 for Lambussie, 2.19 and 3.78 for Lawra, 2.21 and 3.85 for Jirapa and 2.74 and 4.32 for WA 
West. The Internal Rate of Retu rn (IRR) ranges from 17 –38% across all locations ( Table 2, elaborated in Annex 3).  
 
Table 2. Results of the cost -benefit analysis, BCR (discounted and undiscounted) and IRR, by location and source.  
 
SSP1 -2.6 SSP3 -7.0 SSP5 -8.5 
NBI vs Reference  Hybrid vs 
Reference  NBI vs Reference  Hybrid vs 
Reference  NBI vs Reference  Hybrid vs 
Reference  
Lambussie  
BCR  2.09 3.31 2.07 3.17 2.25 3.44 
BCR discounted  1.67 2.36 1.55 2.14 1.70 2.34 
IRR 23.1 %  28.9 %  17.4 %  22.9 %  19.6 %  24.5 %  
Lawra  
BCR  2.24 3.64 2.19 3.48 2.41 3.78 
BCR discounted  1.78 2.59 1.63 2.35 1.83 2.58 
IRR 25.8 %  32.4 %  18.7 %  25.4 %  21.8 %  27.4 %  
 
60 De Groot et al. 2013. Benefits of investing in ecosystem restoration. Conservation Biology 27: 1286 -1293.   
61 Rao et al. 2013. An economic analysis of ecosystem -based adaptation and engineering options for climate change 
adaptation in Lami Town, Republic of the Fiji Island s. A technical report by the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment 
Programme. Apia, Samoa. .Available at: http://ian.umces.edu/pdfs/ian_report_392.pdf


---
*Page 40*
---

D 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 34 
   
 Jirapa  
BCR  2.31 3.70 2.21 3.53 2.49 3.85 
BCR discounted  1.85 2.62 1.65 2.37 1.92 2.63 
IRR 27.8 %  32.7 %  19.2 %  25.5 %  23.9 %  28.5 %  
WA West  
BCR  2.76 4.14 2.74 4.02 2.98 4.32 
BCR discounted  2.20 2.95 2.05 2.71 2.24 2.93 
IRR 35.7 %  37.9 %  26.5 %  30.3 %  28.2 %  31.7 %  
 
 
The design of proposed project interventions has drawn substantially from the best practices and lessons learned from 
a range of local and international development projects and studies. Additionally, stakeholder consultations with 
representatives from regional - and district -level government departments, as well as communities from the t arget 
districts, have provided insights on the local appropriateness of international best practices. The best practices and 
lessons learned include the: i)  Foundational Support Initiative which promotes community engagement; ii) use of 
Regional, District and Community Environmental Management Committees; iii)  the use of EbA as a framework to 
integrate sustainable land management and climate change adaptation interventions; iv) importance of integrating 
gender considerations into project interventions; and v) promotion of autonomous upscaling of project interven tions 
through knowledge sharing between beneficiary and neighbouring communities.  This will include knowledge sharing 
between pastoral and sedentary communities as possible, as many rural communities increasing ly practise mixed 
livelihood strategies  (which often includes a combination of traditional  pastoral practices  and local sedentary farming  
practic es or petty trading ). These knowledge sharing processes will be facilitated through an Indigenous Peoples Plan, 
given that pastoralists in Ghana are predominantly constituted of Indigenous groups such as the Fulani.  These lessons 
learned and best practices are discussed in detail in Section 10 of Annex 2, Feasibility Study. The project will also draw 
from the substantial experience of UNEP to maximise the benefits gained from past experiences and best practices. 
The development of a Gender Action Plan and an Environmental and S ocial Management Framework — guided by 
UNEP’s internal safeguards — will ensure that interventions are in line with GCF requirements and safeguards.


---
*Page 41*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 35 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
 
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  Climate change 
adaptation interventions 
in Ghana typically have 
a localised geographic 
scope and benefit a 
small proportion of 
smallholder farmers. 
This can be attributed to 
limited institutional and 
technical capacity and 
low access to funding 
for upscale  
interventions.  The 
Government of Ghana 
(GoG) is exposed to 
substantial institutional 
capacity challenges, 
particularly at the 
regional and district 
levels, where weak 
coordination and Low In the target scenario, Ghana would have 
a robust and scalable climate adaptation 
framework extending to national, regional 
and local levels. Government 
departments and agencies would have 
the technical and institutional capacity to 
integrate climate consi derations into all 
sectoral policies and programs, thereby 
reducing reliance on external aid and 
mobilising domestic resources for 
resilience initiatives.  
 
A coordinated approach among NGOs, 
CSOs, and CBOs would ensure a 
broader impact, with streamlined 
knowledge transfer from international 
programs to local levels. Enhanced 
collaboration and communication among 
stakeholders would facilitate the 
upscaling of successful interventions, 
leveraging collective knowledge and  
Knowledge management and 
communication will also be facilitated 
under Output 1, which will establish a 
national framework for disseminating 
climate -related hazard management 
information to stakeholders at both 
national and community levels.  
Opportunities for knowledge and 
technology exchange between 
communities and between projects will 
be strengthened, thereby promote 
autonomous upscaling of EbA 
interventions.  
 
The drought and flood management plan 
under Output 1  will serve to inform 
integration of drought and flood 
management into district development 
planning and budgeting processes  
across the country .


---
*Page 42*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 36 
  
  
 collaboration between 
government sectors 
hinder the effective 
management of 
adaptation projects. 
Additionally, 
government staff and 
district extension 
officers are 
inadequately trained 
and lack the technical 
expertise to implement 
and monitor on -the-
ground  interventions. 
Most adaptation 
projects in northern 
Ghana strongly rely on 
donor funding with 
minimal local 
investment, limiting their 
capacity to expand. 
High implementation 
costs and the isolated 
nature of these projects 
restrict their scalability. 
The lack of coordination 
among stakeholders 
exacerbates this issue, 
as national institutions 
are not equipped to 
facilitate collaboration 
and knowledge sharing, 
preventing the effective 
upscaling of successful 
interventions. As a 
result, the scalability of experiences. Strategic planning and 
investment would address financial 
barriers, ensuring resources are available 
to expand initiatives beyond their initial 
scope. This comprehensive, country -
driven strategy would enhance the 
scalability of climate adaptat ion 
interventions, promoting transformational 
change and resilience across Ghana.  
  
Decision -support services will be 
introduced under Output 1 to empower 
farmers and planning officials to respond 
effectively to climate change -induced 
flood and drought hazards in a 
coordinated and strategic manner. These 
efforts will be supported by a national 
action plan for drought and flood hazard 
management, The plan will include a 
national coordination mechanism to 
promote collaboration between national 
and regional stakeholders.  
 
The Economic modelling carried out for 
the economic and financial assessment 
estimated that restoration of 14,000 ha of 
degraded land in strategic locations in four 
Districts would reduce flood risk by 46.7% 
in the 4 Districts.  The project budget 
allows for restoration of 14,000 ha across 
the 8 Districts  (Output 3) .  Scaling up of 
the restoration effort to reduce flood risk 
will be achieved through the knowledge 
management approach in (Output 5) and 
blended finance credit lines (Output 4) .  
 
Climate -resilient livelihoods introduced 
under Output 2 which  will be supported 
by the creation of blended finance credit 
lines under Output 4  to facilitate access 
to finance for adopting and upscaling 
livelihoods beyond the project lifespan. 
Moreover, Output 5  includes dedicated 
knowledge -sharing and awareness -
raising campaigns to ensure that best 
practices and lessons learned throughout


---
*Page 43*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 37 
  
  
 climate change 
adaptation interventions 
in Ghana is low, 
inhibiting the spread of 
adaptation technologies 
and transformational 
change across the 
region.  the proposed project can be developed 
and disseminated with relevant 
stakeholders and other adaptation 
projects across Ghana.   
Replicability  Replicating successful 
interventions in Ghana 
is hindered by limited 
institutional and 
technical capacity for 
implementing and 
monitoring climate 
adaptation 
interventions, 
insufficient knowledge 
transfer and low 
coordination and 
communication between 
proje cts, government 
and academic 
institutions.  
 
At the national level, 
institutions are ill -
equipped to facilitate the 
coordination between 
adaptation initiatives 
and encourage 
collaboration to catalyse 
the upscaling of 
interventions. Without Low The potential target scenario for 
replicability in Ghana involves a robust 
institutional , planning and budgeting  
framework that facilitates the strategic 
replication of successful climate 
adaptation interventions across sectors 
and regions. Enhanced government 
capacity would improve coordination, 
fostering collaboration and knowledge 
sharing among stakeholders, incl uding 
government bodies, academic 
institutions, and local communities. 
Effective communication mechanisms 
would ensure that initiatives benefit from 
collective knowledge and expe riences. 
Institutions would facilitate coordination 
and upscaling of interventions, supported 
by strategic planning and investment to 
overcome financial barriers.   
Under Output 1, a dedicated decision -
support platform for weather and 
hydrological early warning services will 
be developed for national and local 
agencies. Finally, a national framework 
for disseminating climate information to 
communities will be implemented to 
promote national and grassroots 
knowledge -sharing. A national action 
plan for coordinating drought and flood 
hazard management in the agricultural 
sector will be delivere d to ensure that 
EbA interventions can be replicated 
beyond the targeted areas.   
 
Within the eight project districts, there is 
an estimated 240,000 ha of farmland on 
which climate -resilient agriculture and 
livestock management can be practiced 
(representing 12 –66% of the district  
area)62. This represents a potential for a 
10-fold increase in impact from adopting 
the project approach  across the Districts . 
Regarding protection from fluvial floods, 
there are some 9000 ha of buffer zone 
protection from riverine forest s possible, 
 
62 Tables 5 and 9 from Section xx of the Feasibility assessment.


---
*Page 44*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 38 
  
  
 such communication 
and coordination 
between stakeholders, 
climate change 
adaptation initiatives in 
Ghana will likely 
continue to operate in 
isolation, not benefiting 
from the collective 
knowledge of ongoing 
or completed ones.  
 
 implying a four -fold increase in impact 
potential from the project approach, which 
will be up -scaled through the District 
planning process.  A monitoring and 
evaluation strategy will be implemented 
under Output 5 to enable best practices 
and lessons learned during EbA 
implementation to be documented and 
disseminated, further enabling future 
replication.  
 
Restoration interventions for flood and 
drought management  under Output 3 , 
can be replicated in 43 districts across 
the Northern Savannah zone.  
 
Capacity -building activities conducted 
under Output 5 will create an enabling 
environment for the GoG to replicate and 
maintain project activities after the initial 
investment period.  
 
 
Sustainability  Low institutional 
capacity within the 
Government of Ghana 
(GoG), particularly at 
the regional and district 
levels, hampers the 
continuation of 
successful adaptation 
interventions after the 
project. While providing 
a basic governance 
structure, the existing 
Regional and District 
Environmental Low In the envisioned target scenario for 
sustainability in Ghana, adaptation 
interventions would evolve into self -
sustaining practices beyond the project's 
initial timelines, built upon a strong 
institutional, community and financial 
foundation. The project’s  alignment with 
national strategies ensures country 
ownership and ongoing support. 
Regional and district -level institutions will 
be strengthened by capacity building, 
enabling them to plan and implement 
climate change adaptation initiatives 
independently. A grassroots approach   
Under Output 1, a dedicated decision -
support platform for weather and 
hydrological early warning services will 
be developed for national and local 
agencies. Finally, a national framework 
for disseminating climate information to 
communities will be implemented to 
promote national and grassroots 
knowledge -sharing. A national action 
plan for coordinating drought and flood 
hazard management in the agricultural 
sector will be delivere d to ensure that


---
*Page 45*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 39 
  
  
 Management 
Committees often lack 
the necessary 
resources and technical 
expertise to coordinate 
and manage adaptation 
interventions effectively. 
This challenge is 
compounded by 
insufficient training for 
government staff on 
integrating climate 
change adaptat ion into 
local development 
planning and insufficient 
coordination among 
different sectors.  
 
At the grassroots level, 
smallholder farming 
communities in northern 
Ghana face substantial 
sustainability challenges 
because of poverty, 
which limits their 
capacity to adopt 
efficient but costly 
farming technologies 
and practices, such as 
irrigation, mech anised 
tilling, and using 
fertilisers and resistant 
crop varieties. Many 
farmers rely on low -
technology equipment 
because they cannot will ensure that interventions are locally 
appropriate and supported by beneficiary 
communities, with active participation 
from women and youth to secure 
community buy -in. Collaboration with 
private sector entities and financial 
institutions will support t he development 
of value chains and concessional 
financial products, enhancing economic 
resilience. Finally, knowledge -sharing 
and monitoring activities, including 
annual conferences, will facilitate the 
dissemination of lessons learned and 
innovative pract ices, ensuring the 
ongoing replication and sustainability of 
project interventions.  
 EbA interventions can be replicated 
beyond the targeted areas.  
 
Capacity -building activities conducted 
under Output 5 will create an enabling 
environment for the GoG to replicate and 
maintain project activities after the initial 
investment period.  
 
A monitoring and evaluation strategy will 
be implemented under Output 5 to enable 
best practices and lessons learned during 
EbA implementation to be documented 
and disseminated, further enabling future 
replication.


---
*Page 46*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 40 
  
  
 afford more expensive 
machinery, and the high 
costs of agricultural 
inputs further 
exacerbate this issue. 
Additionally, insufficient 
credit and agricultural 
insurance access 
hinders their capacity to 
finance modern 
agricultural technologies 
and recover fro m 
extreme weather 
events. This lack of 
financial resources and 
knowledge prevents 
farmers from increasing 
agricultural yields and 
improving food security, 
ultimately undermining 
the sustainability of 
climate -resilient 
practices.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)   
The proposed project will target the following GCF Results Areas: i) ARA1 Most vulnerable people and communities; ii) ARA2 Health, wellbeing and 
food and water security;  iii) ARA 3 Infrastructure and built environment  and i v) ARA4 Ecosystems and Ecosystem Services.  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final63 
 
63 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG e mission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum n umber of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.


---
*Page 47*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 41 
  
  
  
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities  
 Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Baseline and project 
monitoring (interim and 
final evaluations) 
informed by household 
surveys and reports.  0 people with 
increased 
resilience to 
climate change 
impacts relating 
to droughts and 
floods.  340,000 direct 
beneficiaries, 
1.4 million  
indirect 
beneficiaries  691,125 direct 
beneficiaries 
(52% women 
and 48% men),  
2.9 million 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
(51%  women 
and 49%  men) • Capacity building, 
technologies and 
practices introduced are 
continued beyond the 
project lifespan and are 
effective at delivering 
tangible adaptation 
benefits.  
• Baselines will be validated 
during project inception.  
 
Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate -resilient 
livelihood options  Baseline report and 
project monitoring 
(interim and final 
evaluations) informed by 
household surveys to 
confirm uptake and 
income generation of 
climate -resilient 
livelihood options.  0 people 
benefitting from 
the adoption of 
climate -resilient 
livelihood 
opportunities.  3, 640 people 
(men and 
women) whose 
households 
have adopted 
climate -
resilient 
livelihoods 
options.  6920 (men and 
women) farm 
owners who 
have adopted 
climate -
resilient 
livelihoods 
options. • Ecosystem -based 
adaptation leads to 
increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of 
vulnerable people.  
• Climate -resilient 
agricultural strategies will 
improve the resilience of 
ecosystems and 
ecosystem services.  
• Local communities 
actively adopt livelihood 
options introduced by the 
project. 64 
• Livelihood options are 
successful and generate 
income.  
• Baselines will be 
validated during project 
inception.  
Supplementary 2.4: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) covered Random sampling; 
project level field surveys 
comprising interviews 
and workshops with local 
communities  0 people benefit 
from coverage of 
early warning 
systems  300,000  people 
benefit from 
coverage of 
early warning 
systems  691,125 direct 
beneficiaries 
(52% women 
and 48% men), 
2.8 million • Following capacity 
building, farming 
communities will access, 
utilize and contribute to 
the new drought early 
 
64 For additional information on the livelihood options please see Section 13.4 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.


---
*Page 48*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 42 
  
  
 by new or improved 
early warning systems  indirect 
beneficiaries 
(51% women 
and 49% men)  warning climate 
information.  
• Baselines will be validated 
during project inception.  
 
ARA2 Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  
 Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached  
 Baseline and project 
monitoring (interim and 
final evaluations) 
informed by household 
surveys and reports  0 people with 
increased 
resilience to 
climate change 
impacts relating 
to droughts and 
floods.  
 340,000 direct 
beneficiaries, 
1.4 million 
indirect 
beneficiaries  691,125 direct 
beneficiaries 
(52% women 
and 48% men),  
2.9 million 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
(51% women 
and 49% men)  
 • Capacity building, 
technologies and 
practices 
introduced are 
continued beyond 
the project lifespan 
and are effective at 
delivering tangible 
adaptation benefits.  
• Baselines will be 
validated during 
project inception.  
ARA2 Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  
 Supplementary 2.2: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with 
improved food security  Baseline report and 
project monitoring 
(interim and final 
evaluations) informed by 
random sampling and 
project level field 
surveys comprising 
interviews and 
workshops with local 
communities  0 60,000 people 
whose 
households 
benefit from 
improved food 
security 
(indirect 
beneficiaries)  120,000 
people benefit 
from improved 
food security 
(indirect 
beneficiaries)65 • The national and local 
proactive approach to 
drought management, 
including local capacity 
building in vulnerable 
communities, will 
increase the food security 
of crop farming 
households vulnerable to 
climate change.  
• Baselines will be 
validated during project 
inception.  
ARA3 : Infrastructure 
and built environment   Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made Baseline and project 
monitoring (interim and 
final evaluations) 0 USD 3,430,0 00  
of water USD 6,860,000  
of water • Livelihoods  and  
interventions are 
 
65 Assuming a population of 1,000 in each of the 120 targeted communities.


---
*Page 49*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 43 
  
  
 more resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change and/or more 
able to reduce GHG 
emissions  
 informed by household 
surveys and reports . 
 
Field surveys and GIS 
mapping of changes in 
infrastructure and built 
environment across 
project intervention sites  storage assets 
made more 
resilient to 
effects of 
climate 
change.    storage assets  
made more 
resilient to 
effects of 
climate change  successful and lead to 
the protection and 
enhancement of 
economic assets in 
the project areas  
 
 
 
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services  
 Supplementary 3.1  
Change in expected 
losses of economic 
assets due to impact of 
extreme climate -related 
disasters  
  
Baseline, mid -term and 
terminal   environmental 
and socio -economy data 
gathering surveys and 
analysis  
 
The long duration of the 
dry season experienced 
in northern Ghana 
results in prolonged 
periods of food 
shortages.  High 
temperatures in northern 
Ghana already 
contribute to reduced 
water -retention capacity 
and frequent drying of 
water bodies — such as 
wells, dams, and 
streams — that serve as 
sources of water for both 
livestock and household 
use, including for dry 
season gardening.  
Increased temperatures 
linked to climate change 
exacerbate the problem 
through the expansion of 
ranges of the weeds, High losses  
 
 At least a 20% 
change in 
expected 
losses of 
economic 
impacts due to 
impact of 
extreme 
events.   
 At least a 20% 
change in 
expected 
losses of 
economic 
impacts due to 
impact of 
extreme 
events.


---
*Page 50*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 44 
  
  
 pests and fungi that 
cause food spoilage.    
 
Conversely, extreme 
rainfall events often 
result in severe flooding 
across many areas of 
northern Ghana, 
destroying crops, taking 
lives and damaging 
assets and public 
infrastructures, as well 
as reducing storage 
capacity of reservoirs in 
northern Ghana.  
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services  
 Core 4: Hectares of 
natural resources 
brought under improved 
low-emission and/or 
climate -resilient 
management practice  Household surveys and 
reports  
 
Field surveys and GIS 
mapping of changes in 
land cover across 
project intervention sites.  
 0 ha restored, 
conserved or 
managed in a 
climate -resilient 
manner  4,000 ha of 
smallholder 
agroecosystem
s strengthened 
in response to 
climate change 
through the 
introduction of 
climate -
resilient 
agricultural 
and EbA.66 
 
Breakdown:  
3,460 ha of 
agricultural 
land made 
more resilient 
to climate 
change 
through the 27,840 ha of 
smallholder 
agroecosystem
s strengthened 
in response to 
climate change 
through the 
introduction of 
climate -
resilient 
agricultural 
interventions 
and EbA. 
 
Breakdown:  
13,840 ha of 
agricultural 
land made 
more resilient 
to climate 
change • EbA interventions are 
successful and lead to the 
protection and 
enhancement of 
ecosystem function.  
 
 
 
66 Assuming ~115 ha of agricultural land per target community


---
*Page 51*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 45 
  
  
 adoption of 
climate -
resilient 
agricultural 
practices.  
 
3,500 ha of 
degraded 
Guinea 
Savanna 
restored 
through EbA 
interventions  through the 
adoption of 
climate -
resilient 
agricultural 
practices.67 
 
14,000ha of 
degraded 
Guinea and 
Sudan 
Savanna 
restored 
through EbA 
interventions.68 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
The proposed project will target two of the four enabling environment indicators included in the GCF Integrated Results Manag ement Framework 
(IRMF), namely: i) Core Indicator 5; and ii) Core Indicator 8.  
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage  
      
Core indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, There is limited technical 
capacity to produce 
reliable observation and 
forecasting data for 
drought risk assessment 
and early warning Absence of 
hydrometeoro logical 
data generated from 
northern Ghana  Early warning forecast 
skills are improved by 
investments in 
meteorological technology, 
data and analysis.  
 The project will support 
GMet in increasing its 
network of 
hydrometeorological 
stations in northern 
Ghana and its capacity Three target Regions of 
northern Ghana  
 
67 Estimating an average farm size of ~2 ha67, across the 13,840 ha where CSA will be implemented.  
68 Assuming ~115 ha of natural ecosystems per target community


---
*Page 52*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 46 
  
  
 development or transfer 
and innovation;  systems in Ghana. This 
is compounded by the 
absence of a national 
drought early warning 
system.  
 Evidence of people taking 
up new technologies and 
practices on climate 
resilient agriculture and 
livelihoods.  
 to issue timely and  
detailed early warning 
advisories and forecasts 
to target beneficiaries.  
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards   
Communities have 
limited awareness of 
climate change and 
appropriate adaptation 
responses.  
 
Smallholder farmers do 
not have the capacity to 
apply climate 
information to their 
agricultural practices 
and adopt proactive 
responses to drought 
impacts.  low At least three national 
organisations are 
empowered to use new 
data products and the 
decision -support system 
to strengthen adaptive 
capacity to climate risks.  
 
Communities are made 
aware of climate threats 
and appropriate 
responses, and local 
farmers are using 
climate information in 
agricultural decision 
making.  
 
Climate data and early 
warnings against 
drought and floods will 
be provided to the crop -
farming household either 
via new mobile 
applications or through 
local community groups, 
enabling a proactive 
response to drought and 
flood management.  The project will convene 
knowledge -sharing and 
awareness -raising 
events under Outputs 4 
and 5, targeting 
representatives from the 
government, civil society 
and beneficiary 
communities.  
 
Technical capacity 
building will be provided 
to extension officers and 
local communities under 
Outputs 1 and 3, 
respectively, to enable 
recipients to gain 
practical knowledge of 
climate change 
adaptation practices.  
 National level (one 
country)


---
*Page 53*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 47 
  
  
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Output 1: Improved 
climate data and early 
warnings made 
available to facilitate 
proactive flood and 
drought hazard 
management.   
 Number of males and 
females reached by 
[or total geographic 
coverage of] climate -
related early warning 
systems and other 
risk reduction 
measures 
established/strengthe
ned  Random sampling; 
project level field surveys 
comprising interviews and 
workshops with local 
communities across 
Ghana  No national flood 
and drought early 
warning system 
in place  National flood 
and drought 
early warning 
system 
implemented 
and used by 
National 
organisations  National flood 
and drought 
early warning 
system 
implemented 
and used at all 
levels from 
National 
organisations 
and local 
farmers across 
Ghana  The new DSS with early 
warning system and 
other decision -making 
information will be used 
(with training support) by 
national organisations 
and local crop farmers to 
strengthen adaptive 
capacity to climate risks  
Output 2: Climate -
resilient agricultural 
practices , EbA and 
alternative climate -
resilient livelihoods  
implemented in  
beneficiary 
communities.  Change in the 
capacity of extension 
officers (gender -
disaggregated) to 
implement climate -
resilient agriculture, 
EbA and alternative 
climate -resilient 
livelihoods.  Training scorecard  
 
Interviews with extension 
officers  
 
Attendance registers from 
training events  Extension officers 
in target districts 
have not been 
trained on climate 
change and EbA  n/a 
 200 extension 
officers (of 
which at least 
30% are 
women) have 
increased 
capacity to 
implement 
climate -
resilient 
agriculture, 
EbA and 
alternative 
climate -
resilient 
livelihoods.  At least 30% of extension 
workers are women.


---
*Page 54*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 48 
  
  
 Number of  
Community Climate 
Action Plans 
developed and 
validated by 
beneficiary 
communities  
 Review of CCAPs  
Interviews with extension 
officers  
 
 Target 
communities 
have not 
developed 
CCAPs  40 Community 
Climate Action 
Plans 
developed and 
validated by 
beneficiary 
communities 
with the 
participation of 
both men and 
women.  120 
Community 
Climate Action 
Plans 
developed and 
validated by 
beneficiary 
communities 
with the 
participation of 
both men and 
women.   
Output 3:    Restoration 
of landscape to reduce  
drought and  flood risk  Economic value 
(USD) of avoid / 
prevented damage/ 
loss to physical  
assets (buildings, 
infrastructure, 
agricultural land, etc) 
as a result of  
landscape 
restoration . Baseline, mid -term and 
terminal   environmental 
and socio -economy data 
gathering surveys and 
analysis  Baseline value of 
physical assets 
(buildings, 
infrastructure, 
agricultural land, 
etc) .  
Delayed onset of 
the wet season 
results in a 
shortening of the 
growing season 
for rainfed 
agriculture. 
Crops, mostly 
cultivated in 
floodplains of the 
rivers, have not 
fully matured like 
before when the 
water levels in 
the river rise and 
the fields flood. At least a 20% 
increase in 
economic 
value (USD) of 
assets made 
more resilient 
(compared to 
baseline)  
 
 
 At least a 50% 
increase in 
economic 
value (USD) of 
assets made 
more resilient 
(compared to 
baseline)


---
*Page 55*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 49 
  
  
 This results in 
harvest losses . 
Extreme rainfall 
events often 
result in severe 
flooding across 
many areas of 
northern Ghana, 
destroying crops, 
taking lives and 
damaging assets 
and public 
infrastructures , 
as well as 
reduc ing storage 
capacity of 
reservoirs in 
northern Ghana, 
caus ing them to 
dry-up quicker in 
the dry season as 
well as increase 
the risk of dam 
collapse, leading 
to downstream 
flooding.  
Hectares of natural 
resources brought 
under improved 
low-emission 
and/or climate -
resilient 
management 
practice  Field surveys and GIS 
mapping of changes in 
land cover across 
project intervention 
sites.  
 
Household surveys and 
reports  0 ha restored, 
conserved or 
managed in a 
climate -resilient 
manner  3,500 ha of 
degraded 
Guinea 
Savanna 
restored 
through EbA 
interventions  14,000 ha of 
degraded 
Guinea and 
Sudan 
Savanna 
restored 
through EbA 
interventions.  Assuming approximately 
115 ha of natural 
ecosystems per target 
community  (120 
communities total).


---
*Page 56*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 50 
  
  
  
69 2 events in each targeted community  Output 4: Increased 
access of smallholder 
farmers to financial 
resources and 
engagement with the 
private secto r Number of farmer -
based organisations 
(FBOs) established in 
beneficiary 
communities  Registration documents  
Interviews with extension 
officers  
Interviews with FBOs  No FBOs 
established in 
target 
communities  80 farmer -
based 
organisations 
established in 
beneficiary 
communities  240 farmer -
based 
organisations 
established in 
beneficiary 
communities (2 
in each 
beneficiary 
community)   
Number of VSLAs 
established in 
beneficiary 
communities  Interviews with VSLAs  
Interviews with extension 
officers  0 80 VSLAs 
established 
VSLAs 
established in 
beneficiary 
communities  240 VSLAs 
established in 
beneficiary 
communities (2 
in each 
beneficiary 
community)  Community members are 
willing to work together in 
VSLAs.  
Percentage of FBOs 
established in 
beneficiary 
communities that 
have been able to 
access agricultural 
credit.  Interviews with FBOs and 
LFIs 
 
Review of financial 
records  0 10% of FBOs 
established in 
beneficiary 
communities 
that have been 
able to access 
agricultural 
credit.  30% of FBOs 
established in 
beneficiary 
communities 
that have been 
able to access 
agricultural 
credit.   
Output 5:  Knowledge 
and awareness of 
climate threats to 
agricultural livelihoods 
and available 
adaptation options 
increased to inform the 
upscaling of climate 
change adaptation 
across northern Ghana.  Number of 
community -level 
knowledge and 
awareness events  
 
 Household surveys and 
reports  
 
Interviews with extension 
officers  
 
Review of awareness -
raising material  0 80 community -
level 
knowledge and 
awareness 
events 
organised  
 24069   
community -
level 
knowledge and 
awareness 
events 
organised  
 Communities outside of 
the target communities 
are willing to attend 
knowledge and 
awareness events.


---
*Page 57*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 51 
  
  
 Project/programme co -benefit indicators  
Co-benefit 1: Increased 
and diversified 
household income  Percentage of 
households who 
report diversified 
sources of income at 
target sites.  Household surveys 
across 120 target 
communities.  0% 10% 50% Communities are willing 
to adopt livelihood 
diversification initiatives.  
Improved climate -resilient 
agricultural practices 
result in increased 
household income.  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables   
 
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1: Implement a new  
early warning data information 
and management system to 
provide access to improved 
data sources and new 
datasets  on floods and 
droughts . A new data and information management 
system, combined with an enhanced service 
delivery platform for hydrometeorological 
services (Activity 2.2), will facilitate the cross -
sectoral integration of up -to-date climate 
information and early warnings to enable  
proactive as opposed to reactive management. 
Easier access to improve data sources and 
new datasets facilitated by the improve early 
warning system will address the barriers 
highlighted by stakeholders. This data 
information system will introduce innovati ve 
modelling approaches, based on remote 
sensing data, and service delivery platforms. 
Additionally, with improved access to quality 
climate data information, farmers will be more 
actively involved in planning processes 
pertaining to flood and drought mana gement. 
Proactive measures that farmers will be 
supported to undertake via this intervention 
include, inter alia: i) timing crop planting for 
optimum yields; ii) shifting to drought -resistant 
crops; and iii) relocation of agricultural efforts 
to more suita ble sites that will minimise crop 
losses.  1.1.1    Implementing science -based methods for merging 
the existing Hydromet information with satellite -based 
information for improved accuracy of the data, and 
producing new seasons forecast within Ghana  as a web -
based portal.  
 
1.1.2 Development, validation and implementation of a 
web-based service delivery and decision -support (DSS) 
platform for weather and hydrological early warning 
services to be used by national and local agencies, 
including water resource allocation models, r isk 
knowledge services, drought and flood hazard monitoring 
and EWS.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Web-portal portal implemented  
 
Mobile -based application 
implemented  
 
One workshop to produce 
recommendations ( 1.1.1a)  
 
Two working sessions to enable 
access to satellite -based 
information ( 1.1.1b)  
 
Four working sessions to 
implement science -based methods 
(1.1.1c)  
 
One working session to produce a 
seasonal forecast ( 1.1.1d)  
 
Two working sessions to develop 
and implement a web -based 
service ( 1.1.2a)  
 
Two working sessions to 
implement risk knowledge services 
(1.1.2c)  
 
Two working sessions to test 
hazard monitoring ( 1.1.2d)


---
*Page 58*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 52 
  
  
  
Three working sessions to validate 
the DSS platform ( 1.1.2e)  
Activity 1.2: Enhancing 
hydrometeorological and 
groundwater monitoring 
observation networks.  The accuracy and coverage of climate data will 
be improved under this activity by enhancing 
hydrometeorological, groundwater observation 
networks and groundwater observation 
networks in the country, particularly northern 
Ghana.  1.2.1 Validation of assessment of current gaps and 
installation of a S -band radar station, solar -powered and 
hydrometeorological and groundwater monitoring stations 
to improve network coverage.  
 
1.2.2 Development of a sustainability plan, operation and 
maintaining  plan and institutional framework for the 
enhanced hydrometeorological and groundwater 
monitoring network  
 Installation of 120 groundwater 
monitoring wells.  
 
Installation of 20 solar energy 
technology systems.  
 
Expansion of the meteorological 
network by installing 1 S-band 
radar  to cover northern Ghana 
based in Tamale ; 10 Synoptic 
Automatic Weather Stations ; 20 
agrometeorological stations ; 163 
rainfall stations; and 100 
hydrological equipment  
 
Sustainability plan for and 
hydrometeorological and 
groundwater monitoring network.  
Activity 1.3: Capacitate key 
technical staff at national, 
regional and district levels, 
including GMet, HYDRO and 
WRC, for drought and flood 
services delivery.  The technical capacity of officials within GMet, 
HYDRO and WRC will be improved by 
delivering specialised training programs, 
focussed on the agricultural sector. Training 
will also focus on the use of the Decision 
Support System (DSS) tools and services.  1.3.1   Production of documentation, technical user 
guides and training materials for the developed services 
within the established service DSS platform for future 
use, including for future staff and internal capacity 
building activities.  
 
1.3.2 Organization of training workshops on the use of 
the developed platform with key government 
organisations at national and local level, with focus on 
training key technical staff on the use of the DSS 
services.  
 
1.3.3 Dissemination of outreach products as videos, 
online guidance, brochures etc. for the implemented 
services to other potential regional and local users.  
 
 Documentation, technical user 
guides and training materials.  
 
Two training workshops.  
 
Six feedback sessions on 
disseminated outreach products.  
 
Activity 1.4: Establishing a 
robust national framework for 
disseminating DSS and National and community -based Early Warning 
System communication mechanisms will be 
established to capacitate local communities  in 
the use of the DSS information and flood and 1.4.1  Adapt and supplement existing training materials 
on climate and drought -related hazard management, New and revised training materials 
on climate and drought -related 
hazard management ( 1.4.1a)


---
*Page 59*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 53 
  
  
  
70 The project seeks to leverage the traditional  knowledge of local farmers , rather than Indigenous  Peoples’  knowledge.  Should Indigenous Peoples’  Knowledge be identified 
for use during implementation, any uptake would be managed through the IPP and would ensure both FPIC and appropriate benefit sharing  mechanisms are in place.  climate -related hazard 
management to communities.  drought planning established under Activities 
1.1 and 1.2. including integrating local farmers’ traditional knowledge70 
on drought management and adaptation measures , and 
training extension officers, and farmers  
 
1.4.2 Training local community members and farmers on 
the use of the available DSS tools and services, and 
national -local coordination mechanisms for early warning 
for droughts and climate -related hazards, including 
implementation of a mobile -based applicat ion supporting 
the use of the National DSS services.  
 
 
1.4.3  Collect feedback from government and local 
community stakeholders on the implementation of the 
DSS and undertake awareness raising workshops with 
other vulnerable communities adjacent to project sites.  
 
 Three training workshops on 
climate -related hazard 
management ( 1.4.1b)  
 
Three training workshops with 
farmers on climate -resilient farming 
practices ( 1.4.1c)  
 
Four small workshops on 
integrating local farmers’ traditional 
knowledge into drought 
management ( 1.4.1d)  
 
Two training workshops on the new 
knowledge management platform 
(1.4.2a)  
 
Two training workshops to support 
the mobile -based crowd sourcing 
application ( 1.4.2b)  
 
Six training workshops to gather 
feedback ( 1.4.3a)  
 
Five awareness -raising workshops 
(1.4.3b)  
Activity 1.5: Implement 
national action plan for 
coordinating drought and flood 
hazard management in the 
agricultural sector.  The existing National Drought Management 
Plan, delineating roles and responsibilities for 
key institutions, is set to be put into action. 
This implementation will activate the national 
coordination mechanism designed for 
managing flood and drought -related hazards. 
The plan provides a structured framework for 
coordinating efforts across various entities, 
streamlining responsibilities to enhance the 
efficiency of drought management. By 
executing this plan, the nation aims to foster 
collaboration among key ins titutions, ensuring 
a unified and organized approach to 
addressing the challenges posed by drought. 1.5.1  Review and provide recommendations for 
strengthening the existing strategic framework for 
drought - and flood -related hazard management, and 
develop a national coordination mechanism for 
responding to drought - and flood related hazards in the 
agricult ural sector,  
 
1.5.2 Produce an action plan for integration of climate 
information into policy and decision -making processes for 
drought and flood management, including actions to 
clearly define responsibilities for long term planning and 
proactive measures, and initiate implementation of the 
action plan.  
 Three stakeholder engagement 
workshops to produce 
recommendations ( 1.5.1a)  
 
Recommendations for 
strengthening the existing strategic 
framework for drought -related 
hazard management.  
 
Two workshops to develop national 
coordination mechanism ( 1.5.1b)  
 
National coordination mechanism


---
*Page 60*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 54 
  
  
 The implementation of the National Drought 
Management Plan signifies a proactive step 
towards a comprehensive and well -
coordinated strategy, emphasizing the 
importance of synchronized actions in 
managing and mitigating the impacts of 
drought -related hazard s. 
 1.5.3  Undertake gender analysis for strengthening 
project implementation at all levels and mainstreaming of 
gender considerations in training and rollout activities and 
provide gender -sens itive training on drought - and flood -
hazard management within the agriculture sector for key 
regional branches.  
 
. Three workshops to inform the 
action plan ( 1.5.2a) and three 
workshops to obtain inputs on 
implementing the action plan 
(1.5.2b)  
 
Action plan for integrating climate 
information into policy and 
decision -making processes  
 
Five small workshops to support 
the gender analysis ( 1.5.3a)  
 
Gender analysis  
 
Six training workshops ( 1.5.3b and 
1.5.3c)  
 
Activity 2.1: Train extension 
officers on climate -resilient 
agricultural practices EbA and 
alternative climate -resilient 
livelihoods.  The project will train extension officers within 
targeted districts on: i) climate -resilient 
agriculture, EbA and alternative climate -
resilient livelihoods ii) development of 
Community Climate Action Plans (CCAPs); iii) 
the implementation of a dynamic menu  of 
climate change adaptation to northern Ghana. 
Training district extension officers to plan and 
implement climate change adaptation 
interventions will ensure that the officers are 
prepared to facilitate the implementation of 
climate change adaptation int erventions in 
target communities. Training programmes will 
be designed and conducted by appropriate 
national departments within the GoG, 
particularly the EPA, Department of Agriculture 
and Extension Services Division. The training 
will build on existing ex tension service 
manuals and guidelines and will include both 
theoretical and practical components. One 
training workshop per year will be conducted in 
each of the eight target districts for the 
duration of the project to ensure that extension 2.1.1: Develop training materials and guidelines for 
extension officers on climate change adaptation, flood 
and drought hazard monitoring, CRA and EbA.  
 
2.1.2: Develop a training scorecard to measure the 
effectiveness of the training delivered to extension 
officers.  
2.1.3: Deliver two training session per year for extension 
officers in each of the eight target districts.  
 Training materials and guidelines.  
 
Sixteen training workshops (2 per 
district) per year.


---
*Page 61*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 55 
  
  
  
71 For example, staff within the EPA, specializing in education.  officers remain up to date with adaptation 
technologies and that newly recruited officers 
also benefit from the training.  
Activity 2.2: Train beneficiary 
communities in northern 
Ghana on climate -resilient 
agricultural practices and EbA 
interventions.  The project will train beneficiary communities 
in northern Ghana on CRA, EbA and 
alternative climate -resilient livelihoods. Firstly, 
sensitisation workshops will be held in the first 
year that the project provides support to a 
community. District, Regional  and National 
government staff will facilitate the community 
sensitisation workshops.  Following this, staff 
from relevant departments of the GoG71 and 
extension officers will train beneficiary 
communities on climate change and the 
climate change impact pathways most relevant 
to them as smallholder farmers. Extension 
officers will then introduce the menu of climate 
change adaptation interventions to 
communities. Targeted communities will then 
be trained to implement climate change 
adaptation interventions identified within the 
menu of interventions. In addition, extension 
officers will organise farmers into special 
Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and pro vide 
targeted training on specific adaptation 
technologies from the menu of climate change 
adaptation interventions. Finally, 
demonstration sites will be established by 
extension officers with willing community 
members to demonstrate various climate 
change  adaptation interventions that can be 
implemented at the household level.   2.2.1: Organise project sensitisation workshops in each of 
the targeted communities.  
 
2.2.2: Develop training materials for smallholder farmers 
on climate change adaptation, CRA and EbA.  
 
2.2.3: Develop a training scorecard to measure the 
effectiveness of the training delivered to smallholder 
farmers.  
2.2.4: Deliver training to targeted communities on: i) 
climate change impacts; ii) use of DSS tools and 
services; and iii) menu of climate change adaptation 
interventions.  
 
2.2.5: Establish CIGs and deliver targeted training on 
specific climate change adaptation interventions.  
 
2.2.6: Establish five demonstration sites in each targeted 
community.  
 A community sensitisation 
workshop in each of the 120 
targeted communities (i.e. 120 
sensitisation workshops).  
 
A community training workshop in 
each of the 120 targeted 
communities. (i.e. 120 training 
workshops).  
 
A targeted training workshop in 
each of the 120 targeted 
communities. (i.e. 120 training 
workshops) during the second and 
third year of project support.  
 
Five CRA and EbA demonstration 
sites in each targeted community 
(i.e. 600 demonstration sites).  
 
Activity 2.3: Develop 
community climate action 
plans (CCAPs) in collaboration 
with beneficiary communities.  Under this activity, each target community will 
finalise — with the assistance of extension 
officers — a CCAP that: i) identifies the most 
serious climate threats experienced or likely to 
be experienced by the community; ii) 
recognises current coping strat egies utilised by 2.3.1: Organise workshops in each of the targeted 
communities to develop/finalise a CCAP.  
 5-day validation workshops for 
each of the 120 targeted 
communities.  
 
Validated CCAPs for each of the 
120 targeted communities.


---
*Page 62*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 56 
  
  
  
72 Evaluation criteria will include: i) consistency with budget limits; ii) consistency with EbA interventions from the agreed m enu of climate change adaptation interventions; iii) 
clearly established land ownership/tenure rights; iv) appropriate implementat ion duration; v) the consistency of the CCAP with environmental and social safeguards; vi) a 
realistic implementation plan and budget; and vii) the signature of the responsible extension officer.  
73 Evaluation criteria will include: i) consistency with budget limits; ii) consistency with EbA interventions from the agreed m enu of climate change adaptation interventions; iii) 
clearly established land ownership/tenure rights; iv) appropriate implementat ion duration; v) the consistency of the CCAP with environmental and social safeguards; vi) a 
realistic implementation plan and budget; and vii) the signature of the responsible extension officer.  
74 Permissible inputs will include inter alia : i) land preparation; ii) simple farming tools; iii) fertiliser sprayers; iv) tree seedlings; v) fencing materials; vi) wate r storage tanks; vii) 
climate -resilient seeds; viii) fertilisers; ix) herbicides; and x) pesticides.  
77 Assuming ~115  ha of agricultural land per target community  the community; iii) selects and justifies 
potential adaptation interventions from the 
project’s menu of climate change adaptation 
interventions that will help build climate 
resilience; and iv) details implementation and 
budgeting requirements to implement potential 
adaptation interventions. The CCAPs will be 
validated during 5 -day workshops  facilitated 
by five extension officers. In addition to 
validation by target communities, adaptation 
interventions detailed in each CCAP will be 
reviewed against evaluat ion criteria72 by 
DEMCs and REMCs and will then be approved 
by the PMU and Directorate of Crop Services. 
National staff from EPA and MoFA will attend 1 
CCAP development workshop in each district 
during the first year of the project in which they 
will guide regional and district extension 
officers. The development of CCAPs began 
with the community consultations conducted 
during the development of this proposal (see 
Annex 2). This activity will develop and finalise 
CCAPs for each of the 120 targeted 
communities.  2.3.2: Review adaptation interventions in each CCAP 
against evaluation criteria73 by DEMCs, REMCs, PMU 
and Directorate of Crop Services.  
 
Activity 2.4: Implement 
climate -resilient agricultural 
practices  identified in the 
CCAPs in beneficiary 
communities.  The project will provide technical and input74 
support to beneficiary communities to 
implement the climate change adaptation 
interventions taken from the menu of 
interventions and identified as required and 
locally appropriate in their CCAPs. The 
interventions will be implemented by the local 2.4.1: Implement climate change adaptation 
interventions , including EbA and climate -resilient 
agriculture  in target communities.  
 
2.4.2: Provide technical support to communities to 
implement and maintain climate change adaptation 
interventions.  13,84077 ha of agricultural land 
made more resilient to climate 
change.


---
*Page 63*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 57 
  
  
  
75 Communities will not receive direct access to funds, but instead the executing entity will be responsible for the procurement  and delivery of inputs to the beneficiaries.  
76 The interventions implemented will be consistent with the criteria described in Output 3.2.  communities with technical support from 
district extension officers. The community will 
not receive funding directly, but instead will be 
provided with the equipment and/or inputs75 – 
and training through Activity 2.1 – required to 
implement each intervention. The details of the 
extent, implementation needs and budgeting 
requirements to implement each adaptation 
intervention will be drawn from the relevant 
CCAP. Each community will be  allocated the 
same fixed amount to implement its priority 
adaptation interventions76 over a period of 
three years. The proposed project will cover 
input costs for the implementation of climate 
change adaptation interventions in each target 
community. Input costs will cover, among other 
things:  
• small -scale agricultural equipment such as 
spades, wheelbarrows, pick -axes and hoes 
for improved ploughing and composting  
• climate -resilient seed varieties  
• nursery establishment costs  
• seedlings for agroforestry and riverbank 
protection  
• land preparation  
• labour for sowing, tree planting, weeding, 
digging compost and Zai pits, contour 
bunding, ridging, firebreak cutting etc.  
• fruit trees for intercropping  
• fencing to protect interventions against 
livestock  
• organic fertilisers and insecticides  
• water tanks  
• improved post -harvest storage devices  
• small -scale water infrastructure  
• fodder banks and communal rangelands.  
  
Activity 2.5: Develop a 
monitoring and evaluation This activity will improve the effectiveness of 
climate advisories in northern Ghana by 2.5.1: Develop an M&E framework for climate advisories 
services in northern Ghana.  M&E framework for climate 
advisories.


---
*Page 64*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 58 
  
  
  
78 Assuming ~115 ha of natural ecosystems per target community  strategy for climate advisory 
services in northern Ghana to 
improve the accuracy and 
appropriateness of advisories 
for smallholder farmers.  facilitating the integration of local knowledge 
and the experience of end -users into the 
production and dissemination processes. This 
process will be centred on the development of 
a community -based monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) system targeting end -users  of climate 
advisories. The M&E will serve to ground truth 
climate advisories and assess their uptake by 
end-users. Community surveys will be held on 
an annual basis throughout project 
implementation to gather primary data from 
smallholder farmers on their  perceptions of 
climate advisories and to consider links 
between local farmers’ traditional  knowledge 
and climate science. Finally, a feedback 
mechanism will be established within key 
government institutions — including the Ghana 
Meteorological Agency (GMet), the Ministry of 
Food and Agriculture (MoFA), the Ministry of 
Environment, Science, Technology and 
Innovation (MESTI), Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA), the National Climate Change 
Committee (NCCC), and the Council for 
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) — to 
improve the integration of the M&E data in the 
production and dissemination of climate 
advisories.   
2.5.2: Conduct annual community surveys with 
smallholder farmers in the target communities to ground 
truth climate advisories and identify the needs of the 
communities.  
 
2.5.3: Assess linkages between indigenous knowledge 
and climate science to identify entry points for integrating 
indigenous  knowledge into climate advisories.  
 
2.5.4: Establish a feedback mechanism with producers of 
climate advisories to improve the generation and 
dissemination of advisories using data collected through 
the M&E system.   
18 community surveys.  
 
Feedback mechanism between 
climate advisories and M&E 
system.  
 
Activity 3.1 Implement land 
restoration on communal land 
in 120 communities as per 
CCAPs  The project will e stablish tree nurseries to 
support reforestation in 120 communities ; 
Undertake community consultations , and 
secure the FPIC of Indigenous Peoples when 
involved,  on final location for restoration as per 
CCAPs and agree on modalities for plantings, 
maintenance and protection of the sites  and 
Undertaken annual restoration plantings and 
maintenance in agreed areas as per CCAPs .  
 
3.1.1. Establish community tree nurseries to support 
reforestation in 120 communities  
 
3.1.2  Undertake community consultations on final 
location for restoration as per CCAPs and agree on 
modalities for plantings, maintenance and protection of 
the sites  
 
 3.1.3 Undertaken annual restoration plantings and 
maintenance in agreed areas as per CCAPs  14,00078 ha of degraded Guinea 
and Sudan Savanna 
agroecological systems restored 
through EbA interventions and 
improved land management.


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 59 
  
  
  
Activity 4.1: Establish farmer -
based organisations (FBOs) 
and Village Savings and Loans 
Associations (VSLAs) that can 
access credit insurance for 
farming and non-farming 
livelihood activities.  The project will establish two FBOs in each of 
the 120 communities targeted by the project, 
i.e. a total of 240 FBOs. Eight districts will be 
targeted by the project, engaging an average of 
15 communities per district. The FBOs will meet 
the minimum requirements for receiving joint 
liability  agricultural loans and insurance 
identified during a survey of LFIs conducted for 
the AFAWA programme.  
 
The project will provide support to members of 
the established FBOs to register their 
organisations with MoFA (Sub -activity 4.1.1). 
Furthermore, members of the established FBOs 
will be trained on basic business and financial 
management techniques, includin g records and 
bookkeeping as well as the processes for 
applying for credit and insurance from LFIs. 
Extension officers will deliver this training during 
the first year that each beneficiary community 
receives support to ensure that the FBOs meet 
the eligib ility criteria set by LFIs for joint liability 
lending.  
 
The project will train established FBOs to set up 
Village Savings and Loans Associations 
(VSLAs, Sub -activity 4.1.2). The purpose of 
establishing VSLAs is twofold. Initially, the 
VSLAs will provide simple savings and loan 
facilities to these communities wh o currently do 
not have access to formal financial services. 
Secondly, operating the VSLAs will enable 
them to maintain up -to-date financial records 
which will enable the FBOs to meet the eligibility 
requirements of LFIs for joint liability loans and 
insur ance.  
 
The recommended blended finance model (see 
Activity 4.3) will set up a climate -resilient loan 
(CRL) program as an exit strategy to finance the 
continued implementation of EBA/CRA 
measures after the expiry of the GCF project, 4.1.1:  Establish two FBOs  in each targeted community 
(total of 120 communities across 8 districts)  through 
which smallholder farmers  can apply for agricultural 
credit and insurance . Train members of the FBOs  on 
basic business and financial management techniques  
including records and bookkeeping as well as the process 
for applying for credit and insurance from LFIs .  
 
4.1.2:  Train FBOs on the e stablish ment and operation of 
VSLA.   240 FBOs established (2 in each 
beneficiary community).  
 
240 VSLAs established (2 in each 
targeted community).


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 60 
  
  
  
79 Based on interviews with representatives from ADB and EcoBank.  both by FBOs that benefited from GCF activities 
as well as new, future ones.  
Activity 4.2:  Connect FBOs 
and local financial institutions 
to improve access of 
beneficiary communities to 
credit and insurance products . The project will facilitate engagement between 
FBOs and local financial institutions to improve 
access of beneficiary communities to credit and 
insurance products, see  discussion under 
Output 4 on GAIP and GIRSAL, and risk 
mitigation instruments for agricultural lending. 
Several LFIs in Ghana, including Agricultural 
Development Bank and EcoBank79, run 
outreach programmes that assist farmers in 
accessing credit. These programmes: i) help 
farmers to establish organisations or 
cooperatives; ii) provide financial management 
training; and iii) take farmers through the loan 
application process. However,  these 
programmes tend to focus on central and 
southern Ghana where agricultural production 
is higher and there are more commercial 
farming operations. The project will work with 
relevant LFIs to extend these services to 
beneficiary communities in northern  Ghana, 
see discussion under Output 3 on partnering 
with financial institutions.    
 
4.2.1: Include representatives from LFIs in the training 
and awareness -raising events organised through the 
project.  
 
4.2.2: Conduct a road show where representatives from 
LFIs are taken to beneficiary  communities.    Knowledge products for LFIs.  
 
Two workshops with LFIs.  
 
Three roadshows with 
representatives from LFIs.  
Activity 4.3:   Establish a 
blended finance model to 
provide credit lines to support 
climate -resilient agriculture . Climate -resilient loan (CRL) programs set up by 
one or more LFIs and funded by concessional 
IFI credit lines will benefit from four de -risking 
tools linked to the blended finance model: i) the 
credit score database compiled with the 
projects support; ii) e xisting GIRSAL credit 
guarantees for agricultural lending; iii) off -take 
agreements with off -takers; and iv) agricultural 
insurance provided by the new agricultural 
insurance fund.  
 
To develop the blended finance model, the 
project will begin by providing training to the 
Business Advisory Centres  (BACs) to enable 
BACs to coach FBOs and their members on the 
business and financial aspects of EBA/CRA 
and on the identification of off -takers and 4.3.1:  Provide technical assistance to the staff of the 
BACs using a training -of-trainers approach . 
 
4.3.2: Provide logistical support to BACs through the 
provision of motorbikes that will allow BAC officers to 
provide TA to FBOs on -site. Fuel and maintenance of the 
motorbikes, as well as the allocation of BAC officer time 
specifically for TA to FBOs under this project will be 
provided by the EPA . 
 
4.3.3: Organize annual “climate -resilient agriculture 
forums” convening FBOs, value chain actors, LFIs and 
NGOs operating in the agricultural sector in the target 
regions and relevant government entities . 
 
4.3.4: Provide technical assistance to LFIs on (i) the on 
the business and financial aspects of EBA/CRA that 64 technical training workshops 
delivered to BACs (two workshops 
per BAC for 32 BACs)  
 
Three technical training workshops 
for LFIs  
 
16 motorbikes  
 
12 climate -resilient agriculture 
forums  
 
Credit score database created  
 
One insurance study produced


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 61 
  
  
 signing of off -take agreements, thereby 
enhancing FBO bankability for local financial 
institutions. BACs will be capacitated by the 
provision of logistical support, including 
motorbikes, to enable them to deliver training to 
FBOs. Subsequently , annual ‘climate -resilient 
agriculture forums’ will be convened to facilitate 
the establishment of business relationships 
between FBOs and value chain actors, will 
allow FBOs to share progress on their path to 
climate resilience (with focus on enhanced farm 
profitability) and LFIs to advertise their CRL 
products, loan application procedures and 
requirements.  make EBA/CRA -adopting FBOs more bankable than 
conventional ones, (ii) the design of CRL products whose 
terms reflect the specificities of EBA/CRA and (ii) the 
identification of and introduction to IFIs that could provide 
concessional credit lines to fund t he local FIs’ CRL 
programs.  
 
4.3.5:  Create a credit score database on FBOs and their 
members that are targeted by the project and have never 
borrowed before.  
 
4.3.6: Produce actuarial data on the FBOs and their 
members that adopt EBA/CRA under the project, to be 
used by the new agricultural insurance fund to fine -tune 
its agricultural insurance policies for EBA/CRA adopting 
farms.  
Activity 5.1:  Generate and 
disseminate knowledge 
products capturing best 
practice and lessons learned 
to inform the upscaling of 
climate change adaptation 
across northern Ghana.  A monitoring programme will be designed to 
monitor project progress towards its targets 
and evaluate the socio -economic impacts of 
the various climate change adaptation 
interventions being implemented. A climate 
change intervention monitor will be placed i n 
each targeted community to collect relevant 
information stipulated in the monitoring 
programme. Monitoring and evaluation will 
focus primarily on inter alia: i) the achievement 
of project targets; ii) socio -economic benefits 
of project interventions; iii ) changes in crop 
productivity under different climate -resilient 
agriculture and EbA scenarios; iv) socio -
economic benefits and uptake of alternative 
climate -resilient livelihoods; and v) 
environmental co -benefits of project 
interventions. The monitoring p rogramme will 
build an evidence base for the further 
implementation of climate change adaptation 
interventions in northern Ghana. Based on the 
results of the monitoring programme, various 
knowledge products detailing best practice and 
lessons learned throu gh the project will be 
developed. These knowledge products will 5.1.1: Design monitoring programme to monitor project 
progress and determine the socio -economic impacts of 
the various adaptation interventions.  
 
5.1.2: Implement the monitoring programme in 
association with local research institutions.  
 
5.1.3: Produce annual monitoring reports.  
 
5.1.4: Generate knowledge products on best practice and 
lessons learned through the monitoring programme.  
 
5.1.5: Disseminate knowledge products, including 
through the Ghana Climate Change Data Hub  Monitoring programme  
 
Knowledge products


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 62 
  
  
 include inter alia: i) policy briefs; ii) climate 
change adaptation intervention implementation 
guidelines; iii) training manuals; and iv) 
reports. These knowledge products will then 
be disseminated to relevant stakeholders, 
including through the annual kn owledge -
sharing conferences (Activity 5.2) and the 
Ghana Climate Change Data Hub.  
Activity 5.2:  Conduct 
community -level knowledge -
sharing and awareness -raising 
events.  An awareness -raising campaign will be 
implemented in both beneficiary and non -
beneficiary communities in northern Ghana. 
The campaign will increase awareness about 
appropriate climate change adaptation 
interventions and will promote the upscaling of 
these interventions outside of the project target 
sites. The awareness -raising campaign will be 
developed by a suitably qualified national 
organisation and will utilise locally appropriate 
communication and knowledge dissemination 
mechanisms, such as video docum entaries 
and phone -in radio shows. All of the 
awareness -raising activities included in the 
campaign will be appropriate to local 
circumstances, taking into account literacy 
levels and access to different types of media. 
Knowledge -sharing events will also b e 
organized by district staff and extension 
officers at each beneficiary community. At 
each knowledge -sharing event, interested 
community members from 5 nearby 
communities (approximately 100 people), 
along with extension officers from 
neighbouring district s, will be brought to a 
beneficiary community to view climate change 
adaptation demonstration sites and learn from 
beneficiary community members. Event 
participants will receive basic theoretical and 
practical training on climate change 
adaptation. These e vents will promote the 
autonomous upscaling of climate change 5.2.1: Develop an awareness -raising campaign and 
communication plan to share knowledge on climate 
change adaptation in northern Ghana.  
 
5.2.2: Implement an awareness -raising programme 
utilising locally appropriate communication and 
knowledge dissemination mechanisms.  
 
5.2.3: Install signboards at project interventions sites 
detailing the project approach and adaptation 
interventions.  
 
5.2.4: Host community knowledge -sharing events where 
people from non -beneficiary communities and extension 
officers from non -target districts are exposed to the 
adaptation interventions and approaches implemented by 
this project.  
 
5.2.5: Produce and distribute video documentaries 
detailing the project approach, adaptation interventions 
and community success stories.  
 
5.2.6: Share best practices and lessons learned with 
relevant stakeholders and other adaptation projects in 
Ghana.  
 
5.2.7: Organise a knowledge -sharing conference annually 
to share information and strengthen coordination 
between climate change adaptation projects.  
 
 Awareness -raising campaign.  
 
240 community -level knowledge -
sharing events.  
 
120 project signboards.  
 
Annual knowledge -sharing 
conference.


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 63 
  
  
 interventions promoted by the project in non -
beneficiary communities. Signboards will be 
installed at each project intervention site 
detailing the climate change adaptation 
interventions being implemented there. This 
will allow surrounding communities to c ontinue 
to learn about climate change adaptation 
interventions being implemented outside of the 
formal awareness -raising and knowledge -
sharing events.  
Activity 5.3 Conduct district 
awareness and training 
workshops with District 
Assemblies to integrate 
CCAPs and EbA in District 
Development Plans and 
District Environment Plans and 
Budgets  Regional offices, REMCs and DEMCs in target 
districts will be institutionally and technically 
strengthened to enable them to deliver and 
monitor climate change adaptation projects  
and facilitate the integration of EbA and 
CCAPs in District development plans and 
district environment plans and budgets.  5.3.1  Organise annual workshops with eight District 
Assemblies and DEMC to raise awareness and 
experiences on CCAP and EbA and promote integration 
in District development plans and District environment 
plans and budgets  Awareness raising workshops to 
promote integration of EbA in 
district development plans  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
A full time Monitoring Officer will be employed to conduct and coordinate monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities for the project. The Monitoring Officer will 
design and operationalise a performance monitoring framework to track the project’s progress t owards achieving its targets. This will include: i) measuring 
performance against the project indicators (Sections E.3 –5) to evaluate the progress of the project; ii) reporting the project’s performance to the PSC and PMU; 
and iii) providing technical supp ort to the PC. Additionally, the Monitoring Officer will be responsible for overseeing and monitoring the application of gend er-
disaggregated indicators and ensuring that all gender targets are met. At particular milestones throughout the project — includi ng annual performance reports, 
interim evaluations and at project conclusion — the project team will undertake evidence -gathering exercises to verify the progress. These internal results verification 
reports will be further validated by evaluations  at the mid-term and end of the project implementation, as described below. The costs for the mid -term and terminal 
evaluation will be covered by UNEP .  During the  Terminal Evaluation at the end of the project , the evaluation team will validate a sample of the data collected 
through the  monitoring framework .  
 
UNEP will be responsible for managing  a Mid-Term Review (MTR)  at the mid -point of  the project’s duration.  The Task Manager will oversee the process of hiring 
an external consultant to carry out the  MTR, which  will provide an assessment of project performance at the project’s mid -point.  This will  be a formative exercise 
and will  include analysing whether the project is on track, what problems and challenges the project is encountering, and which correc tive actions are required so 
that the project can achieve  its intended outcomes by project completion in the most efficient and sustainable way. The Project  Steering  Committee  will participate 
in the MTR process and develop a management response to the review’s recommendations along with an implementation plan.  It is the responsibility of the UNEP 
Task Manager to monitor whether the agreed recommendations are being implemented  during the remainder of the project’s operational life.  The Independent 
Evaluation Office of UNEP will provide an assessment of the qualit y of the Mid -Term Review report.   
 
An independent Terminal Evaluation (TE) will take place  once the project has reached operational completion. The Evaluation Office of UNEP will be responsible 
for the TE, which is a summative evaluation,  and will liaise with the UNEP Task Manager  and relevant stakeholders  throughout the process. An independent


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 64 
  
  
  
 
 assessment of project performance  against standard evaluation criteria  (e.g. strategic  relevance, effectiveness,  efficiency, likelihood of impact and sustainability) 
will be made based on documentary evidence, stakeholder interviews and, in most cases, a field mission.  Each evaluation criterion  will be  rated  using a three -point 
rating scheme  and a weighted average will be determined to provide an overall performance rating for the  project as a whole . Where there are any differences in 
ratings  between the ev aluation team and the Evaluation Office  a final determination will be made by the Evaluation Office  when the  evaluation  report is finalised.   
 
The draft TE report will be sent to project stakeholders  during a  commenting process managed by the Evaluation  Office. Formal comments on the report will be 
shared by the Evaluation  Office  in an open and transparent manner. This evaluation report will be publicly disclosed and will be followed by a recommendation  
compliance process.   
  
The costs for results monitoring and performance evaluation  are included in the ‘Detailed Budget’ sheet of Annex 4  under budget lines 284–285.  
 
The EE will submit semi -annual progress reports and quarterly financial statements to the PMU and the PMU will consolidate the reports and submit the m to UNEP 
as the AE. In turn, UNEP will submit annual performance reports and semi -annual financial reports  to GCF. The detailed reporting timelines are as follows:  
 
Under the PCAs, the EE will be required to report to UNEP as follows:  
a. Progress reports: by 30 July for January to June;  
b. Quarterly financial reports by 15 January, 15 April, 15 July, and 15 October;  
c. Annual audited statements by 30 April;  
d. Final report: within 12 months of Programme completion.  
 
UNEP (AE) reports to the GCF:  
a. Annual Performance Reports by 1 March;  
b. Semi -annual Financial Information by 1 March and 30 Sept;  
c. Mid-Term Assessment report: halfway through Programme;  
d. Final APR: within 6 months of Programme completion;  
e. Terminal Evaluation report: within 12 months of Programme completion.  
 
Monitoring will also be undertaken by the AE through at least two Task Manager supervision visits and field missions  per year  to track implementation progress and 
challenges and strategically plan the way forward.


---
*Page 71*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 65 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
AML/CFT and Prohibited Practices compliance were assessed in the UNEP capacity assessment of EPA. 
UNEP noted that there are no UN sanctions or embargoes listed against EPA or its Management team, 
and there appears to be no evidence of engagement in prohibited practices by EPA.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Secure land tenure is critical for investment in climate change adaptations. If tenure is insecure, farmers face lower 
expected returns due to the risk of eviction, which undermines long -term planning and sustainability. Ambiguity in 
land-use rights can lead to disputes between  landowners, tenants and customary users, including pastoralists, 
resulting in tenure insecurity and reduced uptake of adaptation measures.  
 
To address this, the project will engage both landowners and land users, including pastoralist communities, and 
ensure that traditional and customary land use rights are respected  in line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy. 
These rights, including access to water points and rivers, seasonal access to land grazing corridors, will be identified 
and safeguarded through meaningful consultations and securement of the Free, Prior and Informed Consent from 
Indigenous Peoples using  appropriate participatory pro cesses guided by the IPPF. Conflict -sensitive planning and 
local dispute resolution mechanisms will also be applied to reduce risks and ensure inclusive and sustainable 
implementation.  
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk will be managed through a participatory approach to planning and implementation of proposed project 
activities. Close engagement with local communities, GoG entities and traditional authorities in project execution will 
be a priority, while local officials’ knowledge and experience  in dealing with Ghana’s land tenure situation will be 
invaluable. Engagement with landowners will be a priority so that landowners are made aware of the benefits of the 
proposed CRA and EbA interventions and the resulting climate -resilience. Furthermore, the menu of climate change 
adaptation interventions will allow the landowner to decide which activities are implemented on their land. This will 
further promote the participation and ownership of landowners in the proposed project. Consequently, the autono mous 
uptake of project interventions by surrounding farmers and communities will be enhanced and sustainability will be 
strengthened. This mitigation measure is expected to lower the probability of the risk occurring to “Low”.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low High 
Description  
The occurrence of low community demand to implement or sustain project technologies. If the benefits of interventions 
are not locally relevant or the long -term benefits are not adequately explained to beneficiaries,  then communities may 
revert to previously used and unsustainable agricultural methods. As a result, environmental degradation will continue, 
which will lead to further losses of livelihoods and decreased food security.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Attention will be given to locally relevant benefits in the selection of activities to encourage community buy -in. The 
CCAPs will ensure community participation and allow the selection of the most locally appropriate interventions from 
the menu of climate change adaptation interventions. Such a participatory approach to planning and implementation 
will build local awareness on EbA and generate interest in project interventions. The autonomous upscaling of 
proposed project interventions will be promoted thro ugh carefully planned site selection and the facilitation of inter -


---
*Page 72*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 66 
   
 community meetings. M&E of project interventions will be implemented, which will allow for the adaptive management  
of interventions. This will ensure the long -term sustainability of proposed project interventions and promote their 
viability.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  High 
Description  
Local communities may revert to unsustainable harvesting and farming practices after the project. In particular, 
trees planted during forest restoration may be cut down for fuelwood or to make way for new fields.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk will be mitigated  by conducting awareness -raising campaigns in local communities about the specific 
economic benefits that restored climate -resilient forest ecosystems provide. Additionally, forests will be restored 
with tree species that offer higher financial returns to l ocal communities than the sale of fuelwood. Fast -growing, 
climate -resilient species that provide valuable NTFPs will be included in plantings to demonstrate the benefits of 
reforestation to communities before the end of the project. These mitigat ion measures will adjust the probability of 
this risk occurring to “Low”.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low High 
Description  
The use of pesticides in interventions results in ecosystem damage through the secondary poisoning of non -target 
bird and mammal species.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The proposed project will ensure that the pesticides used by smallholder farmers have minimal impacts on 
agroecosystems. Furthermore, extension officers will train smallholder farmers on the safe storage, use and disposal 
of pesticides, as well as informin g them about alternative non -toxic pest management techniques. Part Two of 
Ghana’s Environmental Protection Agency Act (1994)  makes provisions for the effective control and management of 
pesticides. This is aligned with the FAO’s International Code of Cond uct80 in terms of handling, storing, applying and 
disposing of pesticides. The control of pesticide use in Ghana is enforced by  EPA, which is supported by the 
Pesticides Technical Committee. Furthermore, the proposed project will use a proactive integrated pest management 
system (including inter alia  the use of pesticides and post -harvest management) to mitigate the impacts of pests on 
agricultural production and overall project success.  
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description  
Lack of interest or demand, amongst authorities and potential agricultural and ecosystem goods buyers, to support 
activities beyond the project period. This includes the risk that the increased supply of farm products and NTFPs will 
exceed local demand.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Assessments of market access for all agricultural products and ecosystem goods that will be produced through project 
interventions will form part of the screening process for CCAPs under Sub -Activity 2.2.2 will be conducted. These 
assessments will draw fro m the initial Market Assessment conducted under the Feasibility Study (Annex 2) to 
determine the long -term viability of products in terms of supply and demand. The demand for more ecosystem goods 
and services is likely to be stimulated over time as the sup ply increases and as communities become more reliant on 
 
80 Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/agphome/documents/Pests_Pesticides/Code/CODE_2014Sep_ENG.pdf


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 67 
   
 them. Additionally, the post -harvest processing and storage of these products will be offered in the menu of climate 
resilient technologies to smallholder farmers. This will allow for the storage of products over a more extended period 
– especially when th ere is a greater supply than demand – and diversification of end -products. These end products 
can then be sold to various markets – local, national and international – when the demand is high, and farmers can 
charge higher prices. Furthermore, adequate sto rage will strengthen local and national food security during droughts 
and the long dry season. There is high -level support for post -harvest processing and storage in Ghana through the 
Presidential Special Initiatives (PSI) on Agriculture and Development wh ich will de -risk the agriculture and 
agribusiness sector through sustainable agriculture financing aimed at rapidly ramping up agro -processing and 
developing new and stable markets for agricultural products. There is also potential for the small scale stor age 
facilities that will be introduced through the proposed project to link larger regional warehousing proposed under the 
PSI to further enhance links with local, regional and international markets. These mitigation measures will lower the 
probability of the risk occurring to “Low”.  
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Limited capacity at decentralised levels to initiate and manage environmental activities; this includes District 
Assemblies, District Environmental Management Committees (DEMC), Community Climate Action Groups (CCAGs) 
and farmer -based organisations (FBO). In addition, staff at the local level may not fully understand their 
responsibilities under the proposed project leading to delays, and the ineffective  and inefficient implementation of 
interventions.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will encourage a realistic rolling out of activities with districts, based on the capacity of the EPA and MoFA 
regional staff and collaborating partners. The project will also build the capacity of regional and district staff, as well 
as of ext ension officers. MoFA and GMet will be closely involved in local project activities, ensuring that the project 
outputs are implemented in existing local communication structures with farmers and farmer associations, through 
the extension officers and regio nal/district branches. National level entities will provide the necessary technical 
backstopping. This mitigation measure will reduce the probability of the risk occurring to “Low”.  
Selected Risk Factor 7   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Ineffective use of public funds. Systemic weaknesses in financial management (FM) capacity and inefficient use of 
public funds as a result of inadequate oversight and supervisory arrangements on: i) transparency; ii) accountability; 
and iii) possible nonco mpliance with guidelines.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The EPA has a functioning Internal Audit Unit to help minimise such a risk. The GoG financial regulations and manuals 
are adequate for operational control. These manuals document the approval and authorisation hierarchies applicable 
for processing financial transactions. An external audit will also be conducted, and combined UNEP supervision will 
be provided throughout the life of the project. In addition, the following FM measures will be implemen ted: i) improving 
the understanding of project staff on UNEP FM processes and procedures; ii) the project shall prepare an accounting 
manual that clearly defines the policies and procedures to ensure consistency in financial operations and reporting; 
and i ii) periodic Value for Money Audits on the beneficiary agencies will be conducted by the Internal Audit of the EPA 
to ensure that project objectives are achieved. These mitigation measures will decrease the probability of the risk 
occurring to “Low”.  
Selected Risk Factor 8   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description


---
*Page 74*
---

E 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 68 
   
 Weakness in the procurement management capacity at the EPA, including: i) lack of proficiency for the management 
of procurement processes; ii) delays in the processing and submitting of procurement documents; iii) limited 
experience and familiarity with UNEP procurement guidelines and procedures; and iv) lack of adequate procurement 
staffing at the EPA.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The EPA will draw on their experience gained from implementing similar projects, including GEMP and SLWMP, 
which will aid in mitigating this risk. Furthermore, the following measures will be put in place to reduce procurement 
risk: i) the EPA will appoint an experience d project procurement officer to oversee activities and develop in -house 
capacity throughout project implementation; ii) capacity will be built within the EPA for procurement management in 
line with national procurement law; iii) regular updates of the pro curement plan until project closure, with copies sent 
to the GCF and UNEP for review; and iv) the EPA will ensure the prompt submission of procurement documents  
Selected Risk Factor 9   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Medium  
Description  
Potential conflicts between stakeholders may arise, such as diverging views and understanding of project strategic 
direction, dissatisfaction with implementation arrangements or dissatisfaction with the approach to project 
implementation approach in local communities may arise. The conflict probability is generally considered to be low 
locally, as the proposed interventions include upgrade to centralised data and management infrastructure - i.e., no 
activity including direct changes to farmers land and surr ounding ecosystems.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The close engagement of key stakeholders as implementing partners of the project, and participation in the national 
project steering committee NPSC forming the strategic direction of the project will also help avert any potential 
conflicts between stakeholders that may arise from lack of common understanding of the respective needs and 
challenges of both local stakeholders and national institutional players and project strategic direction.  For local level 
stakeholders specifically, including farmers and farmer associations, targeted training and consultation activities will 
take place to inform and engage on project activities, and grievance redress mechanism will be established to ensure 
that any potential conflicts or issues are tacked immediately and addressed in a way that is agreeable to all parties 
involved.


---
*Page 75*
---

F 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 69 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
The project has been designed to take potential environmental and social impacts of project activities into consideration, 
incorporating mitigating measures to reduce the likelihood and severity of unforeseen adverse effects. All project 
activities have be en evaluated against GCF Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) standards using UNEP’s 
Safeguards Risk Identification Form  (SRIF )81 as a screening tool to identify potential negative impacts. The SRIF  
screens the significance of environmental, social and economic risks against safeguard standards outlined in the 
UNEP’s Environmental and Social Sustainability Framework  (ESSF )82. The SRIF  Screening  Decision (Annex 6A)  
classified the project as moderate risk , with moderate risk factors associated with UNEP’s Safeguards Standard 1: 
Biodiversity, Ecosystems and Sustainable Natural Resource Management and Safeguards Standard 7: Indigenous 
Peoples .  
 
As the project is classified as moderate risk, an  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) (see Annex 
6B) has been develo ped. This ESMF provides explicit and systematic guidelines to identify environmental and social 
risks linked to project interventions and outlines the institutional and administrative pathways to address these risks. 
The ESMF identifies environmental and social risks and impacts that may be caused by the proposed project, including: 
i) introduction of harmful specie s; ii) increased use of agricultural chemicals; iii) increased demand for irrigation; iv)  
habitat conversion; v)  excessive fire suppression; and v) the adverse effects of on -farm earthworks. The framework 
provides mitigatory measures for avoiding, minimisi ng and mitigating the harmful risks and impacts such as: i) screening 
for invasive species; ii) adopting integrated pest and nutrient management approaches; iii) avoiding  large -scale or 
diesel pump irrigation; iv) preventing the conversion of natural habitats to cropland or plantation; and v)  supporting 
controlled early burning, rather than outright fire suppression.  
 
Additionally, during the project development period, social risks related to ethnic minorities, inclusive engagement 
processes and potential exacerbation of community conflict were identified. These social risks emerge through potential 
for conflict betwee n ethnic minorities  (including those categorised as Indigenous Peoples per the GCF IP Policy)  
practicing different and sometimes competitive livelihood strategies, namely sedentary farming and semi -
nomadic/transhumant pastoralism. The potential for these r isks to emerge are exacerbated by the project’s focus on 
sedentary livelihood strategies and  general trend of  underrepresentation of pastoral groups within government 
institutions and institutional processes . To address these risks, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has 
been developed in accordance with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy.  The IPPF will be implemented in the first year 
of project implementation and will guide the identification of Indigenous Peoples, ensure FPIC is secured prior to 
activities affecting them, and enable  the development of site -specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs)  in consultation 
with the relevant Indigenous Peoples . These plans will ensure that potential adverse impacts are addressed, that 
Indigenous Peoples are equitably included in project processes, and that their collective rights , land use practices, and 
their traditional knowledge are respected and safeguarded .  
 
As the Executing Entity, the EPA will oversee the implementation/monitoring of the ESMF  and IPP and provide technical 
guidance and specialist advice on environmental and social issues to all stakeholders83. In addition, all potential delivery 
organisations — including private contractors — will be vetted by the EPA in terms of their environmental and social 
performance to ensure compliance with the ESMF. The EPA  — which is responsible for ensuring compliance with 
environmental impact assessment (EIA) procedures under the EPA Act 1994, Act 490 — has the experience and 
capacity to implement the ESMF.  
 
To guarantee effective project implementation and to address grievances that may arise as a result of project 
interventions,  Grievance Redress Mechanisms will be established in each district, detailing the complaints procedure 
and the redress mechanisms for eligible84 grievances (see Annex 6 b). All community members and stakeholders will 
be informed of the grievance redress mechanism, including how to register a complaint. At the community level, 
complaints will be presented to Climate Change Action Groups linked to the proposed project. These  groups will receive 
and record the charges, as well as issue an acknowledgement. Mediation bodies appropriate to the nature of the 
 
81 The SRIF is a screening tool developed under UNEP’s Environmental and Social Sustainability Framework (ESSF) to  
provide a preliminary assessment of the potential safeguard risks presented by a project.  
82 UNEP 2015. UNEP Environment’s Environmental, Social and Economic Sustainability Framework  (ESSF) . Available at: 
https://wedocs.unep.org/rest/bitstreams/14946/retrieve  
83 Funds will be allocated to the EPA for the implementation and monitoring of ESMF.  
84 Eligible grievances include: i) unequal access to project resources; ii) corruption; iii) issues of gender inequality; iv) la ck of 
delivery of project interventions; v) exclusion of minority groups  and iv) unspecified environmental or social grievances 
related to the project, project staff or associated activities .


---
*Page 76*
---

F 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 70 
   
 grievance — including community elders, Tindanas or chiefs — will be established that will endeavour to reach mutually 
acceptable solutions within 20 working days. All efforts will be made to address grievances at the community level. 
Should any complaints  arise that cannot be resolved at the first level of the Grievance Redress Mechanism , these will 
be referred to project staff, through Grievance Redress Committees at the district level. The Grievance Redress 
Committees will hold meetings with complainants  to identify a solution acceptable to all parties involved. The proposed 
redress actions will be communicated to complainants and if satisfactory, implemented promptly. A formal complaints 
register will be established by the EPA in which all concerns raise d through the grievance mechanism will be registered 
within 24 hours. The GRM is based on an existing GRM utilised by the EPA for the LoCAL project as is, therefore, well 
established and operating effectively.  In addition to the standard project level GRM,  the project will: i) include a parallel 
SEAH -specific survivor -centred process, which is detailed in the ESAMF; ii) ensure access to the UNEP SRM for any 
complainants; iii) ensure information is disseminated on how to access the GCF IRM (and notably the I ndigenous 
Peoples Specialist within the Green Climate Fund); and finally iv) develop an Indigenous Peoples -specific GRM through 
the operationalization of the IPPF to ensure the provision of a culturally appropriate process that respects the traditional 
authority structures of any potentially affected Indigenous Peoples.  
 
Extensive on -the-ground public consultations and stakeholder engagements were conducted during the design of the 
proposed project to identify the needs of the beneficiary communities and the potential social risks that the project 
may encounter85. As highlighted in section D.5, it was not possible to undertake comprehensive consultations with 
Indigenous Peoples present on the landscape who may be impacted by the project. These groups will be mapped 
and consulted (with FPIC secured where required) th rough the implementation of the IPPF.  These consultations will 
continue throughout the project lifespan  and in accordance with  an IPP in any landscape in which Indigenous 
Peoples are present . In addition, the inclusion of community members in the development and validation of 
Community Climate Action Plans (CCAPs) will facilitate the identification of community needs. The combination of 
community consultations, stakeholder engagements and the i nclusive development of CCAPs will ensure acceptance 
of project activities from the beneficiary communities.  
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
During project preparation, a gender assessment was conducted to understand the differential vulnerability to, and 
impact of, climate change on women and men in Ghana. From the findings of this assessment, and an analysis of the 
proposed project solution  and interventions , a gender action plan (GAP) was developed. The process to produce these 
components included: i) a desktop review of available literature; ii) gender equality studies conducted by research 
institutions and donor agencies; ii) details made available by the Government of Ghana; and iv) information obtained 
during extensive stakeholder and community consultations  in 2017 and 2024 .  
 
The assessment notes that gender inequalities in Ghana disproportionately affect the adaptive capacity of women to 
current and future climate change, as opposed to men. The effects of climate change on households and communities 
will ultimately be exacerba ted if the adaptive capacit ies of both men and women are not strengthened in parallel. 
Overlooking either gender will affect production and income within a household, having knock -on effects on families, 
children and the community as a whole. Although trad itional knowledge has established coping mechanisms within 
communities to the harsh climatic conditions experienced in northern Ghana, it is unlikely to adapt quickly enough to 
overcome the effects of future climate change.  
 
Women  — including divorcees and widows  — along with children and the elderly, are among the most vulnerable 
groups to the effects of climate change. This is largely because women and female -headed households have fewer 
resources to cope with reductions in food and water security, together with th e effects of extreme weather events such 
as droughts and floods. This is particularly pertinent in the target  communities, where people are often reliant on climate -
sensitive natural resources for their livelihoods. Severa l factors contribute to the vulnerability of women to climate 
change, including, inter alia , the effects of migration, water availability, limited access to climate information or early 
warnings, decreased agricultural yields and reliance on climate -sensitive livelihoods.  
 
Mainstreaming gender into development frameworks and project design — – including conceptualisation, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation —  is therefore important to build the adaptive capacity of households  and 
communities and reduce the social impacts of climate change on communities. To mitigate against biasing against 
women as project beneficiaries during implementation and subsequently, the gender action plan outlines several 
 
85 The potential environmental and social risks that may arise during project implementation, as well as mitigation measure to 
reduce these risks, are presented in Annex 6: Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Framework. In 
addition, summaries of all stakeholder consultations conducted during project development, as well as the stakeholder 
engagement plan, are presented in Annex 7 h: Stakeholder Engagement Plan.


---
*Page 77*
---

F 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 71 
   
 interventions to ensure the project does not unintentionally contribute to perpetuating or worsening gender equality and 
gender -based climate vulnerability in Ghana. The GAP seeks to promote gender equality by including activities which 
will increase women ’s representation and awareness, as well as ensuring that training programmes are gender -
responsive  and -inclusive. It includes clear targets, gender -responsive  design features and quantifiable performance 
indicators to promote women’s participation and be nefits from the project.  
 
The project interventions will address gender equality through several pathways, including:  
• promoting women’s inclusion in all project aspects, including training and awareness -raising opportunities;  
• incorporating gender considerations  into the development of community climate action plans, based on the specific 
gaps identified within each community;  
• integrating women into the institutional structures and involving them in the decision -making process;  
• pursuing representative participation in all consultations, workshops and validation events;  
• providing women with business and financial training;  
• raising awareness on the importance of equal opportunity for all people and the role women play in climate change 
adaptation across a community;  
• sharing lessons learned through project interventions to help create a paradigm shift in the approach to gender 
equality in climate change adaptation projects; and  
• designing and implementing gender -responsive  training that considers the different learning methods and training 
accessibility of men and women.  
• working closely with local community leaders, civil society organisations and pastoralist associations to identify and 
invite pastoralist representatives to participate in stakeholder consultations, workshops, and validation events.  
• ensuring diversity within these groups, including equitable participation of women pastoralists, to capture a wide 
range of experiences and perspectives.  
• ensur ing that logistical and linguistic barriers to participation are addressed, enabling inclusive and effective 
engagement with pastoralist communities throughout the project cycle.  
 
Gender -specific indicators defined in the GAP will be used to quantitatively assess the gender -specific benefits of 
project interventions on an ongoing basis. These indicators will ensure that the monitoring and evaluation process is 
gender -sensitive and t hat project interventions are effectively promoting gender equality in climate change adaptation. 
The results of these assessments will be incorporated into the annual Project Implementation Reports, Mid -term Report 
and Terminal Evaluation.  The full Gender  Assessment and project -level Gender Action Plan are included as Annex 8.  
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The financial management and procurement within the project will be guided by UN financial regulations, rules and 
practices, as well as UNEP’s programme manual. The financial rules of UNEP, which follow International Public Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS), are promulgated under the Financial Regulations and Rules of the UN. Within this 
context, funding -allocation mechanisms are managed as per UN rules and procedures, including eligibility criteria, 
proposal evaluation pro cesses, quality assurance and control, project monitoring and supervision. UNEP is audited 
annually by the UN Board of Auditors and has established dedicated trust funds for Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
resources.  
 
The funding of the project will be conducted  through a distinct grant within the Trust Fund, with the project itself being 
set up in the UNEP Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) as a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS), which is itself further 
broken down into Work Breakdown Structure Elements (WBSEs), org anised by output and outcome. The grant of the 
project will be linked to the WBSEs to fund the activities contributing to the delivery of specific outputs — as per the 
disbursement schedule detailed in the term sheet. The fee income will be managed independently and separately of 
the GCF project grant funds, through a dedicated grant . In line with UNEP procedures, the project will appoint a 
Financial Officer within the PMU who will be responsible for monitoring, reporting on and approving requests for funds 
on a quarterly basis. Reports to summarise the disbursement and projected dema nds for project funding will be 
prepared and submitted to a UNEP Task Manager who will undertake project supervision, in line with r eporting 
standards and methodologies applied in past projects, such as those implemented using GEF modalities. The UN 
financial regulations and rules require the segregation of duties, and safeguards to ensure compliance with UN financial 
rules and regulat ions. All procurement will be undertaken in line with UN procurement regulations, rules and policies. 
UNEP’s modalities for project implementation results in funds being transferred in tranches to the EE once the EPA 
has satisfied the conditions that are d efined under the legal/cooperation instrument (Project Cooperation Agreement; 
PCA and Internal Cooperation Agreement; ICA) to be signed between UNEP Climate Change Adaptation Unit, 
Ecosystems Division and the EPA. The PCA will include specific obligations for EPA on financial management and 
reporting and will require periodic reporting from EPA to follow international financial and auditing standards. The PCA


---
*Page 78*
---

F 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 72 
   
 specifically requires the audit to be undertaken by a recognised firm of certified public accountants or, for governments, 
by a government auditor. This auditor should state whether the GCF proceeds were covered by the scope of the audit.  
 
As a GoG authority, the EPA follows the government’s financial and procurement rules and standards. UNEP has 
undertaken an assessment of the EPA capacity which will guide the procurement monitoring plan which will be agreed 
upon between UNEP and the EPA. T he procurement monitoring plan will be an annex to the PCA and will be shared 
with GCF upon signature, as required by the FAA. The procurement monitoring plan will also be reviewed periodically. 
The project’s investments in equipment will be undertaken fol lowing UN procurement procedures. Finally, in line with 
the UNEP Programme Manual, EPA will be requested to provide an annual compliance audit covering all aspects of 
the project execution, including review of all expenditures incurred during the financial  year.  
 
The procurement plan for the proposed project is provided in Annex 10.  
 
There are no UN sanctions or embargoes listed against EPA or its Management team, and there appears to be no 
evidence of engagement in prohibited practices by EPA. While there is no dedicated act of parliament on corruption, 
Ghana’s penal code penalises co rruption by public officials1 and Ghana has a National Anti -Corruption Action Plan 
(NACAP)1. The Ghana govt also has in place an Anti -Money Laundering Act, 2008 (Act 749)1 which prohibits money 
laundering and established a Financial Intelligence Centre. The Anti -Money Laundering Act penalises money 
laundering and lists it as an extraditable offence.  
Furthermore, the Project Cooperation Agreement with EPA will include a clause requiring EPA to 
contractually oblige all its sub -personnel, agents, employees, or contractors to comply with Anti -Fraud and 
Corruption Framework of the UN and GCF Prohibited Practices.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the follow ing two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy,  and 
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 79*
---

H 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 73 
   
 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☒ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☒ Annex 18  Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☐ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)86 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ Annex 23 
Annex 24  
Annex 25  Beneficiary Estimation Methodology  
Menu of interventions  
Ex-Ante Carbon -balance Tool (EX -ACT)


---
*Page 80*
---

H 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 74 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.  
 
86 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross -cutting projects.


---
*Page 81*
---

RIrLnttc (lr (;l:t ANAMINTSTRY
OF
FTNANCEP.O.Box MB 40, Ministrie+ Accra
Digital Address : GA-l44-2024
Kindly quote this number and date on all
correspondence
My Ref. No._ MOF/ERM/CFU/GCFrc425
Your Ref. No.
1+lL"ApRrL 2o2s Date.
RE: NO.OBJECTION LETTER IN RESPECT OF THE FUNDING PROPOSAL TITLED
"CLIMATE-RESILIENT LAIIDSCAPES FOR SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOODS IN
NORTIIERN GHANA" SUBMITTED BY THE UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT
PROGRAMME (UNEP)
We refer to the funding proposal titled "Climate-Resilient Landscapes for Sustainable Livelihoods in
Northern Ghana" , submitted by the United Nations Environment Programme ([INEP) to The National Designated
Authority on 8ft April2025.
2. The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Finance, the National Designated
Authority/ Focal Point of the Republic of Ghana.
3. Pursuant to GCF Decisions 8.08/10, 8.37122, andB.4ll\2, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, in my capacity as NDA./Focal Point, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the Climate-Resilient
Landscapes for Sustainable Livelihoods in Northern Ghana' as included in the funding proposal.
4. By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Ghana has no-objection to the Proposal; and(b) The Proposal is in conformity with the national priorities, strategies and plans of the Republic
ofGhana.
5. We also confirm that our National process for ascertaining no-objection to the Proposal has been duly
followed.
6. Notwithstanding the foregoing, we expect the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to take the
necessary measures to ensure that the project as described in the Proposal is implemented in a manner consistent
with applicable national laws.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Kind regards.
PHYLLIS ADWOA FRAIKUE
NDA. FOCAL POINT
FOR: MINISTER
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
GREEN CLIMATE F'TIND
G-TOWER, 24-4 SONGDO-DONG
YEONSU-GU INCHEON CITY,
REPUBLIC OF KOREA.
Cc: The Hon. Minister, MoF
The Hon. Deputy.Minister, MoF
The Chief Director, MoF
The Coordinating Director, MoF
The Director, ERM, MoFI'e .n.t:l ri :lijl ,:.1;r 197
: '. ,-t .i", .l -:'- i:.r r j.7
8ffiY&f-'No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 82*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Climate -resilient landscapes for sustainable livelihoods in 
northern Ghana  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Republic of Ghana : 
Jirapa, Lambussie, Lawra and Wa West Districts in the 
Upper West Region;  
Binduri and Garu Districts in the Upper East Region;   
East Mamprusi and Yunyoo -Nasuan Districts in the North 
East Region.  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, May 16, 2025  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  for the full disclosure document s, with the 
executive summary available  in Kusaal, Mampruli , Dagaare 
and Fulani . 
Explanation on language  English is the official language of Ghana. Kusaal is the main 
spoken language in Binduri  and Garu Districts in the Upper 
East Region.  Mapruli is the main spoken language in North 
East Region . Dagaare is the main language spoken in the 
Wa West, Lawra, Jirapa and Lambussie Districts in the 
Upper West Region, and Fulani is spoken  across all three 
Regions . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
UNEPFP Ghana Disclosure Doc ESAMF ENG 14 April 
Clean.pdf  
Kusaal  (Executive Summary) : 
UNEPFP Ghana Disclosure Doc ESAMF ES Kusaal 
Version.pdf  
Mampruli (Executive Summary):  
UNEPFP Ghana disclosure Doc ESAMF ES Mampruli 
version.pdf  
Dagaare (Executive Summary):  
UNEPFP Ghana disclosure Doc ESAMF ES Dagaare 
Version.pdf  
Fulani (Executive Summary):  
UNEPFP Ghana Disclosure Doc ESAMF ES Fulani 
version.pdf  
Other link(s)  UNEP Open Data:  
https://open.unep.org/project/GCF -GCF -GHA -XXX


---
*Page 83*
---

Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA), Ghana  
https://mofa.gov.gh/site/index.php/projects/resilient -
landscapes -for-sustainable -livelihoods -in-northern -ghana  
 
Environment Protection Agency (EPA), Ministry of 
Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI)  
https://www.epa.gov.gh/new/environmental -assessment -
and-audit/  
 
Ghana Meteorological Agency (GMet), Ministry of 
Communications and Digitalisation  
https://www.meteo.gov.gh/news/climate -resilient -
landscapes -for-sustainable -livelihoods -in-northern -ghana/  
 
Remarks  An ESIA  consistent with the requirements for a Category B  
project is contained in the Annex 6 B “Environmental and 
Social Assessment and Management Framework (ESAMF) ” 
of the UNEP Financing Proposal “Climate -resilient 
landscapes for sustainable livelihoods in northern Ghana ”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, May 16, 2025  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  for the full disclosure document , with the executive 
summary available in Kusaal, Mampruli, Dagaare  and 
Fulani . 
Explanation on language  English is the official language of Ghana. Kusaal is the main 
spoken language in Binduri and Garu Districts in the Upper 
East Region.  Mapruli is the main spoken language in North 
East Region. Dagaare is the main language spoken in the 
Wa West, Lawra, Jirapa and Lambussie Districts in the 
Upper West Region, and Fulani is spoken across all three 
Regions.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
UNEPFP Ghana Disclosure Doc ESAMF ENG 14 April 
Clean.pdf  
 
Kusaal (Executive Summary):  
UNEPFP Ghana Disclosure Doc ESAMF ES Kusaal 
Version.pdf  
 
Mampruli (Executive Summary):  
UNEPFP Ghana disclosure Doc ESAMF ES Mampruli 
version.pdf  
 
Dagaare (Executive Summary):  
UNEPFP Ghana disclosure Doc ESAMF ES Dagaare 
Version.pdf  
 
Fulani (Executive Summary):  
UNEPFP Ghana Disclosure Doc ESAMF ES Fulani 
version.pdf  
Other link(s)  UNEP Open Data:  
https://open.unep.org/project/GCF -GCF -GHA -XXX  
 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA), Ghana  
https://mofa.gov.gh/site/index.php/projects/resilient -
landscapes -for-sustainable -livelihoods -in-northern -ghana


---
*Page 84*
---

Environment Protection Agency (EPA), Ministry of 
Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI)  
https://www.epa.gov.gh/new/environmental -assessment -
and-audit/  
 
Ghana Meteorological Agency (GMet), Ministry of 
Communications and Digitalisation  
https://www.meteo.gov.gh/news/climate -resilient -
landscapes -for-sustainable -livelihoods -in-northern -ghana/  
 
Remarks  An ES MP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the Annex 6B “Environmental and 
Social Assessment and Management Framework (ESAMF)” 
of the UNEP Financing Proposal “Climate -resilient 
landscapes for sustainable livelihoods in north ern Ghana”.  
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable)  
Description of report  Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)  
Date of disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, May 16, 2025  
Language(s) of disclosure  English for the full disclosure document,  with the executive 
summary available  in Kusaal, Mampruli, Dagaare and 
Fulani .  
Explanation on language  English is the official language of Ghana.  Kusaal  is the main 
spoken language in Binduri and Garu Districts in the Upper 
East Region.  Mapruli is the main spoken language in North 
East Region. Dagaare is the main language spoken in the 
Wa West, Lawra, Jirapa and Lambussie Districts in the 
Upper West Region, and Fulani is spoken across all three 
Regions.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
UNEPFP_Ghana Disclosure Doc IPPF ENG 14 April Clean.pdf  
 
Kusaal (Executive Summary):  
UNEPFP Ghana Disclosure Doc IPPF ES Kusaal Version.pdf  
 
Mampruli (Executive Summary):  
UNEPFP Ghana disclosure Doc IPPF ES Mampruli 
Version.pdf  
 
Dagaare (Executive Summary):  
UNEPFP Ghana disclosure Doc IPPF ES Dagaare Version.pdf  
 
Fulani (Executive Summary):  
https://open.unep.org/docs/gcf/UNEPFP%20Ghana%20di
sclosure%20Doc%20IPPF%20ES%20Fulani%20version.p
df


---
*Page 85*
---

Other link(s)  UNEP Open Data:  
https://open.unep.org/project/GCF -GCF -GHA -XXX  
Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA), Ghana  
https://mofa.gov.gh/site/index.php/projects/resilient -
landscapes -for-sustainable -livelihoods -in-northern -ghana  
Environment Protection Agency (EPA), Ministry of 
Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI) 
https://www.epa.gov.gh/new/environmental -assessment -
and-audit/  
Ghana Meteorological Agency (GMet), Ministry of 
Communications and Digitalisation  
https://www.meteo.gov.gh/news/climate -resilient -
landscapes -for-sustainable -livelihoods -in-northern -ghana/   
Remarks  A IPPF  consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project and GCF and UNEP policies on Indigenous Peoples 
is contained in the Annex 6 C “Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (I PPF)  of the UNEP Financing Proposal 
“Climate -resilient landscapes for sustainable livelihoods in 
northern Ghana”  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Tuesday, May 13, 2025  
Place  Physical cop ies of the ESAMF and IPPF  (English for the full 
documents and ES in local languages)  have been displayed 
at the  EPA Regional Offices in Wa (Upper West), Bolgatanga 
(Upper East) and Walewale (North East), Offices of the 
Regional Departments of Agriculture in Wa (Upper West), 
Bolgatanga (Upper East) and Nalerigu (North East), 8 
District Assembly Offices of the project’s Districts and at 
their respective offices of the Department of Agriculture in 
Binduri, Garu, East Mamprusi, Yunyoo -Nasuan, Wa West, 
Lawra, Jirapa and Lambussie  Distri cts. 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, June 30, 2025  
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 86*
---

G
CF/B. 42/ 02/Add. 07 
Page 86 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP265 
Proposal name:  Climate -resilient landscapes for sustainable livelihoods in 
northern Ghana  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP ) 
Country/(ies):  Ghana  
Project/programme size: Medium  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths  Points of caution  
The project targets eight districts in 
northern Ghana  – identified as the most 
climate -vulnerable through data -driven 
analysis and extensive stakeholder 
consultations. By supporting 120 high -risk 
communities with adaptive, locally driven 
interventions, the project ensures targeted 
impact, strengthens resilience , and lays the 
foundation for scalable, climate- resilient 
rural development.  A potential risk is the lack of in -country 
presence of the accredited e ntity, which 
may lead to delays in coordination and 
implementation unless mitigated through 
strong local execution and oversight 
mechanisms.  
All executing entities and partners are 
national institutions, ensuring local 
ownership, institutional alignment, and 
long- term commitment. This nationally led 
model builds and strengthens existing 
systems, supports government coordination, and enhances institutional capacity in Ghana 
to scale and sustain adaptation efforts 
independently.  
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding  proposal  in accordance with the
term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity  (AE)  and, if considered
appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in a nnex II to  document GCF/B. 42/02.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 Project background  
3. In northern Ghana, where approximately 80 per cent  of the workforce depends on rain -
fed, subsistence agriculture, smallholder farmers face major challenges due to climat e


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 87 
 
 
   
 variability. Prolonged dry seasons cause food shortages and water scarcity, while rising 
temperatures reduce water retention and increase pests and crop spoilage. At the same time, 
extreme rainfall leads to flooding, crop loss, infrastructure damage, and r educed reservoir 
capacity, heightening the risk of dam failure and downstream flooding.  
4. In response, t he project aims to build climate resilience among smallholder farmers in 
northern Ghana by improving food security and strengthening the rural economy. It focuses on 
climate -resilient agriculture and water storage, landscape restoration (e.g. riverbank 
rehabilitation, agroforestry), and climate -resilient rural infrastructure. Activities will be 
implemented at the community level (planning and capacity -building), regional level (weather 
forecasting), and national level (drought and flood action  plan). Implemented over seven years 
in eight climate -vulnerable districts, the project will support 120 communities and provide 
early warning advisories to the wider population. Led by the Ghana Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) , in partnership with the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Ghana Meteorological 
Agency (GMet)  and Water Resources Commission, the project will promote sustainable, climate -
resilient livelihoods through an integrated, ecosystem- based approach . 
5. The proposed funding for the project is USD  70,1 98,822 , utilizing grant  instruments . The 
GCF contribution to the project is USD 63,211,141 in grant . Co-financing will be provided  by the 
Government of Ghana . 
6. The project targets  around 691,125  direct beneficiar ies and around 2.8 million  indirect 
beneficiaries . Together , these beneficiaries make up  9.3 per cent of the whole population of 
Ghana .  
7. GCF categorizes  the pro ject as B (medium ) for its environmental and social safeguards  
(ESS) . 
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
8. The pro ject is structured in to two components:  
(a) Component 1 : Early warning systems;  and 
(b) Component 2:  Climate -resilient livelihoods.  
Component 1: Early warning systems (total cost: USD  15,358,090 ; GCF cost: USD 13,458 ,090  in 
grants )  
9. This component will strengthen Ghana’s early warning system through a series of 
coordinated interventions. It will improve access to flood and drought information, expand hydrometeorological and groundwater monitoring networks and radar coverage  – particularly 
in the underserved northern region  – to enhance the forecasting accuracy  of GMet , and build 
institutional and technical capacities for drought and flood monitoring, assessment, and 
response. It will also establish a national framework for generating and disseminating climate 
hazard advisories to local communities, supported by the development of a national action plan 
for drought and flood hazard management . 
10. An o utput under this component is improved climate data and early warnings made 
available to facilitate proactive drought and flood management . 
Component 2: Climate -resilient livelihoods (total cost: USD 51,110,644; GCF cost: USD  46,179 ,060  in 
grants )  
11. This component will strengthen capacity for and implement climate -resilient 
agriculture, landscape restoration for drought and flood management, and alternative climate -
resilient livelihoods in beneficiary communities. It will train 200 E xtension Officers (at least 30


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 88 
 
 
   
 per cent  women) on climate -resilient practices, ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA), and 
livelihood diversification. Communities will receive training and support to develop or finalize 
their own climate change adaptation plans, based on locally identified priorities and climate risk 
assessments. Adaptation interventions outlined in each climate change adaptation plan – 
selected from a menu of context -specific options – will be implemented with the support of 
District Extension Officers to reduce community vul nerability to climate change.  
12. Outputs under this component are:   
(a) Climate -resilient agricultural practices, EbA and alternative climate -resilient livelihoods 
implemented in beneficiary communitie s;  
(b) Restoration of landscape to reduce drought and flood risk ;  
(c) Increased access of smallholder farmers to financial resources and engagement with the 
private sector ; and 
(d) Knowledge and awareness of climate threats to agricultural livelihoods and available adaptation options increased to inform the upscaling of climate -change adaptation 
across northern Ghana . 
Monitoring and evaluation  (M&E)  (total cost: USD 1 ,392,462 ; GCF cost : USD 1,314,414 ) 
Project management (total cost: USD  2,337,625 ; GCF cost: USD 2,259,577 )  
13. The p roject management budget will finance project management  expenses , such as a 
Project Manager , Finance Officer  and office equipment . 
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
14. The pro ject consistently scores medium  to high against GCF investment criteria. A 
detailed assessment of the project’s fit with GCF investment criteria is provided below.  
3.1 Impact potentia l                           Scale:  Medium  to high 
15. The proposed project has medium to high  impact potential, directly benefiting 691,125  
rural farmers through enhanced early warning systems, adoption of climate- resilient 
agricultural practices, and large -scale agroforestry and restoration activities.  
16. Indirectly, it will reach the broader population of 2.86 million in northern Ghana by 
improving food and water security and increasing resilience to climate hazards. Enhanced 
climate data and early warning dissemination will also strengthen national drought and flood 
response systems, contributing to more climate -responsiv e development planning.  
3.2 Paradigm  shift                              Scale : Medium   
17. The project will catalyse a shift from vulnerable, subsistence farming to climate-
resilient, ecosystem -based livelihoods in northern Ghana. Through the adoption of climate -
smart agriculture, landscape restoration, and diversified income sources, combined w ith 
strengthened early warning systems and planning capacity, communities will move from reactive to proactive climate responses.  
18. Its model is designed for scale -up across 43 districts, supported by a national action 
plan, and integration into local development plans. A strong M&E and knowledge -sharing 
system will document and disseminate lessons, while training and peer -to-peer  learning will 
promote replication and sustained behavioural change beyond the project areas.


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 89 
 
 
   
 3.3 Sustainable development potential                         Scale : High  
19. The programme will contribute to several Sustainable Development Goals ( SDGs ): SDG  1 
(No poverty) , SDG 2 ( Zero  hunger ), SDG 8 (Decent work and  economic growth ), SDG 1 3 (Climate 
action ); SDG 15  (Life on land ); and SDG 17 ( Partnerships for the Goals ). The pro gramme  expects 
to realize environmental , social , economic , and gender  co-benefits.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                               Scale: High  
20. Northern Ghana is highly vulnerable to climate change due to its reliance on rainfed 
agriculture, limited infrastructure, and a widening development gap. The Government of Ghana 
recognizes the urgency but lacks the fiscal space to fund large- scale adaptati on. Smallholder 
farmers face limited access to credit, and local institutions lack the capacity to implement and 
coordinate adaptation efforts.  
3.5 Country ownership                                                          Scale: High  
21. No-objection letters have been issued by  the Government  of Ghana . Additionally, a ll 
executing entities (EEs) and implementing partners are national entities, with technical support 
and oversight provided by the AE . 
22. The proposed project is fully country -driven as it was prioritiz ed by the n ational 
designated authority in June 2016 using a transparent prioriti zation tool developed under the 
GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme . In addition, extensive consultations with 
national, regional, district and community -level stakeholders (including representatives of local 
government, the private sector and civil society, and women and other vulnerable groups) were 
conducted in -country by the Government of Ghana  during the development of the proposal . 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                     Scale:  Medium  to high 
23. The project provides grants to strengthen capacities at the national, regional, and field 
levels through training  session s, land restoration , and institutional development  for early 
warning systems . This enables smallholders  to adopt and sustain climate -resilient practices 
beyond the programme implementation period . 
24. The GCF cost of USD 91 per direct beneficiary (and USD 23 per total beneficiary) reflects 
moderate cost -efficiency within the GCF adaptation portfolio. The co -financing ratio of 1:0.11 is 
low; while this  is understandable given the government’s financial constraints and in- kind 
contribution commitments, caution is warranted until these contributions have  fully 
materialized .  
25. Scenario analysis shows that n ature -based infrastructure and h ybrid approaches , such 
as reforestation, climate -smart agriculture, and agroforestry , can substantially reduce climate -
related damages and enhance community resilience. These measures lead to avoided damages 
and generate income benefits, with net benefits of up to USD 55.3 million (W a West) and net 
present values of up to USD 68.8 million under h ybrid scenarios . 
26. The proposed investments are economically sound, with b enefit –cost ratios ranging 
from 1.55 to 2.95 and internal rates of return  from 17.4 to 37.9  per cent  across districts. Even 
under conservative assumptions, the financial returns remain positive. Excluded co -benefits 
such as lives saved, improved nutrition, and carbon sequestration suggest even greater value, underscoring the project ’s strong economic and societal  case .


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 90 
 
 
   
 IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
27. Project overview.  The project aims to enhance the climate resilience of vulnerable 
smallholder farming communities in northern Ghana by improving food security and enhancing 
the ag riculture -based economy. Specifically, the project will improve climate data and early 
warning systems in the Northern region of  Ghana under c omponent 1. Component 2 will focus 
on adoption of climate -resilient agriculture and water storage, and investments in EbA , nature -
based flood -risk reduction, and climate -resilient agricultur al practices, benefiting 15 
communities from each of the 8 districts from 3 regions in n orthern Ghana. The direct 
beneficiaries will be identified based on the selection criteria and stakeholder consultations. 
Beneficiary communities will be able to select the most locally appropriate intervention from a 
menu of adaptation of interventions wh ich has been made available in the project formulation 
phase. The potential environmental and social (E&S) co-benefits include restoration of 
degraded lands leading to increased canopy cover, reduced soil erosion, reduced surface run -off, 
improved ecosystem services and resilience, improved agricultural productivity, and reduced 
exposure to climate -related environmental hazards, and strengthened institutional capacity for 
climate adaptation, among others.  
28. E&S risk category and safeguard instrument.  The proposed project activities have 
been screened against the s afeguards risk identification form of the United Nations 
Environment Programme  (UNEP) and h ave been classified as having moderate risks associated 
with the UNEP safeguards standards on biodiversity, ecosystems and sustainable natural 
resource management and on Indigenous Peoples. The moderate risk classification is equivalent 
to the GCF category B classification and aligned with the accreditation level of the AE. An 
environmental and s ocial assessment management framework (ESAMF) has been developed to 
provide systematic guidelines in further identifying E&S  risks and impacts, mitigating measures, 
and institutional arrangements during project implementation. Th e following potential risks 
have been identified in the ESAMF: i) introduction of harmful species; ii) increased use of 
agricultural chemicals; iii) increased demand for irrigation; iv) habitat conversion; v) excessive 
fire suppression; and v) the adverse effects of on -farm earthworks. The ESAMF identifies 
mitigating measures following the hierarchy of mitigation.   
29. Compliance with GCF ESS standards . The following paragraphs describe how the 
project complies with the se standards.  
30. ESS 1: Assessment and management of E&S risks and impacts . Since the exact 
locations and design of specific activities will be identified during implementation, the AE has prepared an ESAMF  at funding proposal development stage. The project’s ES AMF provides 
guidelines for the screening and assessment of potential E&S  risks and impacts; identifies 
potential E&S  risks and impacts and corresponding indicative mitigating measures; describes 
the implementation arrangements and capacity needs; provides details fo r the establishment of 
a grievance redress mechanism  (GRM) ; identifies information disclosure requirements; and 
describes the stakeholder engagement process during the project development and 
implementation phases. The ES AMF also sets out a ctivity exclusion criteria and p rohibited 
activities, outright excluding activities that may have significant E&S  risks and impacts 
equivalent to a category A project. During implementation, any subproject categorized as B 
would require a fit -for-purpose environmental and  social impact assessment  and environmental 
and social management plan  which would need to be disclosed following the GCF Information 
Disclosure Policy. Compliance with national regulatory requirements will also be met, as 
required. Monitoring indicators have been developed for the ES AMF implementation and 
results will be reflected in the annual performance reports.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 91 
 
 
   
 31. ESS 2: Labour and working conditions . The engagement of project staff and 
contractors will be undertaken in compliance with national labour laws and international 
commitments, such as I nternational Labour Organization  conventions, as well as UNEP and GCF 
procurement polic ies and principles. This will ensure that staff are not subjected to adverse 
working conditions, occupational health and safety risks, forced labour and child labour. The 
Ghana Labour Act of 2003 provides general labour protections, however , gaps with 
international good practice have been identified such as those regarding grievance redress mechanisms for workers and compliance with contractor obligations. As such, the UNEP 
safeguard standards will be applied to fill the gaps. A mandatory c ode of c onduct will be signed 
by contractors and project staff. The project anticipates engagement of local labour only and no 
work camp establishment is envisaged. While no significant occupational health and safety risks 
are anticipated, measures will be in place to address any potential risks through EPA 
regulations and good practice. For interventions involving physical work, appropriate health 
and safety training, equipment and safety measures will be in place.  
32. ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention . Early w arning infrastructure 
could cause construction -related impacts such as increased noise and dust levels, localized soil 
and vegetation disturbance, and contamination of nearby water sources. For all activities , the 
AE has identified this standard as triggered with a low level of risk. On o utput 1, as the 
installation of small -scale early  warning equipment involves  construction works, detailed 
mitigation measures relating to construction works will h ave to be detailed in the site- specific 
environmental and social management plan s once the target sites have been identified. On 
output 2, the promotion of climate -resilient agricultural techniques could increase water 
demand and encourage the use of fertilizers and pesticides. Waste can also be generated from 
bags  and containers from agricultural activities. To mitigate such risks, the project will provide 
farmers with the capacity to undertake  integrated pest management, including training on the 
safe use of agrochemicals and waste management, storage, application, minimization and 
disposal. Mitigation measures should be adopted to address potential risks and impacts related 
to climate -resilient water infrastructure (boreholes and check dams). The a ctivity exclusion 
criteria and p rohibit ed activities list  in the E environmental  and Social Assessment and 
Management Framework  identif y activities likely to generate significant greenhouse gas 
emissions, or pollution beyond permissible limits, including uncontrolled burning or industrial 
emissions. No substantial consumption of energy, water or other material inputs associated 
with the pro ject are anticipated. To mitigate potential impacts from small- scale climate- resilient 
livelihood promotion, the project will disseminate good practice guidance on pollution 
prevention, resource efficiency, and environmentally sound waste disposal tailored  to livelihood 
activities. Low -input, low -pollution processing techniques through technical support and 
extension services will be promoted. Chemicals and materials subject to international bans and 
phase -outs will not be used during the proposed project interventions.  
33. ESS 4: Community health, safety and security . Minimal health, safety and security 
risks are associated with the installation of early warning observation equipment and the 
potential for intergroup conflict between sedentary and pastoralist groups if benefits from project interventions are not managed well. The risks associated with local conflict will be 
reassessed and addressed at the local level through customary  land -sharing practices and 
participatory planning processes during implementation to ensure t hat appropriate mitigating 
measures are adopted.  Some sites for observation equipment may need to be fenced  to limit 
public access for safety purposes. The project activities are not expected to result in an influx of workers requiring worker camps, use of security services, nor will they involve medium to 
large -scale construction. Health and safety risks related to livestock -rearing are minimal, as the 
project does not involve the provision or scaling -up of animal -husbandry activities, and no 
increase in a nimal populations is anticipated. Likewise, the project does not include large -scale 
water infrastructure or open water sources . Borehole installations  will be small  in scale and  will


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 92 
 
 
   
 be screened to ensure they do not generate additional risks related to water  or vector -borne 
diseases.   
34. ESS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement . The risks are assessed to be of 
low significance on land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. No physical or economic 
displacement is anticipated from the project activities. Early warning observation equipment 
will be installed on government land as much as possible. In case it is found not  to be  feasible to 
install on government -owned land, formal lease on private land will be arranged through a 
participatory process. If the land identified is within pastoralist grazing land or traditionally  
owned and used land, land access will be agreed through a fully consultative process (i.e. free, 
prior and informed consent  in the case of Indigeno us Peoples’ involvement). To ensure that 
pastoralists are not negatively affected, the project will not support any activity that results in changes in land -tenure arrangements or change existing land -use restrictions. The project will 
not support any activity that would lead to forced eviction.  
35. ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources.  While E&S  risks from a single intervention may be considered as low risk, 
collectively the project is assessed as  having moderate risks triggering the UNEP Safeguards 
Standard on Biodiversity, Ecosystems and Sustainable Natural Resource Management. The implementation of climate change adaptation interventions, including climate- resilient 
agricultural practices may affect local ecosystems if risks are not  managed properly. In selecting 
sites for any activity, siting within or near protected habitats, areas supporting endangered 
species, and areas of high conservation value will be stringently  avoided. The project will only 
support agricultural production in existing agricultural lands used by communities. In planning for plantation reforestation, the project will ensure alignment with any existing management 
plans and land -use plans, and will exclude support for any monoculture practice. No invasive 
species or genetically modified organism will be supported. As part of capacity -building 
initiatives, biodiversity conservation and risk management training practices will be incorporated in to the training materials to enhance the long -term sustainability of climate -
resilient agriculture.  
36. GCF Indigeno us Peoples Policy and ESS 7 on Indigenous Peoples : The AE foresees 
potential impact on Indigenous Peoples in regard to water, land and natural resources access. 
The AE has started initial  engagement with representatives of transhumant pastoralists and 
provided an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, which requests systematic screening for Indigenous Peoples , consultations and ensuring free, prior and informed consent  when needed. 
The project has excluded any change to customary land use, or restriction of use to traditional lands used by pastoralists. The AE foresees Indigenous Peoples representation at the Project 
Steering Committee. The AE is recommended to engage wi th the GCF Indigenous  Peoples 
Advisory Group on relevant I ndigenous Peoples' issues that may be encountered.  
37. ESS 8: Cultural heritage . The proposed activities will not be located in any known 
cultural heritage sites and as such, no adverse impacts on cultural heritage are anticipated. 
However, since the project involves earthworks, chance find procedures will be adopted as a 
precautiona ry measure.  
38. Implementation arrangements . Under the oversight role of UNEP as accredited entity, 
the EPA of the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation as the main EE will 
be responsible for the overall implementation of the ES AMF. EPA will be guided by a Project 
Steering Committee composed of representatives of  various government agencies, United 
Nations Capital Development Fund , and civil society organizations . GMet will serve as the 
executing entity for output 1 on improving climate data and early warning systems. E&S focal 
points will be designated from eac h executing entity to manage safeguard implementation at 
operational level. To ensure effective safeguards and GRM implementation, the E&S focal points will be provided with training and technical support from EPA and the Gender and Safeguards


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 93 
 
 
   
 Specialist at the Project Management Unit ( PMU ) level. E&S  training will also be provided for all 
staff involved in project implementation at the national, regional and district levels .  
39. Stakeholder engagement . Multilevel stakeholder engagements involving 
representatives of the public and private sectors, women and farmer -focused non -governmental 
organizations, and the target ed local communities, including farmers, have been conducted by 
the AE together with the EE during project design and formulation. The stakeholder 
engagements aimed at identifying the needs, issues, risks and resolutions associated with the 
project activitie s. Key concerns raised pertain to GRMs , gender dynamics and inclusion of ethnic 
minorities. The key concerns raised will be addressed through the implementation of the 
ESAMF, Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework , Gender Assessment and Action Plan  and the 
subsequent plans to be developed during implementation. The PMU will continue with the stakeholder consultations during project implementation as detailed in the s takeholder 
engagement plan.  
40. Grievance redress mechanism . A project -supported GRM  that builds on existing 
structures will be made available to all project stakeholders, including contractors or contracted labourers in addition to an GRM process specific to Indigenous Peoples, which will be designed, 
in a consultative manner with potentially affected I ndigenous Peoples  groups. In addition, the 
institutional GRM  of the AE  (Stakeholder Response Mechanism) and the GCF Independent 
Redress Mechanism will also be made available to stakeholder s as additional formal channels. 
The GRM will not impede access to judicial or administrative remedies that may be relevant or 
applicable. The GRM will be disseminated to all stakeholders through meetings, printed posters 
and flyers in local languages post ed in community centres , assembly halls, and extension offices. 
Full training will be provided to project implementers on the GRM implementation.  
41. Sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment  safeguarding : In accordance with the 
Revised Environmental and Social Policy ( decision B.BM -2021/18 ), the AE has acknowledged 
sexual exploitation, abuse, and h arassment (SEAH) as a relevant safeguard issue and has 
included risk mitigation measures in both its gender action plan and ESAMF. SEAH is recognized 
as a contextual risk due to project  team –community interaction, gender and power 
asymmetries, and the participation of economically and socially vulnerable groups. Mitigation 
measures include mandatory SEAH prevention training for project staff, community climate 
action groups, farmer -based organizations, and targeted community members.  The AE has also 
committed to conducting a dedicated SEAH risk assessment at district level during the project’s 
inception phase. This assessment will inform context -specific mitigation planning and allow for 
early validation of reporting mechanisms , stakeholder sensitivities, and risk exposure across the 
target areas. The approach to SEAH risk mitigation is consistent with the provisions of the GCF 
SEAH Policy. Institutional responsibilities are clearly defined, and awareness -raising measures 
are em bedded across relevant stakeholder levels. Training measures include both in -person and 
online delivery. The integration of SEAH considerations within gender, safeguard, and financial 
access components is noted.  The planned development of the SEAH -specific  GRM  during the 
inception phase presents an opportunity to ensure that such systems are accessible, confidential 
and culturally appropriate.  
4.2 Gender policy  
42. The AE provided a gender assessment and action plan with the funding proposal and 
therefore, complies with the requirements of the updated GCF Gender Policy.  A gender 
assessment has been conducted, drawing on a desk review and stakeholder consultations, and 
contextualized within the national gender policy environment. It identifies key gender -related 
barriers such as unequal access to land, limited financial inclusion, disparities in educational 
attainment, and underrepresentation in decision -making structu res. These barriers reduce the


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 94 
 
 
   
 adaptive capacity of women and other vulnerable groups by limiting their ability to participate 
in, benefit from, and influence climate -resilient livelihood strategies. The assessment further 
notes the influence of entrenched gender norms and customary lan d tenure systems, which 
shape control over resources and reinforce gendered divisions of labo ur across sectors such as 
agriculture, shea processing and petty trade. It also considers intersectional factors, highlighting 
how overlapping vulnerabilities , such as disability, age and informal employment , compound 
exclusion from economic opportunities and climate adaptation efforts.  
43. A gender action plan is provided. It presents a structured approach to addressing 
gender -related risks and opportunities. It outlines gender -responsive activities under each of 
the project’s outputs and includes associated indicators, sex -disaggregated targets, timelines, 
roles and responsibilities, and estimated budgets. A Safeguards and Gender Specialist is 
expected to be embedded within the PMU to oversee the implementation, monitoring and 
coordination of gender -related actions , supported by institutiona l capacity from EPA, Ministry 
of Food and Agriculture , and other project partners . Additional capacity -building measures and 
training activities on gender mainstreaming are planned at the community and institutional 
levels.  
44. Gender -responsive design elements are incorporated into various project components. 
These include support for women -led cooperatives, targeted financial literacy and mentorship 
program mes, participation in early warning systems, and leadership roles in knowledge- sharing 
initiatives. The proposal also outlines efforts to promote inclusive engagement in district -level 
planning processes and to ensure participation in decision -making.  The use of community -level 
baselines, targeted leadership roles, and monitor ing mechanisms suggests a commitment to 
tracking both participation and transformative outcomes. The Secretariat encourages the AE to 
continue prioritizing disaggregated impact tracking and documentation of lessons learned 
during implementation . 
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  AE/EE capability  to execute the current project ( medium risk)  
45. The UNEP will serve as the AE for this project. Currently, there are 10 approved FPs 
with UNEP, with a total committed amount of USD249 million in the GCF portfolio. The AE will 
collaborate with two E Es, which are government agencies namely, EPA and Gmet. Since UNEP 
does not have an in -country presence in Ghana  and will be managing from their regional office , 
the capacity of the EEs will be crucial, as they will be responsible for directly managing the day -
to-day operations of the project.   
4.3.2.  Programme specific execution risk  (medium risk ) 
46. Monitoring of the impact for engaging financial institutions (FIs): Output 4 aims to 
improve smallholder farmers’ access to finance by building capacity, forming farmer -based 
organizations (FBOs) and Village Savings and Lans Associations (VSLAs), and linking them to 
blended finance initiatives by international and local FIs. While there are detailed plans and 
analyses of existing facilities and stakeholders, the project scope is limited to the establishment 
of FBOs/VSLAs, and a blended finance model, rather  than resulting credit lines or loan 
agreements - these are framed as potential exit strategies without clear indicators, making 
monitoring difficult. This limitation in scope highlights the need for robust monitoring 
mechanisms to ensure that the intended  outcomes are achieved and to assess the effectiveness 
of capacity -building efforts  as stipulated in the M&E plan.  
47. Use of grant: As mentioned above, Output 4 may involve on -lending activities. Given that 
GCF provides a full grant, there should be a clear distinction in terms of use of grant and loans.


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/ 02/Add. 07 
Page 95 
 
 
   
 To mitigate this, the AE has confirmed that GCF proceeds will not be used to finance credit lines 
or guarantees through financial intermediaries. This assurance is crucial in maintaining the 
integrity of the project's financial management and ensuring that  funds are utilized as intended 
to support smallholder farmers directly.  
4.3.3.  GCF’s portfolio concentration risk  
48. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non -
material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration levels, results area, single 
proposal or AE concentration.  
4.3.4.  Compliance risk (medium risk)  
49. Certain project activities, such as the establishment of village savings and loan 
associations and a blended finance model to provide credit lines – though GCF funds will not be 
used to finance credit lines and guarantees through financial intermediaries – present elevated 
ML/TF risks.     
50. The AE has assessed ML/TF risk as low given its internal controls, including its risk -
based approach to engaging implementing partners on the basis of assessments of their capacity 
and governance capabilities, as well as its established monitoring and eval uation procedures 
and financial reporting mechanism, which will be applied to this project. Moreover, the AE will provide anti -money laundering/countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) training to 
downstream partners at the start of the project. In addition, the AE’s capacity assessment of EPA found that it has the requisite fiduciary and financial management capacity, including in relation 
to AML/CFT compliance.    
51. Based on the AE’s internal controls and governance mechanisms that will be applied 
during project implementation, and the relatively elevated ML/TF risks associated with certain 
activities, the overall compliance risk is determined to be medium.   
Summary risk assessment  
Overall assessment  Medium  
Accredited entity/executing entity capability  Medium  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
Compliance  Medium  
GCF concentration  Within the monitoring thresholds  
4.4 Fiduciary  
52. As the AE, UNEP will provide fiduciary oversight and safeguard supervision, ensuring 
compliance with both UNEP and GCF policies. UNEP will oversee the full project cycle – 
including formulation, start -up, implementation, and closure – using its internal programme 
manual, which includes robust provisions for financial management, procurement, and project oversight. A UNEP Task Manager will lead project supervision and undertake at least two 
oversight missions annually. The experience of UNEP in Ghana, including as d elivery partner for 
the National Adaptation Plan Readiness project and in implementing EbA initiatives and 
environmental programmes, underscores its strong technical and fiduciary capabilities and 
institutional presence in the country.  
53. Executing functions will be carried out by Ghana’s EPA and GMet, with UNEP signing 
formal p roject cooperation agreements (PCAs) with each entity. These PCAs will establish clear 
roles, fiduciary obligations, disbursement conditions, and reporting requirements, aligned with 
UNEP operational standards. The EPA, with a proven track record as an executing agency under


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 96 
 
 
   
 Global Environment Facility -funded programmes (e.g. GEMP, SLWMP), has undergone UNEP 
fiduciary and capacity assessments, confirming its adequacy in financial and operational 
management. GMet, responsible for climate and hydrological data, will implement o utput 2, and 
both entities will be held accountable for results and the effective use of project resources.  
54. The project governance structure includes a national- level Project Steering Committee, 
co-chaired by UNEP and the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation, and 
a PMU housed within the regional office of the EPA  in Tamale. The PMU will be staffed with a 
dedicated Financial Officer, Procurement/Administrative Officer, and an M&E specialist, and 
will work closely with the  finance and procurement teams  of UNEP . Regional implementation 
will be supported by l ocal steering committees, and coordination with national ministries and 
district authorities will ensure vertical alignment and oversight. The EPA will serve as the Project Steering Committee  secretariat and lead the day -to-day fiduciary oversight of EEs  and 
implementing partners.  
55. At the community level, implementation will be supported by a gricultural extension 
agents and local institutions such as c limate change action groups and farmer -based 
organizations, ensuring resource flows and information are responsive to local needs. UNEP -
DHI will also be engaged through a PCA to deliver technical support using internationally recognized modelling  tools. Memorandums of understanding  among entities such as EPA –
Ministry if Food and Agriculture  and GMet –Water Resources Commission  will define inter -
agency roles in agricultural and hydrological interventions. This layered and contractually 
governed approach ensures a clear chain of accountability, appropriate use of GCF funds, and 
compliance with fiduciary standards across all level s of implementation.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
56. The proposed project aims to contribute towards three adaptation result s areas , namely, 
the increased resilience of most vulnerable people and communities; health, well- being, food 
securi ty, and water security; and ecosystems and ecosystem services. To report on the 
corresponding achievements, the proposal included in its logical framework five adaptation 
indicators:   
(a) Core indicator 2: Direct and indirect beneficiaries reached ;  
(b) Supplementary 2.1: Beneficiaries (female/male) adopting improved and/or new 
climate -resilient livelihood options ;  
(c) Supplementary 2.2: Beneficiaries (female/male) with improved food security ;  
(d) Supplementary 2.4: Beneficiaries (female/male) covered by new or improved early 
warning systems ; and  
(e) Core indicator 4: Hectares of natural resource areas brought under improved low -
emission and/or climate -resilient management practices.  
57. These results will be achieved by reducing the vulnerability to climate change of 
smallholder farmers in northern Ghana through the implementation and adoption of climate -
resilient agriculture, EbA  approaches, alternative climate- resilient livelihoods and locally led 
investments in climate resilient rural infrastructure.  The project theory of change articulates the 
results pathways that will lead to the improved adaptive capacity of landscape- level ecosystems 
to flood, drought, and high temperature in the project site.  
58. The project’s M&E plan presents details of data sources and data collection and 
analytical methods  for each indicator required by the Integrated Results Management 
Framework , including periodic surveys undertaken at the start, mid dle, and end  of the project 
implementation , Geographical Information System  mapping, independent verification of


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 97 
 
 
   
 reported results, focus group discussions, key informant interviews, and analysis of secondary 
information based on government data. The plan also allocated budget for a dedicated 
Monitoring and R eporting Officer. The overall M&E budget is around USD 2,337,625 , which the 
Secretariat deems sufficient to meet the requirements  of the monitoring and accountability 
framework , Integrated Results Management Framework , and GCF Evaluation Policy. The main 
risk to reporting credible results is the potential impact of any locali zed conflict that could affect 
the feasibility and/or cost of data collection on the ground.  
4.6 Legal assessment  
59. The Accreditation Master Agreement, which was signed on 15 December 2016 and 
became effective on 20 February 2017, was subsequently amended and restated by First Amendment and Restatement Agreement which was signed on 13 July 2023 and became 
effective on 2  August 2023 (as so amended and restated, the "AMA"),  
60. The Accredited Entity has provided certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.   
61. The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Ghana, country in which 
GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF 
is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which r isks need to be 
further assessed. Moreover, the ability of GCF to undertake redress activities and/or 
investigations in this country may be hindered due to the absence of privileges and immunities 
for relevant GCF personnel.  
62. Therefore, it is recommended that the Board considers whether disbursements of GCF 
proceeds should only be made after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation 
and expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and 
immunities for GCF and its personnel . 
63. To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by 
the Board is made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 98*
---

G
CF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 98 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of FP265 
Proposal name:  Climate -resilient landscapes for sustainable livelihoods in 
northern Ghana  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) 
Country/(ies):  Ghana  
Project/programme size: Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 Overview  
1. In Northern Ghana agriculture employs roughly 80% of the region’s workforce and is
predominantly rainfed and relies on traditional farming methods and assessed to have “limited
technological inputs.” This dependence on natural climate conditions leaves far mers highly
exposed to environmental shifts. The region’s agroecological systems are under strain due to acombination of factors, including erratic climate linked weather patterns, environment
al
d
egradation from unsustainable land use, rapid population gr owth, and disruptions caused by
dam spills from the Tamne and Bagre reservoirs.
2. Exacerbating impact of climate risk on the development  pathway.  Climate change is
intensifying these pressures. Key trends include shorter and more unpredictable rainy seasons ,
i
ncreased frequency of extreme rainfall events, prolonged dry spells, rising temperatures, and
heightened evapotranspiration rates. These incr easing climate hazards have cascading effects
such as degraded soils, reduced crop yields, loss of arable land, and more frequent bushfires.
Farmers already operating at subsistence levels stru ggle to adapt, leading to worsening food
insecurity, income instability, and deepening poverty. Without targeted interventions such a s
imp
roved climate information, resilient farming techniques, and sustainable resource
management the farmers’ capacity to cope will further weaken .
3. Need for strategic interventions.  The situation demands urgent action because if left
unaddressed, climate -induced agricultural decline will worsen marginalization of rural
communities, exacerbate food shortages, and destabilize economic activities in northern Ghan a.
Th
us, effective solut ions need integration of climate adaptation, environmental restoration, and
livelihood diversification to build long -term resilience for smallholder farmers.
4. Proposed project. The Climate -Resilient Landscapes for Sustainable Livelihoods
project in Northern Ghana, aims to enhance climate adaptation, improve agricultural resilience ,
an
d integrate climate -smart practices across vulnerable smallholder farming communities.
5. P roject objective and outcomes. As stated in the funding proposal, the “proposed
project objective is to enhance the climate resilience of vulnerable smallholder farming
communities in northern Ghana by improving food security and enhancing the agro -based rural
economy. The project’s outcomes will strengthen institutional and regulatory systems forclimate -responsive planning and development, enabling government agencies and loc
al
i
nstitutions to effectively integrate climate adaptation into policies and s trategies. The project
supports the adoption of climate -resilient agricultural practices, alternative livelihoods, and
access to financial resources, ensuring farmers can sustainably adapt to climate impacts.Additionally, the project improves knowledge an d learning processes, fostering informed


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 99 
 
 
decision -making and empowering communities with the tools and information needed to scale 
up climate adaptation efforts across the region.”1 
6. Project components and outputs. The project is divided into two components, namely 
early -warning systems (Component 1) and climate resilient livelihoods (Component 2). The 
outputs (strategic interventions) are as follows: (i) improved climate data and early warnings 
made available for fa cilitating proactive management, (ii) climate -resilient agricultural 
practices, EbA and alternative livelihoods implemented in beneficiary communities, (iii) 
restoration of landscape to reduce droughts and flood risks, (iv) increased access of smallholder 
farmers to financial resources, and (v) increased knowledge and awareness of climate threats to 
agricultural livelihoods and available adaptation options.2  
7. Project summary. This climate adaptation initiative represents a strategic investment 
in sustainable agricultural development, with a total project budget of USD 70,198,882 
(including GCF grant funding of USD 63,211,141 and co -financing). This is a medium- scale 
project tha t has a 7 -year implementation period designed to establish foundational climate 
resilience systems, and a 28 -year lifespan to ensure lasting impacts for vulnerable farming 
communities. Grant financing (USD 63,211,141) is the funding modali ty to ensure accessibility 
for resource -constrained smallholders.3 
1.2 Impact potential                                     Scale:   High  
8. The project is meant  to improve resilience through investments in nature -based 
solutions such as riparian buffer restoration, agroforestry, and adaptive agricultural techniques. 
It also seeks to facilitate financial access for smallholder farmers through climate- resilient 
financing models, ensuring long -term viability beyond the funding period. Early warning 
systems are planned to be developed to enhance protection of communities against climate -
induced disasters, further strengthening adaptive capacity.  
9. Ecosystem resilience through nature-based solutions. The project is expected to 
enhance ecosystem resilience in northern Ghana by deploying large -scale Ecosystem -based 
Adaptation (EbA) strategies. The planned restoration of 14,000 hectares of degraded land and 
2,000 hectares of riparian zones across eight di stricts is projected to reduce flood risks by 
nearly 47%, protect watersheds, and enhance soil and water retention. Other reforestation 
efforts using climate -resilient indigenous tree species and natural regeneration aims to   reverse 
degradation. Agroforestry interventions in 120 communities are anticipated to benefit over 
120,000 people. Fire management practices are designed to reduce the frequency and severity 
of bushfires exacerbated by increasing te mperatures or dry seasons, further securing critical 
agroecosystems. These combinations of actions are intended to restore ecological integrity, 
support biodiversity, and buffer communities from increasing variability, frequency and 
intensity of climate ex treme events.  
10. Resilient livelihoods and climate -smart agriculture (CSA).  The project introduces 
CSA practices to address climate -induced agricultural risks (e.g., erratic rainfall, extended 
droughts, and crop failure).  The adoption of drought -resistant crops, precision irrigation, and 
agroforestry models is expected to promote  higher yield stability and sustainable resource use. 
These measures are designed to safeguard food security and stabilize the incomes of 
smallholder farmers. The restoration of natural floodplains  and creation of buffer zones aim to 
protect farmland and infrastructure, ensuring sustained agricultural productivity despite intensifying climate change and variability.  
 
1 See funding proposal section B.2  
2 See funding proposal section B.3  
3 See funding proposal sections A.7 to A.11.


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 100 
 
 
11. Financial inclusion as resilience measure.  The project seeks to enhance farmers’ 
creditworthiness, collective bargaining power, and other structural barriers to financial 
inclusion by organizing smallholder farmers into Farmer -Based Organizations (FBOs) and 
Village Savings and Loans Associations (V SLAs). Through capacity building and financial literacy 
training, farmers are expected to gain skills in accessing credit, insurance, and investments in 
climate -resilient practices. Strategic partnerships with local financial institutions, supported by 
a blended finance model, are projected to expand access to tailored financial products while de-
risking lending activities. Digital financial services are planned to reach remote communities, 
with special provisions intended to empower women through targeted tools and training. This 
financial empowerment is anticipated to underpin long -term economic resilience and inclusive 
rural development.  
12. Upgrade of infrastructure protection and early warning systems.  The project aims 
to strengthen the resilience of rural infrastructure and communities through the development of localized, climate -informed early warning systems (CIEWS). CIEWS are designed to improve 
disaster preparedness and risk management in areas vulnerable to floods and droughts. By integrating meteorological and hydrological data with community -based dissemination 
channels, the project seeks to enhance protection of lives, assets, and p roductivity from climate 
shocks. Infrastructure such as roads, water facilities, and schools frequently damaged by climate extreme events is expected to benefit from improved adaptation planning and risk reduction 
measures.  
13. Emissions reduction co -benefits.  While primarily adaptation -focused, the project is 
expected to generate substantial mitigation co -benefits through sustainable land management 
and agro -ecological farming practices. Reforestation and agroforestry activities are projected to 
sequester appro ximately 1.2 million tCO₂e over the project’s lifetime. These interventions align 
with Ghana’s broader climate goals and offer long -term enviro nmental dividends without 
compromising the project’s core adaptation objectives.  
14. Broad and inclusive impact.  Overall, the project is expected to directly benefit 
approximately 691,125 individuals, with an additional 2.8 million people indirectly impacted 
through improved resilience measures. By focusing on inclusive, nature -based, and financially 
viable solutions , the project aims to build the adaptive capacity of communities, ecosystems, and 
institutions in a region facing acute climate risks. The project is designed to lay the groundwork 
for transformational resilience across northern  Ghana.  
15. The funding proposal’s impact potential is assessed as high.  
1.3 Paradigm shift potential                   Scale:  Medium to high  
16. Enabling Ghana Meteorological Agency ( GMET ) transformation into a modern 
meteorological service through digital innovation.   A successful integration or adoption of 
latest technologies (e.g., satellite remote sensing and AI -powered data fusion algorithms) in 
Output 1 (i.e., activities 1.1.1 and 1.1.2)4 presents a transformative opportunity to modernize 
the GMET  and enhance its service delivery.  GMET  can potentially improve forecast accuracy 
through the intelligent merging of ground -based Hydromet data with satellite observations. 
This scientific advancement is designed to feed into a user -friendly web portal, making seasonal 
forecasts and climate risk information accessible to farmers, policymakers, and disaster 
managers in actionable formats.  
17. The web -based Decision Support System (DSS) sets out to revolutionize early warning 
capabilities by integrating flood and drought monitoring, water allocation models, and risk 
assessments into a single platform. Combined with automated SMS/email alerts and  cloud 
 
4 See funding proposal section B.2.


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 101 
 
 
computing for real -time data processing, GMET  is poised to deliver timely, location -specific 
warnings directly to at -risk communities. Key digital components which may include 
centralized web portals, AI -driven analytics, and geospatial visualization tools are designed to 
work together to convert com plex climate data into practical, decision -ready information.  
18. This potential digital transformation aligns GMET  with global best practices in CSA and 
disaster risk reduction, while addressing critical gaps in last -mile information delivery. By 
transitioning from traditional methods to an integrated, technology -driven approach, GMET  can 
position itself as a modern meteorological service capable of meeting 21st century climate 
challenges turning raw data into life- saving and livelihood -protecting actions for Ghana's most 
vulnerable populations. The result will hopefully  be a more responsive, precise, and user -
centered national meteorological agency that leverages cutting -edge technology to fulfil  its 
mandate more effectively than ever before.  
19. Activities 1.4 and 1.5 plan for information dissemination and a national plan for 
coordinating drought and flood hazard management. There is however no mention about how to develop preparedness and response capabilities. It would be advisable to ensure that all 
elements of an Early Warning System be in place and well- aligned with the needs of farmers and 
other groups to which the system is to cater for.  
20. CIEWS scaling up.  The project outlines a  strong potential for scaling up climate -
informed early warning systems in northern Ghana by addressing key gaps in coverage, data 
accuracy, and information dissemination. Existing drought and flood warnings are limited in 
reach and effectiveness particularly in vulnerable rural areas. The project proposes expanding 
hydrometeorological monitoring, enhancing radar coverage, and training national and local 
agencies  in advanced forecasting and response especially GMet . A national framework will  
hopefully guide the generation and community -level dissemination of climate risk information, 
and its planned integration into district planning and budgeting systems will support long -term 
sustainability. The plan to embe d climate adaptation into local development plans and 
establishing financing mechanisms enhances the project ’s potential for a replicable CIEWS 
model worthy of a  nationwide scale- up. 
21. Accelerating a paradigm shift towards climate -resilient agricultural economy in 
Northern Ghana. The proposed project presents a transformative opportunity to shift northern 
Ghana's agriculture from a vulnerable, rainfed, and unsustainable system toward a low -carbon, 
climate -resilient economy. The integrated approach combining climate -resilient agricu lture 
(CRA), ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA), and locally led investments in rural infrastructure 
addresses both environmental and socio -economic vulnerabiliti es. CRA practices such as 
drought -resistant crops, sustainable livestock systems, and water -efficient irrigation will 
stabilize yields under shifting climatic conditions. Parallel EbA interventions (i.e., reforestation, 
riverbank restoration, agroforestry,  and fire management) will restore ecosystem services, 
reduce land degradation, and buffer communities against floods and droughts.  
22. The introduction of alternative, climate -resilient livelihoods and strengthened local 
climate advisory services enables farmers to move away from environmentally harmful practices like slash -and-burn farming. Investments in meteorological infrastructure an d early 
warning systems will improve climate risk forecasting and inform adaptive decisions at the 
farm level. Institutional strengthening through district -level technical assistance, integration of 
adaptation into development plans, and climate finance ac cess will also enable greening of the 
public financial management and the sustainability and scalability of these interventions. These 
strategies create the conditions for a paradigm shift; empowering smallholder communities to 
adopt resilient practices, i ncrease productivity, and build a more sustainable rural economy 
aligned with national climate goals.  
1.3.1.  Risk to paradigm shift potential


---
*Page 102*
---

G
CF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 102 
23. Gaps in digital innovation integration.  While the project has plans to upgrade th e
GM
et meteorological services using the latest technologies, it has not fully explored the
integration of digital finance infrastructure for the agriculture and finance sector due to th e
l
imited study done in support of this proposal.
24. Overall, the paradigm shift potential is medium to high.
1.4 Sustainable development potential   Scale : High 
1.4.1.  Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  
25. The proposal aims to contribute to the achievements of the following Sustainab le
Dev
elopment Goals (SDGs), i.e., No Poverty (SDG 1); Zero Hunger (SDG 2); Good Health and
Well- being (SDG3); Gender Equality (SDG 5); Clean Water and Sanitation (SDG 6); Decent Work
and Economic Growth (SDG 8); Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure (SDG 9); Reduced
Inequalities (SDG  10 );  Sustainable Cities and Communities (SDG 11); Responsible Consumption
and Production (SDG 12); Climate Action (SDG 13); Life on Land (SDG 15 ); and Partnerships for
the Goals (SDG 17).
26. T ransformative Gender Empowerment.   The project’s Gender Assessment and Action
Plan (GAAP) empowers women not merely as participants, but as active agents of change in
climate -resilient development. It promotes women’s leadership in FBOs, Village Savings and
Loan Associations (VSLAs), and Community Climate Action Groups, positioning them in role s
t
raditionally dominated by men. Women are equipped with practical skills in climate -resilient
agriculture, land restoration, and ecosystem -based adaptation, and are supported to acce ss
f
inancial services including credit and insurance through tailored financial literacy and
enterprise development training. The GAAP also facilitates women's engagement in valu e
ch
ains, linking them to markets and building their capacity to manage climate -resilient
livelihoods. By addressing structural barriers such as limited access to land, finance, anddecision -making spaces, the GAAP ensures that women are not only included but also
empowered to drive long -term climate adaptation a nd economic resilience in their
communities.
5
27. Socio-Economic Development.  The project has strong potential to drive inclusive
socio -economic development, particularly among Indigenous Peoples, women, youth, and rur al
co
mmunities in northern Ghana. Guided by the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, an Indigenou s
P
eoples Planning Frame work (IPPF) has been developed to ensure meaningful engagement
throughout the project lifecycle. This includes mapping indigenous communities, respecting
customary decision -making processes, and preparing site- specific Indigenous  Peoples Plans
(IPPs) to align project interventions with community priorities. These processes ensure thatindigenous people’s rights, perspectives, and development opportunities are fully integrated
and safeguarded.
28. The project will strengthen livelihoods for approximately 142,000 farming households
by increasing agricultural productivity, improving post -harvest processing, and promoting
value -added activities. This will enhance rural incomes, reduce food losses, and diversify market
opportunities. Women, who make up at least 50% of beneficiaries, will be empowered through
targeted support for alternative livelihoods such as shea butter production, beekeeping, andsmall livestock rearing; helping to shift gender roles and improve household resilience. Youth
and women will also be involved in the dissemination of early warning information, reinforcing
their leadership in climate adaptation. Collectively, these interventions contribute to inclusiv
e
5 See funding proposal annex 8.


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 103 
 
 
economic growth, poverty reduction, and more equitable participation in climate -resilient 
development.  
29. Overall, the sustainable development potential is assessed as high.  
1.5 Needs of the recipient                Scale:  Medium to high  
30. Need for access to finance.  Financial constraints present a major obstacle to climate 
resilience for smallholder farmers in northern Ghana6. Adaptation technologies like drought -
resistant seeds and irrigation systems exist are costly from a farmer’s perspective thus leading 
to low adoption. Agricultural financing could bridge this gap, but access remains severely 
constrained. Local financial institutions (LFIs) typically avoid lending to individual smallholder 
farmers due to four interrelated challenges, i.e., (i) low financial literacy which limits farmers' 
ability to engage with formal banking systems; (ii) absence of credit histories which creates 
uncertainty for risk -averse lenders; (iii) collateral shortages which prevent farmers from 
meeting traditional loan requirements ; and (iv) climate sensitive activities  such as rain -fed 
agriculture increase perceived repayment risks.  This financi al exclusion perpetuates a cycle of 
vulnerability. Output 4 specifically addresses these barriers by developing innovative financing mechanisms tailored to smallholder farmers' unique circumstances, thereby enabling 
investment in critical climate adaptatio n measures. The initiative recognizes that without 
financial solutions that account for these realities, even the most effective adaptation 
technologies will remain out of reach for those who need them most. Project component 2 
output 4 will address this . (See footnote 2).   
31. Urgent need to reduce climate impacts on farmers’ livelihoods in Northern Ghana.  
Climate change is significantly undermining the livelihoods of smallholder farmers in Northern 
Ghana, where most households depend on traditional, rainfed agriculture. Erratic and shorter 
rainy seasons, rising temperatures, and prolonged dry spells have r educed crop productivity, 
increased post -harvest losses, and worsened food insecurity. Limited irrigation options hinder 
dry-season farming, while extreme weather events such a s floods and droughts damage crops, 
livestock, and infrastructure. Degraded ecosystems, frequent bushfires, and dwindling water sources further reduce land productivity. With approximately 37% of Ghana’s labour force in 
agriculture, the declining yields di rectly translate to income instability, food shortages, and 
rising malnutrition. Climate -vulnerable regions like Upper West, Upper East, and North East 
face poverty rates exceeding 70%, reinforcing regional inequalities. Crop failure and livestock 
loss tra p households in cycles of debt and deepen rural poverty, highlighting the urgent need for 
targeted climate adaptation interventions. Project component 2 on climate resilient livelihoods 
will address these.  (See footnote 2)  
32. Need for strengthened CIEWS to reduce vulnerability.  The increasing frequency and 
intensity of climate -related hazards such as droughts, floods, and extreme rainfall in northern 
Ghana highlight the urgent need for CIEWS. Traditional knowledge is no longer sufficient to anticipate these rapidly changing clim ate risks, leaving smallholder farmers and vulnerable 
communities unprepared. Many rural areas lack access to timely, accurate, and locally relevant climate information, limiting their ability to make inf ormed decisions on crop planning, 
livestock management, and disaster response. Strengthening early warning systems by integrating meteorological and hydrological data with community -based dissemination 
channels will enhance preparedness, enable early actio n, and reduce losses. Ensuring that 
warnings are accessible to women, youth, and marginalized groups is critical to building 
inclusive resilience and reducing long -term vulnerability across the region. Project component 1 
will address these.  (See footnote 2)  
 
6 See funding proposal section B.2


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 104 
 
 
33. Need for ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA) as a critical response to climate risks.  
The rising frequency and intensity of climate linked hazards (e.g., droughts, floods, and erratic 
rainfall) in Northern Ghana calls for urgent and integrated responses that go beyond 
conventional risk management. Smallholder farmers and vulnerable communi ties struggling 
with limited access to reliable climate information face mounting challenges in anticipating and 
responding to these climate shocks. Strengthening CIEWS is essential, but it must be paired with 
EbA to address the root causes of vulnerability. EbA offers nature -based solutions that restore 
degraded landscapes, enhance water retention, improve soil health, and provide natural buffers 
against climate extremes. EbA  interventions not only mitigate the impacts of hazards but also 
sustain agricultural productivity and livelihoods. Combined with accessible, community -based 
early warning systems especially those inclusive of women, youth, and marginalized groups, 
EbA opt ions becomes a powerful tool for enhancing preparedness, reducing long -term 
vulnerability, and building climate -resilient rural economies. Among the EbA options 
considered are as follows, river bank restoration, agroforestry, reforestation, flood risk 
mana gement and fire risk reduction. Project component 2 output 3 will address this.7 
34. Needs of displaced populations due to impacts of climate. Individuals and 
households affected by flood events typically migrate to urban areas in search of alternate 
livelihoods, usually in non -climate sensitive sectors such as informal trading. Specifically, people 
from the north migrate to the south to stay wit h close relations only for a period and then move 
back. During this period some may change their livelihoods from farming to the service sector 
and then move back. Project components 1 and 2 collect ively address this.  
1.5.1.  Risk to needs of recipients  
35. Gaps in digital finance integration.  Although access to climate finance issues are 
addressed under Project Component 2, Output 4, the potential impact remains constrained by 
the project's limited consideration of digital advancements in agricultural finance.  
36. Overall, the needs of the recipients is assessed as medium to high.  
1.6 Country ownership                  Scale: Medium to high  
37. NOL secured.  UNEP has secured from the National Designated Authority on 8th of April 
2025, signed by the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Finance, the National 
Designated Authority/ Focal Point of the Republic of Ghana.8 
38. Alignment with Ghana development and climate priorities.  The project is well -
aligned with Ghana’s national climate and development priorities, particularly the National 
Climate Change Policy (NCCP), the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS), the 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), and the forthcoming National Adaptation Plan 
(NAP). The funding proposal supports key adaptation priorities identified in these frameworks, 
including resilient livelihoods, sustainable agriculture, land and water resource management, 
early warning systems, and dec entralized climate governance. The project contributes directly 
to Ghana’s 2021 NDC adaptation actions by enhancing climate services, strengthening early 
warning and disaster risk management systems, and promoting climate -resilient livelihoods for 
women an d youth in vulnerable agro -ecological zones. These priorities are expected to remain 
central in the upcoming NDC 3.0 (2025). The project complements nature- based adaptation 
measures under the agriculture sector outlined in the draft NAP, being finalized un der the GCF 
Readiness programme led by the Environment Protection Agency (EPA) and UNEP. The project 
reflects strong government ownership and coherence with national planning processes that 
 
7 See funding proposal section B.3  
8 See funding proposal annex 1.


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 105 
 
 
have been developed through extensive consultations across national, regional, district, and 
community levels.9 
39. Demonstrated track record and core expertise of the implementing partners in 
Ghana. As Executing Entity, the EPA will implement the project in partnership with the Ministry 
of Food and Agriculture ( MoFA ) and the GMet  both of which have established records in 
delivering large -scale climate and environmental programs in their respective fields of 
expertise. The EPA, under the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation 
(MESTI), serves as the national foc al point for the UNFCCC and has led land mark climate and 
environmental initiatives, including the Ghana Environmental Management Project (GEMP), the 
Sustainable Land and Water Management Project (SLWMP), and the GCF -financed National 
Adaptation Plan (NAP). EPA brings expertise in land restoratio n, climate -resilient agriculture, 
and EbA, and will coordinate implementation in collaboration with MoFA , the GMet , and the 
Water Resources Commission (WRC). MoFA  will provide technical support to FBOs, promote 
access to finance, and train extension officers in climate -smart agriculture. GMet , with its 
technical expertise in climate forecasting and drought monitoring, will lead improvements in early warning systems under Output 1, while WRC will integrate hydrological data to 
strengthen climate risk assessments. These agencies have established  effective coordination 
mechanisms and governance structures through prior multi -sectoral projects, ensuring their 
readiness to deliver targeted interventions and achieve project outcomes at scale. MESTI will 
chair the Project Steering Committee (PSC), ensuring strategic oversight and alignment with 
national climate and development priorities.
10 
1.6.1.  Risk to county ownership 
40. Complex implementation.  The implementation arrangements between and amongst 
the Executing Entities and Implementing Entities show a complex coordination set up which 
risks potential delays, miscommunication, inefficiencies, and ineffective execution of project 
activities and ach ievement of project deliverables and outcomes. Absent copies of the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), or agreements, iTAP raised these issues with the AE 
that the MoU appears as a “best efforts” arrangement compared to the “agreemen ts” (i.e., 
Project Cooperation Agreement, grant agreements/ contracts)11 which are likely to be more 
solid legal documentations.  In response, the AE stated that “ As part of updating the FP (Figures 
5 and 6 and associated text) and the term Sheet (Annex 14), and following consultations with 
EPA Head of Legal Department, and whilst MOUs can be stated as legally binding, MOUs will be 
replaced with legal binding Implem entation Agreements between EPA and GMET , EPA and 
MOFA , and GMET  and WRC.  The legally binding Implementation Agreements will specify roles, 
responsibilities, timelines, deliverables and financial commitments.”12 
41. Limited Capacity of EPA to Implement Output 4 and Recommended Measures. 
While the EPA has strong credentials in environmental governance and climate policy 
implementation, its has limited expertise in financial systems, and this presents a significant 
risk to the effective delivery of Output 4: “Increased access of smallholder  farmers to financial 
resources and engagement with the private sector.” EPA lacks institutional experience in key 
areas such as financial product design, blended finance structuring, credit risk assessment, and 
financial literacy programming. Specific gaps include developing credit scoring systems and 
actuarial models, supporting Business Advisory Centres (BACs) and LFIs, and facilitating the 
establishment and regulation of FBOs and VS LAs. These capacity constraints may compromise 
the technical soundness and financial viability of interventions and limit EPA’s ability to 
 
9 See funding proposal section B.4.  
10 See funding proposal section B.4 and AE responses to iTAP questions submitted on 12 May 2025.  
11 See funding proposal figure 5.  
12 See AE responses to iTAP question # 27 dated 12 May 2025.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 106 
 
 
coordinate complex, multi -stakeholder engagement across rural areas where institutional 
presence is often weak. EPA’s limited experience in data governance and digital infrastructure 
may affect the creation and management of secure, reliable databases need ed for credit 
profiling, risk -based pricing, and loan processing. Lastly, EPA needs support for the technical 
capability to deliver financial literacy training and facilitate access to markets functions that are 
critical for Output 4's success.  As mentione d above, MoFA will provide technical support to 
FBOs, promote access to finance, and train extension officers in climate -smart agriculture; 
however, the agreement between EPA and MOFA is based on an MOU;  MOFA  capacity for output 
4 also remains to be seen given finance is outside their core expertise. Other organizations 
mentioned expressing interest, collaboration, support, etc. should be secured  
42. Recommendations.  To address these gaps, the following measures are recommended:  
(a) Establish strategic partnerships with financial sector institutions.  EPA should 
partner with fit- for-need organizations (e.g., Ecobank13, ARB Apex Bank, GIRSAL, 
microfinance networks, VSLA -experienced NGOs (e.g., CARE), and development finance 
institutions (e.g., AfDB). These partnerships must be properly formalized prior to 
implementation through technical cooperation agreements focused o n product 
development, capacity building, and finance delivery mechanisms.  
(b) Delegate financial functions as appropriate.  EPA should identify strategic partners or 
explore subcontracting fit -for-need experts, or co- implement technical aspects of Output 
4 with relevant financial/ sectoral specialists, particularly for designing credit scoring 
and actuarial tools, conducting p ortfolio risk assessments, and delivering targeted 
technical assistance to BACs and LFIs.  
(c) Embed financial experts within EPA’s project team.  Recruit financial inclusion 
experts and a dedicated blended finance advisor to enhance internal capacity to manage 
Output 4, oversee coordination, and ensure financial product design is contextually 
appropriate and operationally viable.  
(d) Invest in data and IT infrastructure.  Secure, cloud -based or mobile -accessible 
platforms should be developed to support real -time data management and credit 
profiling, while ensuring adherence to data privacy and security standards.  
(e) Pilot test before scaling. A pilot phase in select districts should be conducted to 
validate training content, financial delivery models, and institutional coordination 
mechanisms before rolling out to all 120 communities. This will allow for iterative 
learning and adaptive managem ent. 
43. Country ownership is assessed as medium to high.  
1.7 Efficiency and effectiveness                             Scale: Medium  
44. The proposed project enhances climate resilience through Nature -Based Infrastructure 
(NBI) and Hybrid (combined nature -based and conventional) interventions. These include 
reforestation, climate -smart agriculture, ecosystem restoration, and improved water 
storage/irrigation systems. The project’s effectiveness is evaluated under three Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs)
 14 (i.e., SSP1, SSP3, and SSP5) to assess economic feasibility and 
resilience benefits.  
 
13 See f ootnote 8  
14 The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs)  framework outlines five global development trajectories used in 
climate modeling. Three key scenarios include SSP1 which is characterized by equitable growth, rapid


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 107 
 
 
45. Impact of Climate Scenarios.  Economic analysis demonstrates that NBI and Hybrid 
interventions significantly reduce climate risks. For example, in Lambussie, flood damages to 
agriculture under SSP3 decline from USD 67.2 million to USD 60.7 million by 2050, while 
generating additional income (USD 0.27 million from tree planting and USD 2 million from new 
agricultural practices). The interventions also mitigate costs from floods (buildings and crops) 
and droughts, underscoring their dual role in risk reduction  and livelihood improvement.  
46. Economic and Financial Viability.  Benefit -Cost Ratios (BCR). Discounted BCRs range 
from 1.55 –2.95 across districts (Lambussie: 1.55 –2.36; Lawra: 1.63 –2.59; Jirapa: 1.65 –2.62; WA 
West: 2.05 –2.95), confirming strong economic viability, cost -effectiveness, better resource 
allocation, and resi lience to uncertainties (e.g., climate shocks), therefore outweighs the costs.  
47. Net Present Value (NPV).  The NBI scenario yields NPVs of USD 22.4 million (under 
SSP1), USD 18.4 million (SSP3), and USD 23.5 million (SSP5). The Hybrid scenario performs 
even better, with NPVs of USD 68.8 million (SSP1), USD 58.8 million (SSP3), and USD 68.5 
million (SSP5).  The results demonstrate c consistent  positive returns confirming the projects' 
economic viability regardless of climate future. The Hybrid approach generates 2 -3 times 
greater economic value than NBI alone, highlighting the benefits of i ntegrated solutions. While 
SSP3 shows slightly reduced NPVs, the returns remain robust  and demonstrates that the 
interventions' effectiveness even under adverse conditions.  The Hybrid scenario under SSP1 
yields the highest NPV (USD 68.8M), suggesting optimal outcomes when sustainable development aligns with integrated infrastructure.    
48.  Internal Rate of Return (IRR).  The IRR ranges overall between 17.4% and 37.9%; this 
range highlights the project’s potential to deliver robust financial and socio -economic benefits, 
especially in climate -vulnerable communities.  
49. Financing and leverage.  With a GCF grant of USD 63.2 million, the Government of 
Ghana commits USD 6.99 million in co -financing (USD 250,000 cash; USD 6.74 million in -kind). 
The resulting leverage ratio of 0.11 reflects Ghana’s financing constraints while demonstrating 
stakeholde r engagement.  
50.  The project is economically viable across all climate scenarios, with Hybrid solutions 
offering the highest returns. By integrating nature -based and conventional infrastructure, it not 
only mitigates climate impacts but also generates co -benefits for comm unities and ecosystems.  
1.7.1.  Risk to effectiveness and efficiency  
51. Limitations of the exit strategy and the need for strengthened financial access and 
institutional support.  The project’s exit strategy presents a comprehensive framework for 
sustaining climate adaptation through capacity building, community engagement, financial 
inclusion, and knowledge sharing.15 However, several risks could undermine its long -term 
effectiveness if not proactively addressed. District Authorities are expected to lead future implementation but the risk of limited fiscal resources and competing local priorities may 
hinder the mainstr eaming of climate actions into development planning. Similarly, training and 
alternative livelihoods will be introduced but their sustainability depends on access to markets 
and continuous financing. Community engagement among women and youth may vary in d epth 
and consistency thus risking weak ownership of interventions. Efforts to improve financial 
access through FBOs and VSLAs are crucial but may be insufficient without reliable long -term 
 
decarbonization, and strong international cooperation, this pathway aligns with low -emission futures (e.g., RCP1.9 
or RCP2.6), limiting warming to 1.5 –2°C by 2100. SSP3 features geopolitical fragmentation, weak institutions, and 
slow technological progress , leading to high emissions (typically RCP7.0) and ~4°C warming by 2100.  SSP5 
assumes rapid growth reliant on fossil fuels, with delayed climate action resulting in very high emissions (RCP8.5) 
and 4 –5°C warming. See IPCC AR6 (2021) and Riahi et al. ( Global Environmental Change , 2017) for deeper analysis.  
15 See funding proposal section B.6.


---
*Page 108*
---

G
CF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 108 
funding sources. The knowledge -sharing component also faces limitations in reach, 
participation, and the ability to drive autonomous replication. Strengthening access to finance 
both during and beyond the project period is essential to sustain and scale th ese interventions. 
This requires building stronger linkages with financial institutions, de -risking private sector 
participation, and establishing mechanisms to mobilize additional public and private capital for 
continued investment in climate -resilient li velihoods and systems. The identified risk to country 
ownership (see paragraph 31 i and ii) will compound these risks.  
52. Outdated baseline and limited integration of latest technologies in agriculture.
The project’s effectiveness and efficiency are at risk due to a dated baseline assessment that failsto reflect significant recent developments in Ghana’s agricultural landscape particularly th
e
r
apid adoption of digital technologies in the agriculture and  agri finance sector.  While use of
latest technologies is considered under Component 1,  and under the monitoring and evaluation
plan16, project  component 2 of the funding proposal does not adequately capture the growing
role of digital tools such as AI and emerging technologies for national development; amongthem are the  digital agriculture tools such as mobile -based extension services (e.g., Esoko
,
F
armerline), digital financial platforms  (Growforme) , digital insurance, GIS -based monitoring
systems. Despite Ghana’s progress as highlighted in the Ghana Digital Agriculture Strategy(2021) and multiple donor -supported initiatives, the project design do es not systematically
these advancements. This oversight weakens Component 2’s o ptimal design.
53. Recommendation. The AE should revisit and update the feasibility study to align with
Ghana’s rapidly evolving landscape in climate -resilient agriculture and digital financ e
i
nfrastructure. Given the accelerated adoption of AI, mobile -based financial tools, and digit al
ex
tension services, leveraging the most current data and technological developments is crucial
to ensuring the project’s relevance and long -term impact. Without considering these
advancements  such as predictive analytics for climate adaptation , mobile mone y
in
teroperability, and smart farming solutions, the project risks being outdated at inception,
lagging behind national progress, and most of all, potentially weakening Component 2  output 4 -
Increased access of smallholder farmers to financial resources and engagement with the privat e
se
ctor.  This update will ensure interventions are fit -for-purpose forward- looking, context
responsive,  and positioned to drive transformational change in Ghana’s agri -finance sector .
54. Given the above, efficiency and effectiveness are rated as medium.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
55. The iTAP recommends this funding proposal for approval by the Board subject to the  
following recommendations and covenant.
56. While supporting the proposal, the iTAP notes several risks that may affect the  
efficiency, effectiveness and long-t erm sustainability of the project, as mentioned in paragraphs  
23 (Gaps in digital innovation integration), 35 (G aps in digital finance integration), 40 (Complex  
implementation), 41 (Limited ca pacity of EPA to im plement ou tput 4 and recommended  
measures),  51 (Limitations of the exit strategy and the need for strengthened financial access  
and institutional support) and 52 (Outdated baseline and limited integration of latest  
technologies in agriculture) of this assessment.
16 Use of Digital Technologies in M&E. The monitoring and evaluation plan includes the use of digital photos and 
videos for visual inspections, as well as the most recent satellite imagery at a reasonable pixel resolution of the 
project area overlaid on topographical base maps.  The project wil l integrate satellite data (Landsat/Sentinel) and 
drone imagery into Ghana’s GIS -based monitoring system developed by the Technical Partner. This GIS mapping of 
land cover change will be used for independent change analysis reports. See funding proposal annex 11 monitoring and evaluation plan.


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B. 42/02/Add. 07 
Page 109 
 
 
57. Recommendation 1 : strengthen EPA’s capacity and execution s trategy for Output 
4. To mitigate risks associated with complex implementation arrangements and limited in -
house technical expertise, the iTAP recommends the following measures be undertaken prior to 
or during early implementation:  
(a) Establish formal partnerships  with financial and development institutions (e.g. , 
African Development Bank  ARB Apex Bank, Ecobank, GIRSAL ) through technical 
cooperation agreements focused on product development, delivery mechanisms and 
capacity -building ; 
(b) Delegate technical functions  where appropriate by partner ing with or subcontracting 
qualified sector specialists to co -implement financial tools such as credit scoring 
systems and portfolio risk assessment methodologies;  
(c) Embed financial expertise  within the project team, including recruitment of a financial 
inclusion expert and a blended finance advis er to support implementation of output 4 ; 
(d) Develop secure digital infrastructure to support data -driven credit profiling, real -
time performance tracking and institutional reporting ; and  
(e) Pilot the approach in selected districts to test delivery models and coordination 
mechanisms before national scale -up to all 120 target communities.  
58. Recommendation 2: u pdate feasibility and b aseline assessments. To ensure that 
project interventions are evidence based, context  responsive and aligned with recent 
developments in Ghana’s agricultural and financial sectors, the iTAP recommends that the AE:  
(a) Update the project feasibility study and baseline assessment  to reflect post -COVID -
19 economic dynamics, climate -resilient agricultural practices, digital finance 
infrastructure and community -level vulnerability data ; and 
(b) Ensure that revised baseline data incorporates disaggregated indicators for components 2 and 4 ( particularly in relation to financial inclusion ) and local adaptation 
capacity .  
59. The measures in recommendation 2 are critical to ensure that the interventions remain 
relevant and fit  for purpose at inception, particularly as technological and market conditions 
have significantly evolved since the proposal’s initial design.  
60. Covenant :  In respect of the Implementation Agreements, t he Accredited Entity shall:  
61. Contractually require the Executing Entities that the Implementation Agreements with 
the Implementation Partners contain the following:  
(a) Clearly define d institutional roles, performance milestones, deliverables, and f inancial 
commitments;  and 
(b) Enforcement clauses covering accountability, reporting obligations, and remedial action 
in case of underperformance .


---
*Page 110*
---

G
CF/B. 42/02 /Add. 07 
Page 110 
Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP265) 
Proposal name:  Climate -resilient landscapes for sustainable livelihoods in 
northern Ghana  
Accredited entity:  UNEP  
Country/(ies):  Ghana  
Project/programme size: Medium 
Impact potential  
We value and affirm iTAP’s assessment  of the project’s potential impact as high.  We note that 
no specific recommendations are made.    
Paradigm shift potential  
We note iTAP’s conclusion that the paradigm shift  potential is medium to high owing to further 
potential to integrate digital finance infrastructure for the agriculture and finance sector.  We 
reaffirm the intention to support expansion of Ghana’s fast developing digital infrastructure  in 
the project’s 8 northern districts.   We sought guidance from Finance Access , a social enterprise 
specialized in rural financial services with headquarter s in the Netherlands and an office in 
Ghana, in the project design.  The intention is to support development of a digital tool for credit 
scoring systems which we will explore extending to include portfolio risk assessment .  
Sustainable development potential  
We value and affirm iTAP’s assessment of the project’s sustainable development p otential as 
high.  We note that no specific recommendations are made.    
Needs of the recipient  
We note iTAP’s conclusion that the need  of the recipients is assessed as medium to high  owing 
to the project’s limited consideration of digital advancements in agricultural finance.  The 
project will address this risk as explained in our response concerning paradigm  shift potential 
and in addressing the iTAP recommendations in the section “overall remarks”.  
Country ownership  
We note iTAP’s conclusion that country ownership is assessed as medium to high owing to the complex implementation arrangements and 
limited capacity of EPA to implement Output 4. 
We accept the recommendations made to  strengthening legally binding agreements, 
establishing strategic partnership with financial sector institutions as envisage d, ensuring


---
*Page 111*
---

G
CF/B. 42/02 /Add. 07 
Page 111 
delegated financial functions under output 4, and to secure financial experts within the project 
team, and invest in data and IT infrastructure, and pilot test before scaling up in the 8 districts.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
We note iTAP’s conclusion that the effectiveness and efficiency assessment is medium due 
to lack of details on financial expertise to deliver on access to credit markets by smallholder 
farmers. We have added clarifications in the Funding Proposal, that were in Annex 2, that 
will engage two partners to support the implementation of the workplan:  GIRSAL (Ghana 
Incentive-Based Risk-S haring System for Agricultural Lending) and an entity specialized in 
building credit scores that can bring to bear the latest in AI-d riven analytical capability 
Similarly, the project will update the project’s feasibility study when the baseline study is 
developed in the inception stage, factoring in the recent development in Ghana’s 
agricultural landscape including adoption of digital technologies for agriculture and 
agriculture finance. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
We take note of iTAP’s recommendations and commit to undertake the following within the 
parameters of the submitted FP package: 
Recommendation 1:  Strengthen EPA ’s capacity and execution strategy for Output  4: 
We have added clarifications in the FP that will engage two partners to support the 
implementation of the workplan:  GIRSAL ( Ghana  Incentive -Based Risk -Sharing System for 
Agricultural Lending) and an entity specialized in building credit scores.  
The AE will also explore with EPA and MOFA to second  financial inclusion and blended finance 
expertise from a government institution (e.g. MOFA, Min. of Finance, GIRSAL , Development 
Bank Ghana ) potentially as part of Government  cofinancing  and to establish a Working Group 
on Finance with members from FIs, agricultural finance programmes, Government institutions 
(e.g. MOFA, Min of Finance, GIRSAL, Development bank Ghana, etc.) and independent experts 
to exchange knowledge and experience related to financial inclusion, digitalization  and 
blended finance.   
Recommendation 2:  Update feasibility and baseline assessments  and ensure that the revised 
baseline dat a incorporates disaggregated indicators.   
This will be undertaken as part of the baseline survey planned during the project ’s six -month  
inception period  (See E3 and budget line  M&E1) . 
We agree to the proposed Covenant in respective of the Implementation Agreements, where 
the Accredit Entity shall a) clear ly de fine institutional roles, performance milestones, 
deliverables and financial comments, and b) enforcement clauses covering accountability, 
reporting obligations, and remedial action in case of underperformance.


---
*Page 112*
---

1 CLIMATE -RESILIENT LANDSCAPES FOR 
SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOODS IN 
NORTHERN GHANA  
ANNEX 8  
GENDER ASSESSMENT AND ACTION PLAN  
(GAAP)Gender documentation for FP265


---
*Page 113*
---

2 
 Contents  
Part one: Gender assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 3 
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  3 
2. Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  3 
3. The Northern Ghana Context  ................................ ................................ ..............................  4 
3.1. Existing gender inequality in northern Ghana  ................................ .............................  5 
3.1.1.  Gender Inequality Index  ................................ ................................ ......................  6 
3.2. Poverty and employment  ................................ ................................ ............................  6 
3.3. Access to and control over resources  ................................ ................................ .........  7 
3.4. Education  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  7 
3.5. Political participation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 8 
3.6. Gender and climate change  ................................ ................................ ........................  9 
3.7. Gender -based violence (GBV)  ................................ ................................ ................... 10 
4. Legal and policy framework for gender equality  ................................ ................................ .10 
4.1. National Gender Policy  ................................ ................................ .............................. 11 
4.2. Ghana’s National Development Frameworks and the Sustainable Development Goals
 11 
4.3. Shared Growth and Development Agenda.  ................................ ................................ 12 
4.4. International commitments  ................................ ................................ ......................... 12 
5. Situational analysis — Northern Ghana target areas  ................................ .......................... 13 
5.1. Gender and agriculture  ................................ ................................ ............................. 13 
5.2. Alternative livelihoods  ................................ ................................ ................................ 14 
5.3. Access to and control over land  ................................ ................................ ................. 15 
5.4. Access to finance  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......15 
6. Recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 16 
6.1. Project design and implementation  ................................ ................................ ............ 16 
6.2. Monitoring and evaluation  ................................ ................................ .......................... 17 
7. Part two: Gender Action Plan  ................................ ................................ ............................. 18 
7.1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 18 
7.2. Impact Statement  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......18 
7.3. Outcome Statement  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...19


---
*Page 114*
---

3 
 Part one: Gender assessment  
 
1. Introduction  
 
The overall objective of the ‘Climate Resilient Landscapes for Sustainable Livelihoods’ project is 
to contribute to improved  resilience of local small -holder farmers and vulnerable communities in 
the Upper East, Upper West and Northern regions of Ghana .  
 
Experience and evidence indicate that women, youth , children  and disabled individuals  are 
among the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, and that a large proportion of 
vulnerable people who are highly dependent on local natural resources for their survival are 
women and children. The Government of Ghana (GOG) has therefore est ablished that gender -
responsive planning, resource -allocation and implementation in the context of the proposed 
project will be a priority. Supporting transformational change both in the lives of female 
beneficiaries and in prompting gender mainstreaming i n national climate change policymaking 
and implementation was therefore considered a priority during  stakeholder consultations.  
 
To fulfil the project’s design requirements, this Gender A ssessment  (GA)  was undertaken in 
accordance with GCF guidelines to inform the project design on gender barriers, constrains and 
opportunities for women to benefit from the project ’s activ ities. In addition, the Gender Action Plan  
(GAP)  will ensure women , Indigenous Peoples (IPs)  and other marginalised groups are included 
in the project’s activities. The GAP is based on the proposed project ’s logical framework and is 
focused on avoiding and minimising the negative impacts of the project ’s activities on the local 
communities and  maximising the positive impacts and social benefits , particularly  on women , IPs 
and marginalised groups.  
 
2. Methodology  
 
This GA primarily used  qualitative data collection methods, including informant interviews with 
multiple stakeholders and partners ( See Annex 7h: stakeholder engagement plan) as well as  
mixed  community consultations in seven  local communities across four districts , namely Jirapa, 
Lawra, East Mamprusi and Yunyoo -Nasuan  (Figure 1). The method involving open community 
meetings proved particularly effective as it allowed for the provision of information by individuals 
through open discussions, accompanied by immediate expressions of approval or disapproval 
and corroborated by testimonies or cases from other group members. This facilitated a n accurate 
representation of the gender -related challenges  faced by their respective communities.  The GA 
has also made use of: i) a desktop review of available literature; ii) gender equality studies  
conducted by research institutions and donor agencies ; and iii) details made available by the 
GOG.


---
*Page 115*
---

4 
  
Figure 1. Map of the project sites and consultation locations.  
To elicit informed and relevant responses from community members, a brief overview  of the 
project ’s components, objectives and anticipated outcomes was shared with participants prior to 
engaging in discussions. The questions posed to the community members focused on the lived 
experiences of individuals and communities regarding the effects of climate ch ange and their 
gendered responses to these challenges. Th is data collection method w as preceded and 
supplemented by a review of existing literature on gender  dynamics and equality in Ghana  — 
particularly within the rural and agricultural sectors  — to establish a framework aligned with the 
project ’s objectives and anticipated impact. The findings of the GA form the basis of the GAP  (part 
two).  
 
3. The Northern Ghana Context  
 
The three northern regions of Ghana — the Upper East, Upper West and Northern regions — are 
threatened by harsh agro -climatic conditions, resulting in l imited  agricultural outputs per capita. 
Communities in these regions have limited livelihood options besides smallholder farming, with 
less service provision and urbanisation  than in the south of the country. Approximately 70% of 
the ~4 million people living in northern Ghana depend on traditional, small -scale1, rainfed 
agricultural systems to generate household incomes and maintain food security2. These 
agricultural systems are vulnerable to changes in rainfall patterns and extreme climate events.  
 
Furthermore , a large proportion of northern Ghanaians rely on climate -dependent ecosystem 
goods produced in the agro -ecological landscapes in which their livelihoods are embedded.  This 
reliance on climate -sensitive livelihoods makes rural communities in Ghana vulnerable to the 
effects of current and future climate change. Ghanaian w omen are considered particularly 
vulnerable  to climate change because of their limited access to education , land resources  and 
 
1 Farms < 2 hectares in size.  
2 Ministry of Food and Agriculture – 2012 – Agriculture in Ghana: Facts and Figures.


---
*Page 116*
---

5 
 credit3. However, given that they account for approximately half the population,  women play a 
substantial role in socio -economic development . Therefore, by building the capacity of women to 
adapt , the project  will substantially improve the overall resilience  of rural communities in no rthern 
Ghana.  
 
This GA examines the gender situation in Ghana, focusing on women from rural communities 
within the Upper East, Upper West and Northern regions. The object ives of the GA are to: i) 
identify relevant cultural and policy matters  that contribute to gender inequality in Ghana ; and ii) 
determine potential opportunities for address ing gender inequality through project interventions. 
Addressing gender inequality is necessary to addressing climate change, because of the 
substantial role  women play in  the adoption of climate change adaptation practices.  Lessons 
learned from the implementation and evaluation of similar projects in the region have also been 
incorporated into the GA. The findings have been integrated into a GAP  to ensure adequate 
consideration of gender issues  in the design  of project activities,  targets, indicators, monitoring 
and evaluation  protocols . 
 
3.1. Existing gender inequality in northern Ghana  
 
Ghana  has a long history of commitment to gender equality, dating back over 50 years to the 
establishment of the Affirmative Action Act  — shortly after achieving independence  in 19 57. 
Gender equality is further embedded in Ghana’s constitution, which states that “all persons shall 
be equal before the law” and “a person shall not be discriminated against on  the grounds of 
gender, race, colour, ethnic origin, religion, creed , social or economic status”. More recently, 
Ghana has highlighted the importance of empowering women and promoting gender equality as 
part of their commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals  (SDGs) . Despite th ese efforts to 
ensure gender equality , women in the northern region s of Ghana  still face several gender -specific 
barriers  limiting the  capacity  of communities  to adapt to climate change.  
 
The ability of men and women to adapt to climate change is dependent on their: i) involvement in 
policy development and decision -making; ii) integration into local committees  that are focused on 
climate change adaptation; and iii) capacity to implement Ecosystem -based Adaptation ( EbA) 
practices4. Building the capacity of both men and women will  lead to increased adaptive capacity 
at the household  and community levels .  
 
Barriers to achieving gender equality and building the adaptive capacity of women in Ghana 
include, inter alia : i) strong patriarchal family structures; ii) limited i nfluence in decision making;  
iii) increased out -migration of men leaving women with an increased labour burden5; iv) greater 
difficulty translating labour into secure incomes6; and v) limited financial independence . 
Approximately 68% of women in rural Ghana are employed in the agricultural sector7. However, 
less than 20% of northern households are headed by women8 and, therefore, the role of women 
in farming decision -making is limited.  These challenges are compounded by a lack of policy 
 
3 FAO. 2012. Gender Inequalities in Rural Employment in Ghana – Policy and Legislation. Gender, Equality and 
Rural Employment Division of FAO.  
4 Gaye I. 2009 . Gender and climate change: Women matter. UN Economic Commission for Africa.   
5 Baden S, Green C, Otoo -Oyortey N & Peasgood T. 1994. Background paper on gender issues in Ghana. Bridge 
Development – Gender Report No 19.  
6 FAO. 2012. Gender Inequalities in Rural Employment in Ghana – Policy and Legislation. Gender, Equality and 
Rural Employment Division of FAO.  
7 Ghana Statistical Service . 2014 . Ghana Living Standards Survey Round 6.  
8 Ibid.


---
*Page 117*
---

6 
 frameworks directed at integrating social and gender equality in rural labour markets9. This makes 
women particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change . Addressing these barriers to 
gender equality would lead to numerous advantages  to rural communities, building their 
resilience . For example,  through stakeholder consultations  (see Annex 7h: Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan) it was noted that  if women  are provided  access to fertile land, improved 
technologies and financial services , they are  likely to invest in the land, leading to increased 
production  — and potential increased income — which benefits  not only themselves , but the ir 
families and communities  too. Furthermore, women are most likely to invest in health and 
education which will improve the overall situation within households and communities.  
 
The following sections detail the gender dynamics  currently experienced in Ghana and their 
implications for building the adaptive capacity of women  — and their communities  — to the effects 
of climate change.  
 
3.1.1.  Gender Inequality Index  
 
The Global Gender Gap Report10 published in 2024 ranks Ghana 88th out of 14 9 countries in 
terms of gender equality, with an overall parity score of 0. 701 (Table 1). This is based on four 
criteria including: i) economic participation and opportunity; ii) education attainment; iii) health and 
survival; and iv) political empowerment. Of these criteria, Ghana ranks 30th in terms of economic 
participation and opportunity, with a parity score of 0. 750. Political empowerment scores the 
lowest at only 0.1 01, ranking 119th.  
 
Table 1. Gender Gap Report for Ghana11 
Focus Area  Parity Score  Ranking (out of 144)  
Economic participation and opportunity  0.805  30 
Education attainment  0.972 103 
Health and survival  0.978 36 
Political empowerment  0.101 119 
Overall  0.701 88 
 
3.2. Poverty and employment  
 
There is  a considerable disparity in depth and severity of poverty across Ghana, with  greater 
poverty rates in the northern than southern regions. In addition to lower economic activity and 
development12,13, northern Ghana underperforms relative to the south in terms of social 
development. Child mortality is relatively high in the north14,15, while data on indicators relating to 
education, sanitation, water, health, security and governance suggest that the northern regions 
have experienced less development compared with the southern regions16. In addition to the 
north -south development gap, there is a notable gap in poverty levels between rural and urban 
 
9 FAO. 2012. Gender Inequalities in Rural Employment in Ghana – Policy and Legislation. Gender, Equality and 
Rural Employment Division of FAO.  
10 WEF . 2024. Global Gender Gap Report. Available at:  https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2024.pdf    
11 Ibid.  
12 Indicated by night light intensity.  
13 Mellander C, Lobo J, Stolarick K, Matheson Z. 2015 . Night -time light data: a good proxy measure for economic 
activity? Available at : http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139779 .  
14 Burke M, Heft -Neal S and Bendavid E. 2016 . Understanding variation in child mortality across Sub -Saharan Africa: 
A spatial analysis. The Lancet Global Health, 2016, Volume 4, Issue 12, e936 -e945.  
15 ICF International (2004 –2015) Demographic and Health Surveys (various) [Datasets]. Calverton, Maryland: ICF 
International [Distributor], 2015.  
16 UNICEF. 2015. Ghana’s District League Table 2015.


---
*Page 118*
---

7 
 areas. Poverty levels in rural areas (3 8%) are far higher than those in urban areas ( 11%), with 
the gap growing over the past two decad es17. There is also a gendered pattern between poverty 
levels and employment in Ghana. Although the u nemployment rates in Ghana are only marginally 
higher for women than m en (~6% compared to ~5%)18, women’s employment is often 
concentrated in low -income activities19, including unpaid family labour and small household farms . 
As a result, women’s control over their income is precarious and poverty rates among working 
women are generally higher than those of working men. This challenge is compounded by the 
gender wage gap of 0.75, with women earning 75 cents to the dollar compared with men20. This 
ranks Ghana at 26th out of 144 countries  in terms of the gender wage gap. However, in terms of 
overall economic participation and opportunity, Ghana ranks much higher at 30th place, with a 
gender gap index of 0.805 .  
 
3.3. Access to and control over resources  
 
A major factor influencing t he economic and social status of a group of people is their access to 
and control over assets. In rural communities  such as those in northern Ghana , this often centres 
on the land tenure. Approximately 70% of the northern population  of Ghana are reliant on small -
scale subsistence farming for their livelihoods . Therefore,  control over the natural resources and 
land-use practices strongly  influence s income potential, social status  and power21. In Ghana, 
~80% of the total land is controlled under a customary land tenure system, mean ing that land is 
largely vested in male -centred kinship institutions and  customary authorities22. The customary 
authority then grants community members access to customary lands . In the patriarchal culture , 
which dominates most of northern Ghana, the land -use rights are passed through the male 
lineage. Women’s customary rights to access land are therefore restricted in favour of men ’s, 
despite women’s  rights to own and inherit land being protected under The Constitution23. As of 
2014, ~80 of women aged 15 -49 did not own land24. Furthermore, the social status of women and 
the stability of their marriage can influence their access to agricultural and natural resources from 
family -owned land, with divorcees and widows often facing discrimination when trying to access 
land25.  
 
3.4. Education  
 
Access to education is fundamental to social and economic development. Ghana’s Education 
Sector Strategic Plan (ESP 2010 –2020) aims to provide equitable access to quality basic 
 
17 Cooke E., Hague. & McKay A. 2016. The Ghana Poverty and Inequality Report. Available at: 
https://www.unicef.org/ghana/Ghana_Poverty_and_Inequality_Analysis_FINAL_Match_2016(1).pdf  
18 World Bank. Ghana – Gender Data Portal. Available at: http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/ghana  
19 Heintz J. 2005. Employment, Poverty and Gender in Ghana. Practical Economy Research Institute. Working Paper 
Series 92.  
20Schwab K, Samans R, Zahidi S, Leopold T.A, Ratcheva V, Hausmann R & Tyson L.D. 2016. The Global Gender 
Gap Report. World Economic Forum, Geneva.  
21 Kuusaana E.D, Kidido J.K & Halidu -Adam E. 2013. Customary Land ownership and Gender Disparity – Evidence 
from the Wa Municipality of Ghana. GJDS 10(1&2). Pg 63 -80. 
22 USAID 2013. Ghana Commercial Agriculture Project. Available at: https://www.land -links.org/country -profile/ghana/   
23 Kuusaana E.D, Kidido J.K & Halidu -Adam E. 2013. Customary Land ownership and Gender Disparity – Evidence 
from the Wa Municipality of Ghana. GJDS 10(1&2). Pg 63 -80. 
24 The World Bank Group. 2024. Ghana gender landscape. Available at: 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099024506302242863/pdf/IDU05017dff90e8da047a70964d0d0b553ab
2f02.pdf  
25 Kuusaana E.D, Kidido J.K & Halidu -Adam E. 2013. Customary Land ownership and Gender Disparity – Evidence 
from the Wa Municipality of Ghana. GJDS 10(1&2). Pg 63 -80.


---
*Page 119*
---

8 
 education26. Access to primary education is relatively high , with a 92% net enrolment ratio in 2016  
and an equal gender ratio27. Overall enrolment  begins to decrease  at the junior  high school level  
— dropping to 50%28 — and continues to decrease at the tertiary level , with the progression to 
senior high school declining  to only 25%. Gender disparity is, however, still great  among 
secondary education, with a ratio of 0.98. The Northern region has the highest level of gender 
disparity at  the senior high school level, with 42% female enrolment . It is only at the tertiary 
education level that gender disparity is notable, dropping to a ratio of 0.67, ranking 122nd out of  
144 countries29.  
 
3.5. Political participation  
 
Women’s political participation is consid ered a catalyst for gender equality and sustainable 
development in Ghana30. Since achieving independence in 1957, Ghanaian women have been 
afforded equal rights to participate in  political activities  and decision -making at every level . 
Despite this, cultural structures and traditional practices  involving male dominance and patriarchy  
still impede women’s participation  in decision making31,32. Cultural perceptions of women being 
inferior to men have long been used to rationalise the differential roles between men and women 
in society33. Consequently, women are underrepresented across all government structures.  
Currently , only 14.5% of  parliamentary seats are held by women, with less than 30% of those 
holding ministerial or chief executive roles34. Ghana , therefore,  ranks  95th out of 144 countries in 
terms of political empowerment, with a parity score of 0.11235. However, despite women’s political 
representation f ollowing a positive trajectory  — increasing by 0.4 over the past decade  — women 
remain underrepresented at the highest levels of political participation36.  
 
As part of their commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals Agenda  2030 , Ghana ian 
gender advocates  have set forward a gender check list to measure their progress towards 
achieving gender equality in decision -making. The checklist sets targets for women ’s 
representation across various sectors, in cluding  inter alia : i) 60% of parliamentary seats; ii) 60% 
of ministerial portfolios; ii i) 60% of metropolitan, municipal and district Chief Executive posts; iv) 
50% of vice chancellors hips and university professors hips; and v) 60% of state corporations Chief 
 
26 Ghana Ministry of Education. 2016. Education Sector Performance Report. Available at: 
http://www.moe.gov.gh/assets/media/docs/ESPR2016_Final_Version_Final.pdf  
27 Schwab K, Samans R, Zahidi S, Leopold T.A, Ratcheva V, Hausmann R, & Tyson L.D. 2016. The Global Gender 
Gap Report. World Economic Forum, Geneva.  
28 Ghana Ministry of Education. 2016. Education Sector Performance Report.   
29 Schwab K, Samans R, Zahidi S, Leopold T.A, Ratcheva V, Hausmann R, & Tyson L.D. 2016. The Global Gender 
Gap Report. World Economic Forum, Geneva.  
30 Asuako J. 2017. Women’s political participation – a catalyst for gender equality and women empowerment in 
Ghana. UNDP Ghana.  
31 Ibid. 
32 FAO. 2012. Gender Inequalities in Rural Employment in Ghana – Policy and Legislation. Gender, Equality and 
Rural Employment Division of FAO.  
33 Asuako J. 2017. Women’s political participation – a catalyst for gender equality and women empowerment in 
Ghana. UNDP Ghana.  
34 The World Bank Group. 2024. Ghana gender landscape. Available at: 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099024506302242863/pdf/IDU05017dff90e8da047a70964d0d0b553ab
2f02.pdf  
35 Schwab K, Samans R, Zahidi S, Leopold T.A, Ratcheva V, Hausmann R, & Tyson L.D. 2016. The Global Gender 
Gap Report. World Economic Forum, Geneva.  
36 Ameyibor F. Agenda 2030: Women in Power and Decision -Making. Government of Ghana. Available at: 
www.ghana.gov.gh


---
*Page 120*
---

9 
 Executive Officer  positions37,38. The Minister of Gender, Children and Social Protection has 
officially called on all state institutions and non -governmental organisations to support Agenda 
2030.  
 
3.6. Gender and climate change  
 
The gender inequalities described above disproportionately affect the adaptive capacity of women 
to current and future climate change, as opposed to men . The effects of climate change on  
households and communities will  be exacerbated if the adaptive capacity  of both men and women 
are not  strengthened  in parallel . Overlooking either gender will affect production and income 
within a household, having knock -on effects on families, children and the community . Although 
traditional knowledge has established copin g mechanisms within communities to the harsh 
climatic conditions experienced in northern Ghana, it is unlikely to adapt quickly enough to 
overcome the effects of future climate change39.  
 
Women  — along with children and the elderly  — are among the most vulnerable groups to the 
effects of climate change. This is largely because women and female -headed households have 
fewer resources to cope with reductions in food and water security  and the effects of extreme 
weather events such as droughts and floods. This is particularly pertinent in rural communities, 
where people are often reliant on climate -sensitive natural resources for their livelihoods. Several 
factors contribute to the vulnerab ility of women to climate change including, inter alia , the effects 
of: i) migration ; ii) water availability ; iii) decreased agricultural yields ; and iv) reliance on climate -
sensitive livelihoods. These are described in more detail below.  
• When climatic conditions become less favourable for agricultural practices, men often migrate 
out of rural areas in search of work in other sectors. Women are left behind to not only continue 
with their domestic duties but also to continue the agricultural  work on their land. Much of this 
agricultural work comes in the form of subsistence farming, with little or no pay, leaving women 
without the financial resources to adapt to climate change.  
• Women  have  limited rights to own or control land. Without ownership of the land they are 
working on, women are unable to make the necessary decisions or access the necessary 
funds to improve agricultural practices, leading to reduced agricultural productivity and fo od 
security . This  affect s not only the women themselves but also their households and potentially 
the wider community . 
• Water scarcity associated with shifting rainfall patterns and drought can have a substantial 
impact on women, most of whom are responsible for the collection of water for household 
uses such as drinking, cooking and cleaning. When water security is threatened, extra effort 
is required for women to collect water  — with women having to travel further to collect water. 
Similar pressures are observed with regards to the collection of fuelwood which will become 
scarce as climate conditions worsen. This compounds  the additional workload placed on 
women maintaining both domestic duties and agricultural responsibilities, with little capacity 
to adapt to growing climatic pressures.  
• Many rural Ghanaian women are reliant on natural resource -based livelihoods that are 
climate -sensitive. As the availability of natural resources become s threatened by climate 
change, so do income generation and food security.  
 
 
37 Government of Ghana. Ghana women set dramatic 2030 gender equality target. Available at: www.ghana.gov.gh  
38 Ameyibor F. Agenda 2030: Women in Power and Decision -Making. Government of Ghana. Available at: 
www.ghana.gov.gh  
39 Damptey T.M. & Essel A.K. 2012. Gender perspectives of climate change coping and adaptive strategies in Ghana. 
UN Women.


---
*Page 121*
---

10 
 The intersection of the vulnerabilities highlighted above further  exacerbat es gender inequality in 
Ghana . Rural women with disabilities  face physical, social and institutional barriers — such as 
limited mobility , unstable income and stigma  — that restrict  their economic participation. Young 
women in informal labour  are more likely to have lower levels of financial literacy , making them 
more likely to be under -paid,  while  gender norms combined with household hierarchy may 
constrain their ability to  participate in training or capacity -building initiatives . These overlapping  
forms of marginalisation exacerbat e existing gender inequalities, further restricting  access to land, 
finance and decision -making opportunities. As climate change increasingly threatens natural 
resource -based livelihoods, the ability of women with intersecting vulnerabilities  to maintain food 
security and support household well -being becomes increasingly strained.  
 
3.7. Gender -based violence  (GBV)  
 
Despite being considerably  underreported, rape and domestic violence are considered to be a 
widespread problem in Ghana40, particularly when married women are thought to be unfaithful. 
As many as 27% of Ghanaian women experienced some form of domestic violence in 201641. 
There is also evidence of women being targeted for not conforming to expected submissive roles. 
In cases of domestic violence and rape, Ghanaian women are often faced with obstacles when 
reporting and receiving justice for abuse. This is largely rooted i n the cultural belief that domestic 
violence is a private matter that should be settled outside of the criminal justice system42. 
Magistrates may block women’s attempts to pursue cases of domestic violence through the 
courts, advocating instead for family unity and encouraging settlements between the parties43. 
Women face similar hurdles when reporting cases of sexual abuse, often being unable to 
complete formal complaints because of fees associated with physicians’ documentation needed 
for police medical forms. Any instances of GBV or sexual exploitation and harassment (SEAH) 
during the project’s implementation will be reported through the Domestic Violence and Victim 
Support Unit ( DOVVSU) as elaborated in the project’s grievance redress mechanism (GRM) . For 
further details on this process, s ee Annex 6c: ESAMF.  
 
4. Legal  and policy  framework for gender equality  
 
Ghana  has a long history of commitment to gender equality,  dating back to its independence in 
1957 . The basic rights of women are outlined in the Constitution and have been incorporated into 
legislature and policy across all levels  of government. The legal framework for gender equality is, 
however, complicated by the inclusion of customary laws which vary between regions and 
ethnicities.  
 
Matters of gender equality currently fall under the portfolio of the Ministry of Gender, Children and 
Social Protection  (MoGCSP) , established in 2013 as a successor to the Ministry of Women and 
Children’s Affairs . The mission of the MoGCSP is to “contribute to the development of the nation 
by achieving gender equality and equity, facilitate the enforcement of the rights of children  and 
promote the integration and protection of the vulnerable, excluded and persons with disabilities in 
the development process  through appropriate policies and strategies with adequate resources. ”  
It is the ministry’s  responsibility to guide the formulation of gender, child and social protection -
related policies  — taking the lead role in the coordination, monitoring and evaluation of matters  
 
40 US DoS. 2016. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 - Ghana.  
41 Ibid. 
42 Campbell J. 2016. Violence against women in Ghana: Unsafe in the second safest country in Africa. Council on 
Foreign Relations – Africa in Transition.  
43 Annex 7h: stakeholder engagement plan.


---
*Page 122*
---

11 
 relating to these target areas. The primary gender -related policies and development frameworks 
are summarised below.  
 
4.1. National Gender Policy  
 
The National Gender Policy44 (NGP ) established in 2015 is central to Ghana’s efforts to promote 
the empowerment of women and gender equality. Through the NGP, the Government of Ghana 
seeks to emphasise the objectives set out in their commitment to the SDGs  and Ghana’s National 
Development Frameworks (see Section 4.2 ). The overarching goal for the NGP is to  mainstream  
gender equality and women’s empowerment into Ghana’s devel opment efforts by improving 
social, legal, civic, political, economic and socio -cultural conditions for the people of Ghana. 
Through the empowerment of women, Ghana aims to : i) reduce poverty levels and social injustice; 
ii) improve health standards; and iii) enhance the efficiency of public and priv ate sector 
investments.  This will be achieved by focusing on five policy commitments, namely:  
• women’s empowerment and livelihoods;  
• women’s rights and access to justice;  
• women’s leadership and accountable governance;  
• economic opportunities for women; and  
• gender roles and relations  
4.2. Ghana’s National Development Frameworks  and the Sustainable  Development Goals  
 
Social development forms one of the four pillars of national development in Ghana, along with 
economic, environmental and institutional development. The long-term National Development 
Frameworks (NDFs) guide the preparation and implementation of medium - and short -term 
development plans, setting targets and indicators for national development.  The long -term 
framework is binding to all successive governments but flexible to allow for each government to 
prepare their own medium -term plans that align with the o verarching vision, goals and objectives 
of the framework45. Among the focal areas of the NDFs are the targets  committed to by Ghana 
through the SDGs. These targets, as define d under Goal 546 of the SDGs , include:  
• ending all forms of discrimination against women and girls;  
• eliminating all forms of violence against women and girls;  
• eliminating all harmful practices, including early forced marriage and female genital mutilation;  
• recognising and valuing unpaid domestic work and care ; 
• promoti ng shared responsibility within the household;  
• ensuring all women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at 
all levels of decision -making in political, economic and public life;  
• ensuring universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights;  
• undertaking reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources and control over land, 
financial services, inheritance and natural resources ; 
• enhancing the use of enabling technolog ies to promote empowerment of women; and  
• adopting and strengthening sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of 
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.  
 
 
44 MoGCSP. 2015. National Gender Policy – Mainstreaming Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment into 
Ghana’s Development Efforts.   
45 National Development Planning Commission. 2015. The basis for a long -term National Development Plan for 
Ghana. Available at: https://s3.amazonaws.com/ndpc -
static/CACHES/PUBLICATIONS/2016/03/24/TheBasisforaLong.pdf  
46 Sustainable Development Goals. 2016. Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls. 
Available at: http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/gender -equality/


---
*Page 123*
---

12 
 4.3. Shared Growth a nd Development Agenda . 
 
Gender equality and women empowerment are listed as a focus area for the medium -term 
priorities in the Shared Growth and Development Agenda (GSGDA) II47. The objectives of the 
policy are to:  
• promote gender equality in political, social and economic development systems ; 
• safeguard the rights, safety and security of vulnerable groups including girl s and women ;  
• promote women’s equal access to economic opportunities and resources; and  
• integrate gender considerations at all stages and in all dimensions of data production.  
 
Through these objectives, the GSGDA II will address the slow progress made in solving gender 
inequality and increase the recognition  of gender equality in the public sector . 
 
4.4. International commitments  
Ghana is a signatory to several regional, continental and international commitments aimed 
specifically at empowering women and promoting gender equality and equity. These 
commitments include the Protocol on the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ (ACHPR) on 
the Rights of Women in Africa and the United Nations (UN) Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). Further details on international and regional 
commitments on gender are provided  in Table 2 below.  
Table 2. International and regional agreements Ghana has ratified.  
Commitment  Overview  
2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development 
(2015)48 The agenda provides a shared framework aimed at eradicating poverty, 
combating inequalities and promoting prosperity by 2030. Of the 17 
SDGs and targets, SDG 5 speaks specifically to achieving gender 
equality and empowering all women and girls by 2030. SDG  5 is further 
supported by 37 gender -related targets across nine other goals.  
Beijing Declaration and 
Platform for Action (1995)49 The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action serves as an agenda 
plan for the empowerment of women and provides appropriate actions 
required by, inter alia , multilateral development institutions, 
governments, intergovernmental organisations  and public and private 
institutions, as well as communities and women’s and youth 
organisations. The Platform for Action provides several strategic 
objectives targeted towards addressing, inter alia , gender inequalities in 
the access to education and healthcare, insufficient mechanisms to 
promote the advancement of women  and gender inequalities in the 
management and protection of the natural environment and resources.  
United Nations (UN) 
Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against 
Women (CEDAW, 1979)50 CEDAW emphasises that discrimination against women: i) undermines 
the principles of equality of rights and respect for human dignity; ii) 
hinders the participation of women as equal to their male counterparts 
in the social, political, economic and cultural  spheres of their countries; 
iii) inhibits the development and prosperity of societies; and iv) 
challenges the empowerment of women in the service of their countries 
and humanity. Therefore, CEDAW  provides measures required by state 
parties to enable and e nsure the elimination of all forms of 
 
47 Government of Ghana. 2015. Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda II. National Development Planning 
Commission.  
48 UN. 2022 History of the Sustainable Development Goals. Available at: https://sdgs.un.org/goals#history   
49 UN Women. 1995. Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. Available at: 
https://www.icsspe.org/system/files/Beijing%20Declaration%20and%20Platform%20for%20Action.pdf   
50 UN General Assembly. 1981. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 
Available at: https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/ProfessionalInterest/cedaw.pdf


---
*Page 124*
---

13 
 discrimination against women, such as developing appropriate 
legislation to ensure equality of men and women, promoting and 
supporting women empowerment  and modifying social and cultural 
patterns that perpetuat e gender inequality.  
Convention on the Rights 
of Persons with 
Disabilities51 (CRPD, 2006)  Ghana ratified the CRPD  in 2012 , a treaty aimed at promoting, 
protecting, and ensuring the full and equal enjoyment of all human 
rights by persons with disabilities. It emphasi ses principles such as 
dignity, non -discrimination, equality, accessibility and full participation in 
society. The convention covers various rights, including access to 
education, healthcare, employment and the justice system, while also 
promoting awareness , independent living and social inclusion. It calls 
on governments to implement legislative, administrative, and other 
measures to uphold these rights.  
Protocol to the African 
Charter on Human and 
Peoples’ (ACHPR) on the 
Rights of Women in Africa 
(The Maputo Protocol, 
2003)52 This protocol was developed based on the recommendation of the 
African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights to provide a 
protocol on women’s rights in Africa. The objective of the protocol 
addresses, inter alia , the elimination of discrimination against women 
and harmful practices, women’s rights to participate in political and 
decision -making processes, as well as their rights to education, training, 
economic and social welfare . The protocol  ensures  that the rights of 
African women are promoted, realised and protected, and further 
includes provisions.  
 
5. Situational analysis  — Northern Ghana target areas  
 
5.1. Gender and agriculture  
 
In the agricultural sector of Ghana, gender dynamics shape  the responsibilities and contributions 
of men and women across numerous communities  in northern Ghana . These dynamics are 
evident in the distinct division of labour, access to resources and the economic roles that men 
and women occupy within their respective communities.  For example, i n the Upper West Region, 
agricultural work in the Tuggoh community is divided along gender lines, with men taking on 
physically demanding tasks such as land preparatio n, while women focus on planting, sowing and 
compost production.  Women also support  men's work by collecting water and preparing food 
during land preparation activities. However, their involvement in certain types of crop cultivation, 
such as  yams, is limited due to the physical demands of the task. Additionally, women are often 
responsible for selling agricultural produce at local markets, but they must first seek permission 
from their husbands or elders, highlighting the influence of gender norms on econo mic activities53. 
 
Similarly, in the Ping community, gender roles are clearly defined, with men leading in the 
cultivation of major crops such as maize and groundnuts and engaging in tasks such as pesticide 
application, which is reserved exclusively for them. This is primari ly because of the belief that 
pesticides can bring harm to women’s reproductive capacity. Nevertheless, both men and women 
participate equally in livestock farming, and women extend their involvement beyond agriculture 
into petty trading and shea butter pr ocessing. Despite these contributions, women face challenges 
 
51 UN General Assembly. 2006. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities . Available at: 
https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments -mechanisms/instruments/convention -rights -persons -disabilities   
52 African Union. 2003. Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of women in 
Africa. Available at: 
https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Women/WG/ProtocolontheRightsofWomen.pdf   
53 Annex 7h: stakeholder engagement plan.


---
*Page 125*
---

14 
 in sustaining dry season gardening due to unreliable water sources, demonstrating how 
environmental factors can exacerbate existing gender inequalities in agriculture54. 
 
The challenge of land ownership further complicates gender dynamics in agriculture, as seen in 
the Bagri community. Historically, women have had limited ownership rights over farmland, 
restricting their ability to fully engage in agricultural activities. However, initiatives such as the 
Women in Agriculture Programme (WAP) ha ve begun to address these disparities by enabling 
women to form farmer -based organisations (FBOs) and purchase land. While this has empowered 
women to take greater control over their agricultural activities, challenges remain, such as the 
reallocation of l and that women have maintained and improved to others male smallholder 
farmers, which discourages long -term investment. These obstacles underscore the ongoing 
struggle for gender equality in the agricultural sector55. 
 
In communities like Sumniboma 1 in the Upper East  region of Ghana, the division of labour 
between men and women reflects both collaboration and the persistence of gendered 
responsibilities in agriculture. While some tasks, such as  ploughing, are performed by men, 
women take on cooking and planting, often working alongside men in the fields. Specific tasks, 
such as groundnut farming, are divided, with women overseeing  the plucking and men digging up 
the plants. Despite these shared responsibilities, certain roles, such as  pesticide application, 
remain reserved for men , although some women also participate, depending on their physical 
condition56. 
 
In Fulani herding communities, gendered responsibilities are defined by specific roles. For 
example, men primarily manage herding, migration  in search  for grazing  land, and cattle trade, 
along with ensuring the protection of livestock. Women are responsible for processing dairy 
products, caring for young livestock and performing household tasks such as cooking and 
gathering firewood. Additionally, Fulani women often sell milk and other dairy products in local 
markets, contributing economically to the househ old. This division of labo ur aligns with cultural 
norms, where men focus on external tasks, while women manage domestic and economic 
activities within the household57. 
 
5.2. Alternative livelihoods  
 
In rural communities across northern Ghana, alternative livelihoods are necessary  for diversifying 
income sources and sustaining families, particularly during the dry-season when farming activities 
are limited. For example, t he Bogni community  relies on dry season farming as an alternative  
livelihood strategy. However, l imited reliable water sources and electricity  presents considerable  
challenges, forcing some residents to migrate to southern regions, cities, or mining sites in search 
of additional income.  Despite these difficulties,  women’s  traditional practices such as beekeeping, 
wild honey harvesting, and brewing Poitou58 remain viable  alternative livelihoods that supplement 
household incomes  during the dry season59. 
 
Similarly, in the Sumniboma 1 community, a variety of alternative livelihoods support both men 
and women. For example, w omen participate  in shea butter production, while men and women  
 
54 Ibid. 
55 Annex 7h: stakeholder engagement plan. 
56 Annex 7h: stakeholder engagement plan.  
57 Setra na, M. 2021. Citizenship, Indigeneity, and the Experiences of 1.5 - and Second -Generation Fulani Herders in 
Ghana. African Spectrum.  
58 Poitou is a traditional beer brewed by the local populations in Ghana.  
59 Annex 7h: stakeholder engagement plan.


---
*Page 126*
---

15 
 participate in  livestock rearing. Charcoal production and firewood sales also provide income, with 
the community ensuring  wood is sourced from private farming land rather than the community 
forest s, which is reserved for gathering medicinal plants. Women also engage in food preparation, 
trading, and local fowl rearing, though they face barriers to expanding these activities due to 
limited capital. Dry season gardening is also practiced, but water access  challenges  makes it less 
viable60. 
 
In the Ping and Bagri communities, alternative livelihoods are similarly diverse. The proximity of 
the Volta River  to the Bagri community makes fishing a predominant activity, while in the Ping 
community , women engage in petty trading and shea butter processing. Similar to  other 
communities, dry season gardening is practiced, but it is hindered by unreliable water sources, 
leading to a reliance on boreholes and wells. Additionally, some young men in the Ping community  
participate in informal gold mining dur ing the dry season. While this provides temporary income, 
it poses considerable  safety risks and contributes to environmental degradation61.  
 
5.3. Access to and control over land  
 
Within this context, various communities in the Upper West, Upper East and Northern regions of 
Ghana exhibit differing levels of access to land for women, often shaped by local customs and 
initiatives aimed at improving equity. For example, in the Lawra district, women have begun to 
form farmer -based organisations (FBOs) through the Women in Agriculture P rogramme (WAP) 
and Rural Women in Agriculture (RWA)  facilitated by each District Agricultural Office . These FBOs 
can purchase and manage land collectively, offering women greater control over their agricultural 
activities, although challenges remain, such as the reallocation of improved land to other  
community members.  In the Zambo Baagangn community, women have access to farming land 
without specific restrictions on their agricultural activities but  are still denied formal ownership  as 
a result of  the Customary Land tenure favouring patriarchal ownership  (see Section 3.3: Access 
to and control over resources) . Similarly, in the East Mamprusi district, women are heavily 
involved in the labour -intensive aspects of farming but lack control over land ownership, 
underscoring ongoing gender disparities  associated with the Customary Land tenure systems . 
The Nyagu community presents another dimension to the land access challenge, where women, 
although not given formal ownership, have access to land because their farming activities benefit 
the household. Men in this community have recognised the higher productivity of women’s farms 
and are therefore supportive of women’s access to land. These examples highlight the 
complexities of land access in rural norther n Ghana and the need for more equitable practices to 
ensure that women, who are substantial  contributors to agriculture, have secure and fair access 
to land and its resources62. 
 
5.4. Access to finance  
 
Access to finance in the northern region of  Ghana play s a substantial  role in supporting household 
livelihoods, farming activities, and overall community well -being. Although only  ~30% of wome n 
and ~50% of men in Ghana have bank accounts63, Village Savings and Loan Associations 
(VSLAs) are a common financial mechanism for local communities in the Upper West, Upper East 
and Northern regions of Ghana that enables community members to save, borrow, and invest in 
 
60 Ibid. 
61 Ibid. 
62 Annex 7h: stakeholder engagement plan. 
63 The World Bank Group. 2024. Ghana gender landscape. Available at: 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099024506302242863/pdf/IDU05017dff90e8da047a70964d0d0b553ab
2f02.pdf


---
*Page 127*
---

16 
 a way that supports both individual and collective needs64. These community -driven savings 
groups are necessary in areas where formal financial services are limited or inaccessible. By 
pooling resources and offering loans, VSLAs empower individuals, particularly women, to manage 
their finances, invest in agriculture, and contribute to household expenses65. 
 
For example, in the Tuggoh community, VSLAs provide a platform for farmers, traders, and 
students to access necessary funds for farming inputs and other needs. Profits from market sales 
are divided, with portions allocated to household expenses and farming  reinvestments. Women 
receive a share of the proceeds for personal use, but much of the money is reinvested into 
sustaining household operations. In contrast, the Ping community has tailored its VSLAs to cater 
to different demographics and needs, with grou ps that are women -led or mixed. These VSLAs 
not only support farming and health -related expenses but also foster social unity through co -
management and collaboration. Meanwhile, in the Sumniboma 1 community, financial 
management is more independent, with m en and women managing their own incomes based on 
their roles in farming and household responsibilities. These examples highlight the diverse ways 
in which VSLAs and access to finance can be adapted to meet the unique needs of local 
communities, ultimately contributing to their economic resilience and social cohesion66. 
 
 
6. Recommendations  
 
6.1. Project design and implementation  
 
Climate change affects men and women differently , with cultural practices making women more 
vulnerable than men. Mainstreaming gender into the climate resilient and sustainable livelihoods 
project  design – including conceptualisation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation – is 
therefore necessary to build the adaptive capacity of households  and communities  in the Upper 
West, Upper East and Northern regions . The results from this gender assessment  will guide the 
design of project activities, ensuring that women  (including divorcees and widows) , the yo uth, 
elderly  and other vulnerable groups are not only included in the project , but that the relationships 
between the cultural roles of men and women are considered. The proposed project interventions 
will, therefore,  address  gender equality through several pathways, including:  
• incorporating a  gender action plan  into the development of the development plans and 
community climate action plans , based on the specific gaps identified within each community ; 
• integrating women into the project specific institutional structures and involving them in the 
project’s decision -making process ; 
• ensuring women’s participation in all climate change adaptation training ; 
• ensuring equal opportunity and access to women farmers for on -the-ground adaptation 
interventions;  
• targeting women for specific adaptation interve ntions, w ith a particular focus on climate -
resilient additional livelihoods;   
• providing women with business and financial training;  
• raising awareness of the importance of equal opportuni ty for all people and the role women 
play in climate change adaptation  across a community ; 
 
64 The World Bank Group. 2024. Ghana gender landscape. Available at: 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099024506302242863/pdf/IDU05017dff90e8da047a70964d0d0b553ab
2f02.pdf   
65 Ibid. 
66 Ibid.


---
*Page 128*
---

17 
 • establishing  long-term monitoring and evaluation programs to assess the effectiveness of 
interventions for achieving gender equality; and  
• sharing lessons learned through project interventions to help create a paradigm shift in the 
approach to gender equality in climate change adaptation projects .  
 
It is also essential to avoid exposing women to greater risks of sexual exploitation and harassment 
(SEAH), GBV and intimate partner violence as a result of their empowerment through project 
activities that increase their income accessibility. Project inte rventions should be sensitive to 
these dynamics, ensuring that women can exercise their agency and empowerment, while also 
engaging male community members in women empowerment.  
 
The gender assessment and problem analysis identified gaps in access and control over 
resources and opportunities. Mainstreaming gender in the project design is achieved by using 
sex-disaggregated data, facilitating awareness raising on grievance redress m echanisms (GRM) 
for SEAH and GBV, developing strategies and actions to close those gaps, allocating resources 
and expertise for implementing equality strategies, and monitoring results using gender -sensitive 
indicators.  A SEAH risk assessment will be under taken during the project’s inception phase of 
implementation (see Annex 6B: ESMF for additional details).  
 
6.2. Monitoring and evaluation  
 
Gender will be considered throughout the planning, implementation , monitoring  and evaluation of 
the project.  Gender -specific i ndicators defined in the gender action plan ( GAP ) below will be used 
to quantitatively assess the gender -specific benefits of project interventions on an ongoing basis. 
These indicators will ensure that the monitoring and evaluation process is gender -responsive  and 
that project interventions are effectively promoting gender equality in climate change adaptation. 
The results of these assessments will be incorporated into the annual Project Implementation 
Reports, Mid -term Report and Terminal Evaluation  and will serve as information communication 
products produced by the project.


---
*Page 129*
---

18 
 7. Part two: Gender Action Plan  
 
7.1. Introduction  
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA ) are leading the preparation of a GCF 
funding proposal titled Climate -resilient landscapes for sustainable livelihoods in Northern Ghana  with United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) as its international accredited entity.  Agroecological systems in northern Ghana, on which the livelihoods of 
smallholder farmers rely, are under considerable stress because of among other things: i) unfavourable climate conditions; ii ) extensive 
environmental degradation; and iii) outdated and  unsustainable farming methods . Therefore, this proposed project  will be implemented 
in eight districts in northern Ghana that have been specifically chosen because of their high vulnerability to climate change  impacts. 
The project will directly support at least 120,000 males and females of different age groups. These direct beneficiaries represent ~15% 
of the total population of the eight districts and 1.5% of the people in Ghana .  
 
The Gender Action Plan (GAP) has two primary objectives: i) to guide the project in understanding and addressing the differen tial 
impacts of climate change on women and men; and ii) identify gender entry points for actions that ensure equitable benefits f or women, 
men, and vulnerable populations in the target areas. The GAP serves as the main strategy for integrating gender metrics into the 
proposed project ’s implementation. Building on the gender a ssessment (Part One) , the GAP  ensures targeted actions to address 
existing gender gaps and inequalities faced by women , people with disabilities and the youth . 
 
 
7.2. Impact Statement  
  
Research and anecdotal evidence indicate that women, children and youth are among the groups most vulnerable to the impacts o f 
climate change. In addition, a large number of vulnerable people in communities that are highly dependent on local natural re sources 
for their survival are women and children. Therefore, the Government of Ghana (GOG) has established that gender -responsive 
planning, resource -allocation and implementation in the context of this proposed project will be a priority. Supporting transform ational 
change both in the lives of women beneficiaries and in prompting gender mainstreaming in national climate change policy -making and 
implementation was therefore seen as a priority in stakeholder consultations.  
 
Expected total numbers of direct and indirect beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased resilience) are:  
• 691,125 people directly benefit from project interventions (331,743 men and 359,385 women); and  
• 2,861,674 people indirectly benefit from the project interventions (1,459,474 women and 1,402,200 men).  
 
The project will also:  
• ensure that all reviewed policies, recommended policy revisions, and economic development planning frameworks and guidelines 
promote gender inclusion and responsiveness. ;  
• ensure sustainability and long -term impact of gender -responsive outcomes, outputs and actions;


---
*Page 130*
---

19 
 • build capacity for government institutions , traditional authorities and faith -based institutions  in acknowledging gender differentials 
in responding to climate risks;  
• ensure that women  and youth  take leadership with regards to project components related to them, however, without the 
marginali sation of men with the intent to avoid their resistance and negative influence; and  
• increase social accountability.  
 
7.3. Outcome Statement  
  
The project aims to enhance the climate resilience of at least 124,410 women directly, and approximately 2.2 million women indirectly, 
by improving their access to resources for agricultural practices and/or grant facilities.  
 
The GAP outlined in Table 3 serves as a framework for integrating gender considerations into the climate resilient and sustainable 
livelihoods project  in northern Ghana. It will be used to ensure that both men and women  — including divorcees and widows — are 
actively involved in planning, decision -making and the implementation of climate -resilient agricultural practices, early warning systems 
and livelihood interventions. The  EPA, M oFA, WRC and other governmental bodies will collaborate closely with the project  
management unit’s (PMU)  ESS/ Gender Specialist , who holds primary responsibility for overseeing gender mainstreaming efforts. The 
plan will be monitored through gender -disaggregated indicators such as participation rates and consultation outcomes, with reporting 
scheduled at intervals throughout the p roject’s implementation. Regular workshops, focus group discussions, and training sessions will 
be u sed to ensure continuous feedback and adaptation of the plan.  During the 2024 mission, women in the target dis trict local 
communities indicated that they have previously been unable to attend workshops or training sessions in the afternoon and ear ly 
evening as a result of their household responsibilities. Therefore, all workshops, consultations and meetings within  the local 
communities will take place during weekdays in the morning hours. The implementation status of the GAP will be a recurring agenda 
item for all project steering committee (PSC) meetings.  
 
Table 3. Gender Action Plan  
Project 
management 
activities  Gender activity  Baseline  Indicators  Targets  Indicative 
timeline  Responsibility  Budget  
Ensure a gender 
balance in establishing 
the Project 
Management Unit 
(PMU) and in managing 
its human resources.  No PMU 
established  Documentation of 
contracting process — 
such as vacancy 
announcements, 
shortlisting, interview 
notes  — and proportion 
of women employed in 
unskilled , technical , 
management , or 
supervisory roles . Demonstrable 
efforts to recruit 
at least 50% 
women, 
including in 
positions with 
project Year 1  UNEP Task 
Manager  N/A


---
*Page 131*
---

20 
 responsibilities
67 
Recruit a ESS/ Gender 
specialist  in the PMU  to 
support and monitor the 
effective implementation 
of the Gender Action 
Plan (50%) and oversee 
any grievances related 
to gender -based 
violence (GBV) or 
sexual exploitation and 
harassment (SEAH).  No Gender 
Specialist in 
the PMU  ToRs  to recruit for the 
position  85% of their 
time is 
dedicated to 
supporting the 
gender -
integrated 
implementation 
of the project. 
15% of their 
time is allocated 
to support 
grievances for 
SEAH or GBV.  Year 1  UNEP Task 
Manager  N/A 
Gender Training for the 
PMU. Training materials 
will include topics of, 
inter alia : i) SEAH and 
GBV; understanding 
how to analyse the 
differential impacts of 
projects on men and 
women; iii) strategies to 
promote equitable 
access to project 
benefits for all social 
groups; and iv) 
familiarisation with 
national, regional and 
international gender 
policies and 
conventions.  No training for 
the PMU  Online and in -situ training 
provided to team 
members (certificates, 
modules), knowledge 
assessed through 
interviews  100% of PMU 
team members 
are 
knowledgeable 
on gender 
challenges and 
able to report 
on gender -
responsive 
indicators of the 
project such as 
certificates, 
modules and 
knowledge 
assessments.  Year 1  PMU 
ESS/ Gender 
Specialist   
Develop and implement 
mandatory SEAH 
prevention training for 
project staff, CCAGs, 
FBOs and communities  No SEAH 
prevention 
training  Percentage of project 
staff, CCAGs, FBOs and 
community members who 
have completed the 100% of project 
staff, CCAGs, 
FBOs, and 80% 
of community 
members Year 1  PMU 
ESS/ Gender 
Specialist  N/A 
 
67 Measurability will be improved in the implementation stage by tracking and reporting % of female hires in the APR , including  any challenges encountered.


---
*Page 132*
---

21 
 mandatory SEAH 
prevention training.  trained in SEAH 
prevention 
within the first 
six months of 
the 
programme's 
implementation.  
Integrate SEAH 
prevention measures in 
the financial credit line 
development 
programmes for the 
local financial 
institutions (LFIs) 
engaged under Output 
4 to adhere to SEAH 
free policies and to 
ensure women have 
direct access to 
financial services 
without intermediaries.  No SEAH  
integration  Number of LFIs engaged 
under Output 4 that have 
integrated SEAH 
prevention measures and 
adopted SEAH -free 
policies, ensuring direct 
access to financial 
services for women.  100% of LFIs 
engaged under 
Output 4 
integrate SEAH 
prevention 
measures and 
SEAH -free 
policies, with 
80% of women 
accessing 
financial 
services 
directly, without 
intermediaries, 
within the first 
two years of 
program me 
implementation.  Year 1 –2 PMU 
ESS/ Gender 
Specialist  N/A 
Project 
output  Gender activity   Indicators  Targets  Indicative 
timeline  Responsibilitie
s Budget  
 Component 1: Early warning systems  
Output 1: 
Improved 
climate data 
and early 
warnings 
made 
available to 
facilitate 
proactive 
drought and 
flood 
management.  • Ensure gender -
sensitive training for 
technical staff at 
national, regional, 
and district levels, 
including GMet, 
HYDRO, and WRC, 
focusing on the 
unique needs and 
vulnerabilities of 
women in flood and 0% of 
technical staff 
have received 
training in 
gender -
responsive 
flood and 
drought 
management 
practices ; 
Less than 5% 
of women • Percentage of 
technical staff trained 
in gender -responsive 
flood and drought 
management 
practices.   
• Percentage of 
women in each 
community reporting 
increased access to 
and understanding of • At least 
40% of 
trained 
technical 
staff 
(national, 
regional, 
district) are 
women, and 
100% of 
staff trained 
receive Year 1  Water Resource 
Commission 
(WRC), DHI 
and project 
ESS/ Gender 
Specialist  
 • National 
consultant 
(gender expert) 
procured to 
undertake the 
FGDs, develop 
the report and 
collaborate 
with system 
developers: 
US$12,000


---
*Page 133*
---

22 
 drought 
management.   
• Integrate gender -
specific data and 
information into the 
new early warning 
system, ensuring 
that women’s 
access to flood and 
drought early 
warning information 
is prioritized, 
especially in 
vulnerable farming 
communities.  
• Facilitate women’s 
active participation 
in the development 
of the national 
framework for 
disseminating DSS 
and climate -related 
hazard 
management 
information to 
ensure their specific 
concerns and 
priorities are 
addressed.   report having 
access to or 
understanding 
of flood and 
drought early 
warning 
information.  flood and drought 
warnings.  
• Number of women 
actively involved in 
consultations and 
decision -making 
processes for the 
development of the 
national framework 
on drought and flood 
hazard management.  gender -
sensitive 
training by 
the end of 
the second 
year of 
implementat
ion.  
• 80% of all 
women 
across all 
the 
communitie
s report an 
increase in 
access to 
early 
warning 
messages 
by the third 
year of 
implementat
ion. 
• Women 
represent at 
least 50%68 
of the 
participants 
in 
consultation
s for the 
developmen
t of the 
national 
framework 
by the 
second year • Travel to each 
target district 
and DSA: 
US$18,400.  
• The PMU 
ESS/ Gender 
Specialist 
salary   
collaborating 
with system 
developers to 
integrate 
gender -
responsive 
features into 
the early 
warning 
system.  
 
68 50% has been selected as a target for this activity based on the 2024 mission where there was considerably high female attend ance. See Annex 7h: stakeholder 
engagement plan.


---
*Page 134*
---

23 
 of 
implementat
ion. 
 Component 2: Climate resilient livelihoods  
Output 2: 
Climate -
resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
implemented 
in beneficiary 
communities.  • Establish 
mentorship and 
capacity -building 
programmes 
specifically 
designed to 
enhance women’s 
entrepreneurial 
skills in climate -
resilient livelihoods, 
including market 
access, value chain 
development and 
business 
management, to 
increase their 
economic 
independence and 
long-term 
resilience . 
• Ensure women -led 
cooperatives in the 
local communities 
lead climate -
resilient agricultural 
practices and EbA 
initiatives, 
enhancing women’s 
leadership, 
decision -making 
power and 
economic 
resilience.  
 No women 
entrepreneurs 
have received 
training or 
mentorship in 
climate -
resilient 
livelihood 
development 
or business 
management.  • Number of 
women 
entrepreneurs 
trained and 
mentored in 
climate -resilient 
livelihood 
development and 
business 
management.  
• Number of 
women -led 
cooperatives 
facilitating in 
climate -resilient 
agriculture and 
EbA practices.  • At least 
80% of 
women in 
each 
community 
report 
increased 
financial 
literacy and 
profit 
margins on 
products 
sold as a 
result of the 
training.  
• At least 50 
women in 
each 
beneficiary 
district are 
mentored 
and 
supported 
to launch or 
expand 
climate -
resilient 
businesses 
by the third 
year of the 
project, with 
specific 
strategies to 
improve 
their access 
to markets Year 1 –7 District 
Agricultural 
Offices and 
project 
ESS/ Gender 
Specialist   
• Costs of the 
mentorship 
and capacity 
building 
programmes 
are embedded 
in the activity 
costs 
(US$192,000) . 
• The PMU 
ESS/Gender 
Specialist 
salary


---
*Page 135*
---

24 
 and value 
chains.  
• At least one 
women -led 
cooperative 
or group is 
established 
in 75% of 
beneficiary 
communitie
s by the 
second year 
of the 
project, with 
ongoing 
support 
provided for 
their 
leadership 
developmen
t and 
access to 
resources.  
Output 3: 
Restoration of 
landscape to 
reduce 
drought and 
flood risk  • Facilitate the active 
participation of 
women in planning 
and implementing 
land restoration 
activities, including 
training women in 
nurseries mgmt, 
agroforestry and 
flood -based farming 
techniques.  Women are 
minimally 
involved in 
communal 
land 
restoration 
activities and 
have limited 
access to 
training in  
nursery 
operations,  
agroforestry or 
flood -based 
farming 
practices.  • Number of 
women trained 
and actively 
participating in 
land restoration 
and agroforestry 
interventions in 
the 120 target 
communities.  • At least 
3,600 
women (30 
per 
community) 
trained and 
actively 
engaged in 
land 
restoration 
and 
agroforestry 
activities by 
the end of 
the project.  Year 1 –7 District 
Agricultural 
Offices and 
project 
ESS/Gender 
Specialist  • The PMU 
ESS/ Gender 
Specialist 
salary


---
*Page 136*
---

25 
 Output 4: 
Increased 
access of 
smallholder 
farmers to 
financial 
resources and 
engagement 
with the 
private sector.  • Prioritise the 
formation of 
women -led Farmer -
Based 
Organisations 
(FBOs) and Village 
Savings and Loan 
Associations 
(VSLAs), ensuring 
that women have 
leadership roles 
and decision -
making authority in 
these groups to 
directly influence 
access to credit and 
insurance for both 
farming and non -
farming livelihood 
activities.  
• Develop tailored 
financial products 
and insurance 
packages that 
address the specific 
needs and risks 
experienced by 
women smallholder 
farmers and 
entrepreneurs, 
ensuring that 
women have equal 
access to financial 
services and are 
not excluded due to 
collate ral or credit 
history 
requirements.  0 women  
report having 
access to or 
using formal 
financial 
products such 
as credit and 
insurance ; 
Women 
smallholder 
farmers and 
entrepreneurs 
have received 
minimal to no 
training in 
financial 
literacy or 
mentorship on 
engaging with 
private sector 
actors.  • Percentage of 
women -led FBOs 
and VSLAs 
established and 
actively 
accessing 
financial 
resources for 
climate -resilient 
farming and 
alternative 
livelihoods.  
• Number of 
women who 
report increased 
access to 
financial products 
such as credit 
and insurance.  
• Number of 
women 
smallholder 
farmers and 
entrepreneurs 
trained in 
financial literacy 
and mentored in 
engaging with 
private sector 
actors69. • At least 
50% of all 
newly 
established 
FBOs and 
VSLAs are 
women -led 
by the 
second year 
of the 
project, and 
100% of 
these 
groups 
have 
access to 
credit and 
insurance 
products by 
the end of 
the third 
year.  
• 60% of 
women 
smallholder 
farmers in 
beneficiary 
communitie
s accessing 
these 
products by 
the third 
year of the 
project.  
This will be 
measured 
through 
surveys Year 1 –5 District 
Agricultural 
Offices and 
project 
ESS/ Gender 
Specialist  • National 
consultant 
(gender expert) 
to prepare 
materials for 
and facilitate 
the training 
sessions 
(US$16,000 ). 
• National 
consultant 
(gender expert) 
to engage with 
the BAC on 
facilitating 
mentorship 
and financial 
literacy 
programmes in 
each target 
district 
($1,600).  
• Travel and 
DSA for the 
national 
consult to 
travel to each 
target district to 
facilitate the 
training and 
engage with 
the  BAC 
(US$22,400).  
• The cost for 
the training 
workshop is 
covered under 
the training 
 
69 Engagement with the private sector refers to collaboration with businesses and financial institutions to leverage their resou rces, expertise, and services.


---
*Page 137*
---

26 
 • Establish 
mentorship and 
financial literacy 
programmes for 
women farmers and 
entrepreneurs to 
build their capacity 
to manage credit, 
understand 
insurance products, 
and engage with 
private sector 
actors, fostering 
long-term financial 
empowerment and 
busines s resilience.  capturing 
the number 
of women 
who self -
report 
improved 
access to 
financial 
products 
compared 
to the 
baseline.  
• At least 100 
women in 
each 
beneficiary 
district are 
trained in 
financial 
literacy and 
business 
skills by the 
second year 
of the 
project, with 
at least 
50% of 
them 
actively 
engaging 
with private 
sector 
actors for 
climate -
resilient 
agriculture 
by the end 
of the third 
year.  costs for sub -
activity 4.1.2 
(US$286,000).  
• The PMU 
ESS/Gender 
Specialist 
salary


---
*Page 138*
---

27 
 Output 5: 
Knowledge 
and 
awareness of 
climate threats 
to agricultural 
livelihoods 
and available 
adaptation 
options 
increased to 
inform the 
upscaling of 
climate 
change 
adaptation 
across 
northern 
Ghana.  • Establish and 
support women -led 
knowledge hubs in 
beneficiary 
communities where 
women farmers and 
entrepreneurs can 
lead the 
dissemination of 
climate adaptation 
information, share 
best practices, and 
provide peer -to-
peer learning on 
climate -resilient 
agric ultural 
practices and 
adaptation options.  
• Facilitate women’s 
leadership in 
knowledge -sharing 
and awareness -
raising events, 
ensuring that 
women climate 
champions and 
leaders from 
various sectors —
such as farming, 
small businesses 
and community 
leadership —are 
given platforms to 
share their 
experien ces, 
insights, and 
success stories in 
climate -resilient 
agriculture and 
adaptation.  0 women -led 
knowledge 
hubs currently 
exist or are 
operational for 
sharing 
climate 
adaptation 
information 
and best 
practices ; 
Women are 
underrepresen
ted as key 
speakers or 
facilitators, 
with less than 
10% of events 
featuring 
women in 
these roles.  • Number of women -
led knowledge hubs 
established and 
operational in sharing 
climate adaptation 
information and best 
practices.  
• Percentage of 
knowledge -sharing 
and awareness -
raising events where 
women serve as key 
speakers or 
facilitators.  • At least one 
women -led 
knowledge 
hub is 
established 
in each 
target 
communitie
s by the end 
of the fourth 
year of the 
project, with 
these hubs 
actively 
engaged in 
generating 
and 
disseminati
ng climate -
resilient 
agricultural 
knowledge.  
• Women are 
key 
speakers or 
facilitators 
in at least 
50% of 
knowledge -
sharing and 
awareness -
raising 
events by 
the second 
year, with 
these 
events 
specifically 
targeting at 
least 70% Year 1 –4 District 
Agricultural 
Offices and 
project 
ESS/ Gender 
Specialist  • National 
consultant 
(gender expert) 
to facilitate the 
establishment 
of women -led 
knowledge 
hubs in each 
target district 
($8,000)  
• Travel and 
DSA for 
national 
consultant to 
go to each 
community  
($14,400).  
• The PMU 
ESS/Gender 
Specialist 
salary


---
*Page 139*
---

28 
 female 
attendance 
to ensure 
broader 
outreach to 
women 
farmers and 
entrepreneu
rs. 
 
Table 4. Summary of GAAP budget  
Output number  Gender activity description  Budget  
Output 1 • Ensure gender -sensitive training for technical staff at national, regional, and 
district levels, including GMet, HYDRO, and WRC, focusing on the unique 
needs and vulnerabilities of women in flood and drought management.  
• Integrate gender -specific data and information into the new early 
warning system, ensuring that women’s access to flood and drought 
early warning information is prioritized, especially in vulnerable farming 
communities.  
• Facilitate women’s active participation in the development of the national 
framework for disseminating DSS and climate -related hazard 
management information to ensure their specific concerns and priorities 
are addressed  
• Undertake the FGDs, develop the report and collaborate with system 
developers   • National consultant (gender expert): US$12,000  
• Travel and DSA: US$18,400.  
Output 2  • Establish mentorship and capacity -building programmes specifically 
designed to enhance women’s entrepreneurial skills in climate -resilient 
livelihoods, including market access, value chain development and 
business management, to increase their economic independence and 
long-term resilience.  
• Ensure women -led cooperatives in the local communities lead climate -
resilient agricultural practices and EbA initiatives, enhancing women’s 
leadership, decision -making power and economic resilience.  • National consultant (gender expert): USD 4,000  
• Travel and DSA: USD 13,000  
Output 3  • Facilitate the active participation of women in planning and 
implementing land restoration activities, including training women in 
nurseries mgmt, agroforestry and flood -based farming techniques.  • National consultant (gender expert): US$12,000  
• Travel and DSA: US$18,400.  
Output 4  • Engage with the Business Advisory Centre (BAC) on facilitating mentorship 
and financial literacy programmes in each target district . • National consultant (gender expert): US$1 7,600  
• Travel and DSA: US$22,400


---
*Page 140*
---

29 •Prepare materials for and facilitate the training sessions.
Output 5  •Facilitate the establishment of women -led knowledge hubs in each target
district•National  consultant (gender expert): US$ 8,000
•Travel and DSA: US$14,400
Monitoring &  
 Safeguards  •Environmental and Social Safeguards and Gender Specialist •Remuneration over 7 years (USD 327,957 )
GAP total budget  US$468,157  
___________