=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20201015133958+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
/ModDate: D:20201021142516+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Adde ndum  IX 
Funding proposal package for FP149  GCF/B.27/02/Ad d.09 
21 October 2020  Meeting of the Board 
9 – 13 November 2020 
Virtual me eting 
Provisional Agenda Item 11 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following six parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “ Green Climate Financing Facility for Local Financia l
I
nstitutions in Latin -America”  submitted by the Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF) ;
b) No
-objection letter s issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s);
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e) R
esponse from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s
assessment; and
f
)Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
T
hese documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled  “Green Climate Financing Facility for Local 
Financial Institutions in Latin-America”  submitted by the  Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)  is 
being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members 
to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive 
information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/Add.09  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                               1 
No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorit y(ies)  or focal point (s)              74 
Environmental and social report(s) di sclosure                                                                                          79 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                             81 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                 90 
assessment  
Gender document ation                                                                                                                                      92


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Green Climate Financing Facility for LFIs in Latin -America   
 
Country(ies): Latin America: Chile, Ecuador, Panamá  and Peru.  
 
Accredited Entity:  Corporación  Andina de Fomento (CAF – Development Bank of 
Latin Americ a) 
 
Date of first submission:  2018/ 07/19  
Date of current submission  2019/11/01 
Version number  V.2.0


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 1 OF 73 
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill ou t information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 2 OF 73 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
A.1. Project or
programmeProgramme  A.2. Public or privat e
sectorPrivate  
A.3. Request f or
Proposals ( RFP)NA 
A.4. Result area (s) 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of the percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☒ Energy access and power generation:
☐ Low-em ission transport:
☒ Buildings, cities , industries and appliances:
☒ F orest ry and land use:
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☐ Most vulnerable people, communities  and regions:  
☐ H ealth and well-being, and food and water security:
☐ Infrastructure and built environment: 
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution: 
32% 
0% 
38% 
30% 
NA% 
NA% 
NA% 
NA% 
A.5. Expected m itigation
impact10,7 04,5 62 tCO 2eq A.6. Expected a daptation
impactNA 
NA 
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance)USD 150.2 million  
A.9. Project size Medium (50<X<250 ) 
A.8. Total GCF fundi ng
requeste dUSD 100 million  
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requeste d
for the GCF fundingMark all that apply  and provide total amounts . The sum of all total amounts should be consistent  
with A.8.  
☒Grant U SD 5 million  
☒Loan USD 95 million  
☐Guarantee  NA☐Equity NA 
☐Results -based
pay
ment NA 
A.11. Implementation
period5 years. 
Expected financing close is 5 
years fro m the start date.  A.12. Total lifespan10 years. (all funding 
returned)  
20 years for total calculated 
impacts to be realized.  
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approvalThis is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/  
programme, if available.  
Click or tap to enter a date.  A.14. ESS category Medium  (Category B)  
A.15. Has this FP bee n
submitted as a CN
before?Yes ☒    No ☐A.16. Has Readiness or
PPF support been use d
to prepare this FP ?Yes ☐       No  ☒
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme?Yes ☐    No ☐A.18. Is this FP included
in the country
programme?Yes ☐  No ☐


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 3 OF 73 
 A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc .)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  CAF – Development Bank of Latin America1 
Boulevard Pacífica P.H. Oceanía Business Plaza Torre 2000 piso 27, Punta Pacífica 
Código postal 0832  
Ciudad de Panamá  
Cont act person:  
Maria Moreno , Principal Executive, Environment and Climate Change  
mmoreno @caf.com  
+507297531 7 
 
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s) 
Energy and land use are two of the main sources of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in many Latin American 
countries. The objective of the Programme ‘ Green Climate Financing Facility for Local Financial Institutions (LFIs) in 
Latin America’  is to reduce GHG emissions in this Region through locally financed and developed climate change 
projects in the renewable energy, energy efficiency and land use sectors.  
 
The Programme will achieve thi s by helping local market actors from the agriculture, forestry, commerce, industry and 
services sectors, overcome key barriers to climate change project development, including financial barriers –  for 
example, smaller businesses do not have trusted relati onships with mainstream commercial banks –  as well as 
knowledge barriers, considering many LFIs have limited knowledge on how to assess climate change projects. The 
programme will make available to LFIs a Green Finance Credit Line; it will also implement t en grant -funded activities 
with a focus on awareness raising and technical support, including: climate change and mitigation awareness raising, 
matchmaking between LFIs, Technology and/or Solution Providers (TSP), and SMEs (including farmers); performance 
based payments for TSPs; technical support and capacity building for LFIs, SMEs and TSPs; and dissemination and 
learning.  
 
For this first P rogramme roll out , four countries will  be targeted: Chile, Ecuador, Panamá and Perú , which have a 
combined population of 7 2 million. Each  country was selected based on the strength of its existing climate policy; 
energy and land use project market sizes; uncrowded financial markets for local climate change projects, and the 
strength of existing CAF relationships with LFIs . Pending the success of this first programme, it  could be likely replicated 
in other Latin American count ries and in other regions.  
 This Programme will achieve 10.70 million tCO
2eq in lifetime GHG emission reductions while training personnel at 11  
LFIs in project assessment , 720 SMEs in project development,  and increasing climate awareness among 36,4202 
other local market actors ( e.g. SME employees , business ow ners benefitting from sub -loans , green TSPs, banks ’ 
credit managers, public officials, among others)  at a total cost of USD $ 14.03 per tCO 2eq avoided.  
 
1 CAF is the overall executing entity for the programme.   
GCF reimbursable proceeds will be channelled by CAF onto Local Financial Institutions (LFIs) for the purposes of funded 
activities.  
Component 1 - Green finance credit line for LFIs  
CAF will execute the planned activities in collaboration with Local Financial Institutions (LFIs) and other l ocal and national 
actors.  
Component 2 - Technical Support and Awareness Building  
CAF will execute and carry out the planned activities under this component in collaboration with local actors.    
2 Approximately 30 people reached estimated  per each project  to be carried out over the 5- year project period


---
*Page 7*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 73 
 
  
3 Calvin et al. 2016  
4 https://www.carbonbrief.org/paris -2015-tracking-country -climate -pledges  
5 Language provided in the Panama NDC: 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Panama%20First/PANAMA%20NDC.pdf  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages ) 
Strategic Context  
Baselines:  
The energy and land use sectors are responsibl e for majority of greenhouse gas emissions in many Latin American 
countries. It has been estimated that approximately 40% of GHG emissions are from agriculture, forestry and other land 
use (AFOLU) sector.3 Emissions from the energy sector vary substantiall y from country to country, yet the region´s 
reliance on fossil fuels and growing energy needs imply that without the adoption of clean energy technologies that the 
sector will continue to contribute to increasing GHG emissions globally. Investments in low -carbon technologies and 
land use practices have been identified as effective  investments  for climate change mitigation, yet the adoption of such 
practices is limited due to the lack of  green- lending for sustainable climate change mitigation projects ( refer to Section 
B2 for a detailed description of the barriers limiting the establishment and adoption of green credit lines).  
 
The following paragraphs provide a brief overview of each target country´s GHG emissions profile, commitments to the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC ), as well as key development and sectoral 
strategies/ policies that are related to the energy and land use sectors. Please refer to Annex 2 - Feasibility Study  for 
further det ails on National priorities of each country.  
 
Panama  
In terms of mitigation, Panama´s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the UNFCCC  highlights the importance 
of the energy and land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) sectors. Energy contributes 17.3% of national 
emissions, whereas LULUCF contributes to 80% of national emissions. The country´s NDC further discusses its intention  
to contribute to the de- carbonization of the electric matrix, promoting renewable energies and supporting improvements 
in energy efficiency. It further discusses promoting reforestation, supporting the establishment of plantations, 
agroforestry systems, s ilvopastoral systems and agroforestry, as well as incorporating agricultural systems into 
measures to support the reforestation and restoration of ecosystems. By 2050 Panama aims for renewable energy to 
comprise 30% of all installed capacity , as compared t o 7% in 2010.4 excluding hydropower In terms of LULUCF, Panama 
aims to have at least a 10% more CO 2 absorption capacity by 2050, as compared to the baseline scenario without NDC 
(and up to 80% more if international  support is provided).5  
National strate gies and policies further demonstrate Panama´s commitments to the energy and land use sectors. The 
´Strategic Government Plan 2015- 2019´ includes measures to support low -emission development, as well as capacity 
development and technology transfer. The National Energy Strategy 2015 -2050 , States that electricity demand is 
expected to increase by more than six -fold between 2014 and 2050, and prioritizes early action with efficiency measures , 
and r ecognizes the role of small and medium renewable energy sour ces in meeting future demand. In terms of land 
use, the Strategic Government Plan identifies the agricultural sector as the top investment priority sector because it is 
an employment intensive sector that is characterized by low productivity. The Governmen t further has a law on forest 
incentives from 2017, supporting agroforestry systems and plantation forestry amongst others as activities that have the 
potential to halt and reverse deforestation.   
Ecuador  
The country´s National Climate Change Strategy 201 2-2025 (ENCC)  establishes the strategic and institutional basis for 
the generation of national climate change plans in prioritized sectors for mitigation and adaptation. Ecuador is also 
currently working on the development of a National Adaptation Plan and aims to develop a National Mitigation Plan.   
Ecuador’s NDC has addressed the five sectors prioritized in the ENCC . The lines of action in the Energy, Agriculture, 
Industrial Processes and Waste sectors result in an estimated GHG emissio n reduction potential of 9% compared to the 
trend scenario for 2025. In addition, a potential reduction of 20.9% over the same period could be achieved with the 
support of international cooperation. This would give way to an 11.9% increase in mitigation am bition in reference to the 
trend scenario for 2025. With respect to LULUCF, a reduction potential of 4% has been identified compared to the 2025


---
*Page 8*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 73 
 
  
6 https://w ww.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/funding- proposal -fp019-undp -ecuador.pdf  
7 INDC Peru (2016)  
8 Grupo de Trabajo Multisectorial de naturaleza temporal encargado de generar información técnica para 
orientar la implementación de las Contribuciones Nacionalmente Determinadas (GTM -NDC) INFORME FINAL, 
17 de diciembre de 2018  benchmark. With support of international cooperation, additional mitigation potential of 16% would provide an a dditional 
reduction of 20% compared to the benchmark level for 2025.  
The present proposal contributes to the following NDC’s lines of action and initiatives: boost the use of renewable energy 
(hydroelectricity, wind, solar , biogas) , strengthen energy efficiency , in line with the National Energy Efficiency Plan by 
supporting equipment replacement and cogeneration in the industrial sector ;  promote sustainable livestock 
development; develop and implement sustainable agro -productive systems (agricu ltural and forestry), strengthen 
sustainable forest management; and support generation, exchange and dissemination of information to drive mitigation 
actions in the Industrial Processes sector.  
Climate change adaptation and mitigation have been addressed through national policies since 2009 via Executive 
Decree 1815, and through the Inter -institutional Committee on Climate Change established in 2010, via Executive 
Decree 495. Furthermore, Ecuador has adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a national policy 
through Executive Decree 371 from April 2018. Related to the energy sector, Ecuador’s 2008 Constitution explicitly 
states that the government will promote the use of clean and alternative energy sources, in addition to energy efficiency, w
hile providing access to public services, preserving the environment and maintaining food and water security. In terms 
of land use, the agricultural sector policy identifies various prioritized value chains: cocoa, coffee, dairy products, flowe rs 
and comme rcial forestry. The government has launched several programs and/or large projects focusing on 
strengthening these sectors that are further outline in the market study within Annex 2.  Ecuador has also developed a 
REDD+ Action Plan to guide the implementat ion of the country´s national REDD+ program, where supported measures 
include commercial reforestation as well as providing incentives to support the transition to sustainable production 
systems in non- forested areas.   
Additionally, the country is implementing the Amazon Integral Program for Forest Conservation and Sustainable 
Production, PROAmazonía, an initiative of the Ministry of Environment (MAE), the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock 
(MAG) and the United Nations Development Program (UND P), funded by GCF and GEF. This Program focuses on  
reduc ing emissions from deforestation, the growth of the agricultural and livestock frontier , strengthening mitigation and 
adaptation efforts, forest protection and the promotion of bioenterprises.  GCF co -financing provides  targeted investment 
to control agricultural expansion into forest areas; optimize existing financial, economic mechanisms to implement 
agricultural and livestock production practices that reduce deforestation; align land- use zoning plans with national 
climate change- related targets; strengthen restoration, conservation and sustainable production in vulnerable 
watersheds; redesign public credi t lines to orient them  towards sustainable agricultural production practices; promote 
tax incentives for REDD -supportive activities; and strengthen purchasing policies for deforestation- free commodities, 
their certification and traceability6. This way, the proposed Program strategically aligns and complements Ecuador’s 
actions to tackle climate change,  
Peru  
Peru´s INDC highlights the importance of promoting renewable energy sources, reducing deforestation and forest 
degradation, maximizing social and envi ronmental benefits of efficient and inclusive productive sectors and supporting 
sustainable natural resource management. Agriculture and forestry are priority areas for adaptation. Half of national 
emissions in Peru are attributed to LULUCF.7 By 2030, Peru aims to reduce GHG emissions by 30% below BAU levels 
(20% through domestic resources, 10% subject  to the availability of international financing and the existence of favorable 
conditions).  In this regard, 75 mitigation options distributed in the six emission sectors were presented. The Energy 
sector had the highest number of mitigation options, 25 (33.3%); followed by the LULUCF sectors (13; 17.3%) .8 
The National Strategy on Climate Change is the main instrument that guides the management of  climate change in 
Peru. It provides guidance on climate change for national, sectoral and regional development plans and projects, 
including REDD+. The national policy proposes measures for a more rational management of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions, bet ter management of forests for increased carbon sequestration, and distribution of knowledge and 
information about climate change, among other topics. In terms of energy, the country´s National Energy Policy for the 
period 2010 -2040 (Supreme Decree No 064 -2010-EM) sets the country’s energy policy objectives, including: relying on 
a diversified energy matrix, promoting energy from renewable energy sources and promoting energy efficiency and 
developing an energy sector with minimum impact on the environment, includin g a reducing the sector´s contribution to


---
*Page 9*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 73 
 
  
9 2010 data from Chile´s INDC  (2015): http://portal.mma.gob. cl/wp-content/doc/2014_1IBA_Chile_Espanol.pdf    
10 USD value from 2010  national GHG emissions. The National Strategy on Forests and Climate Change (ENBCC) (2016) promotes the 
reduction of deforestation and degradation and the conservation of 54 million hectares of primary forests as n ational 
priority. Since 2016, the Government is working on a National Law on Climate Change that aims to set clear emission 
mitigation and adaptation trajectories across sectors, as a response to the Paris Climate Agreement (2015). The National 
Forest Law (29763) was approved in 2011 and includes the creation of the National Forest Service (SERFOR). It aims 
to sustainably develop a competitive forest industry in natural forests and plantations while conserving forests and 
wildlife resources. Peru is a high priority country f or forest conservation and sustainable forest management for 
international donors, and many programs have been designed to address the high deforestation rates in different regions of the country (e.g. REDD+, FIP).  
Peru has been implementing consultation meetings with different sectors to define, update and define an implementation plan for the NDCs in Peru, as  
mandated by the Paris Agreement. The monitoring of this and the definition of the next 
cycles will be under the competence of the High-Level Commission on Climate Change, recently created.  
Chile  
Chile´s NDC notes that energy is the largest contributor to Chile´s GHG emissions (75% of emissions), followed by 
agriculture (15%).9 LULUCF is an important sector for GHG mitigation. Identifies energy, agriculture land use land use 
chang e and forestry as priority sectors for mitigation in Chile.  Chile aims to reduce GHG emissions by 30% (from 2007 
levels) by 2030 (35 -45% of these redu ctions are conditional international financial support).  Chile w as one of the first 
nations in Latin America to set long -range targets for adding clean generating capacity. This includes a clean energy 
mandate at 20% of generation by 2025.  
Chile´s National  Energy Agenda (2014) aims to reduce marginal costs of electric energy production by 30% by 2018, 
integrate 20% of non- conventional renewable energies in the energetic matrix by 2025, and reduce energy consumption 
20% by 2025. Chile has proposed to undertake Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) in different areas to 
reach an emissions level 20% below BAU by 2020 (as projected from 2007). While climate -finance in Chile has had a 
stronger focus on the energy sector, national policies recognize the importance o f climate change mitigation and 
adaptation measures within the land use sector. The Chilean Forestry Policy 2015- 2035 recognizes the importance of 
sustainable forest management and reforestation within the country.  Chile’s current goal with the Forestry Se ctor is to 
restore 100,000 hectares of degraded land with its own resources. The government has committed to invest an 
estimated USD $250 million, which would be for reforesting an area of at least 100,000 hectares of managed native 
forest by 2035. There i s further a strong enabling environment in place for commercial forestry investments. In terms of 
agriculture, the Government Program on Agriculture 2014 -2018 and other sectorial policies and initiatives includes 
measures to support climate change adaptati on and mitigation, recognizing the importance of the sector to mitigate 
GHG emissions. Chile does not  have suitable and competitive financing (proper tenor and interest rates) for small and 
medium size enterprises to implement sustainable energy or land us e projects. The financial market provides good 
option for large corporations. This Programme aims t o support LFI to incorporate specialized credit lines and measures 
to support SMEs to implement RE, EE and land-use projects.  
 
Project / Programme Objective against Baseline  
National Baselines  
The following table provides an overview of key indicators for each country including their gross domestic product ( GDP ), 
total primary energy supply, emissions from fuel combustion, energy intensity and carbon intensity.  
Table 1.  Key baseline indicators, by target country10 
Country  Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) 
(billion USD  $) Total Primary 
Energy Supply 
(million toe)  Emissions from 
fuel combustion 
(million tCO 2eq) Energy Intensity 
(TPES/GDP) (toe/ 
thousand USD  $) Carbon Intensity 
(CO 2/GDP)          
(kgCO 2/ USD  $) 
Panama  42.24  4.26 10.68  0.10 0.25 
Peru  186.21  24.61 49.15  0.13 0.26


---
*Page 10*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 73 
 
  
11 PIB 2015 at constant prices of 2007 = 70.3 billion USD (Central Bank of Ecuador; 
https://www.bce.fin.ec/index.php/boletines -de-prensa-archivo/item/909- la-econom%C3%ADa-ecuatoriana-creció -en-02-en-
el-2015)  Ecuador  86.6411 15.06 37.57  0.17 0.43 
Chile  263.13  36.11 81.68  0.14 0.31 
 Source: International Energy Agency (Data from 2015)  
 
Energy Efficiency Baselines  
Small to medium energy efficiency investments in target countries have average simple paybacks ranging from four 
years for boilers to six years for industrial refrigeration ( Figure 2). This is illustrative of the financial unattractiveness of 
energy efficiency to most SMEs since  businesses generally require payback  periods of two years or less.  
 
Figure 1. Estimated payback (years) of small to medium energy efficiency measures in target countries  
 
Source: Own analysis – assumptions included in Annex 3  
 
Distributed renewable energy baseline 
Distributed generation is often equally unattractive. For example, even in the target countries with the highest retail 
electricity costs (Panama), the return- on-investment for a 100kW distributed solar array i s still 6 years  (Figure 3).  
 
Figure 2. Average electricity cost per kWh v. ROI for a 100- kW distributed solar system in target countries  
 
Source: Own analysis – assumptions included in Annex 3


---
*Page 11*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 73 
 
  
12 Ministerio del Ambiente de Ecuador 2016  Land use baseline  
Agriculture, together with land use, land use change and forestry, is a major emitter of GHGs in all participating countries  
(Figure 4). In general , land use emissions represent a large share of total emissions in Latin America. On the one hand 
energy matr ixes include large renewable energy sources, while on the other hand land use change in the form of 
deforestation further plays a dominant role in the region. While each country experiences unique trends, drivers and 
underlying causes of deforestation, oft en the agricultural sector is often attributed to some degree of deforestation and/ 
or forest degradation. For example, in Ecuador, 99% of the forested area lost from 1990 -2008 was converted from forest 
to agricultural land use (incl. livestock).12 
The sha re of land use emissions within total country emissions varies however due to many factors. In Chile for example, 
the forestry sector is a carbon sink. This means that agricultural emissions are compensated by reductions in the forestry 
sector and the over all land use sector emissions are relatively low. The following figure gives an overview of land use 
emission shares in participating countries.  
 
Figure 5. Share of agriculture, land use, land use change and forestry in national CO 2 emissions, and share of 
agriculture in GDP  
 
 
The following table gives an overview of static land use sector emissions from the year 2015 as compared to annual 
land use GHG emission savings of the program, expressed in t CO 2eq. 
 
Table 2. Baseline Land Use emissions and emission reductions with the Programme (tCO 2eq) 
Country  Agriculture 
emissions  Land use 
emissions  Total annual 
baseline emissions  Annual emissions 
reduction with project  
(tCO 2eq) 
Panama   3,220,100  8,562,900  11,783,000  -168,900  
Peru  23,523,100  72,039,000  95,562,100  -21,113  
Ecuador  11,760,700  33,899,100  45,659,800  -142,643  
Chile  12,837,700  -105,087,000  -92,249,300  -339,042  
Source: FAOSTAT 2015, own calculations, a negative value indicates net emission savings  
 
Programme outcomes against baseline  
The overarching objective of the programme  is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in Latin America through locally 
financed and developed climate change projects. It will contribute to the following GCF results areas:  
 M1.0: Reduced emissions through increased low -emission energy access and power generation, and


---
*Page 12*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 73 
 
  M3.0: Reduced emissions from buildings, cities, industries and appliances  
 M4.0: Reduced emissions from land use, deforestation, forest degradation and through sustainable forest 
management, and conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.  
 
The Programme will help LFIs and beneficiaries /SMEs  overcome financial and marke t barriers to implementing climate 
change projects. The Programme is expected to finance nearly 1, 214 local climate change projects in the four target 
countries. The distribution by project type is reflective of different country baselines and opportunities as docum ented in 
detail in the Market Assessment (Annex 2). Energy efficiency projects are forecasted to account for 57 % of total projects, 
renewables 19%, and land use 24%. While land use accounts for a small share of anticipated projects, these projects 
are expected to account for 82 % of the total GHG emissions mitigated within the P rogramme because of the cost -
effective ness of th e sector  and supported investments . However, it is important to highlight that the objective of the 
Programme is to engage Banks in financing green climate change solutions , requiring align ment with  the demand and 
appetite from the banks whilst a lso finding a balanced distribution of funds  between energy efficiency, renewable energy 
and low -carbon land use projects . A good distribution of financing (for renewable energy, energy efficiency, and low -
carbon sustainable land use projects) allows banks  to reduce their risk perception when committing to build a green 
financing product and allocate the funding requested to the Programme in a reasonable period of time. The projects 
financed through the programme are expected to result in the mitigation of up to 10.70 million tCO 2eq over a period of 
20 years ( Figure 9). 
Figure 1. Climate change projects by target country and in total (left) and distribution of lifetime C O2 mitigated by project type (right)  
 
 
  
Distributed renewable energy projects are expected to generate 1,168 GWh total over the lifetime of the investments; 
conversely, energy efficiency projects are expected to save 1,270 GWh. Annually , this corresponds to generation of 
74.47 GWh/year and savings from energy efficiency projects of 12 6.98 GWh/year.  Figure 7 shows the annual impacts 
per country . 
Figure 2. Annual energy generated and saved through the programme, by target country (GWh)


---
*Page 13*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 73 
 
  
Beyond direct climate change mitigation benefits, the Programme will further generate diverse additional benefits. It will 
simultaneously increase land use sustainability and boost local economies. A conversion of 21,662 hectares (ha) of land 
area to sustainable uses is expected, with a value added of USD $17,304 million  in prod uction income over the projects’ 
lifetimes ( Figure 8). Further project -specific investments can also have biodiversity benefits,  reduce workplace hazards 
(such as the exposure to harmful agrochemicals ), and adaptation benefits, among others . 
 
Figure 3. Lifetime production income generated by sustainable land use projects (y -axis) and 
 land area converted to sustainable use (bubble size)  
 
 
Finally, the projects financed through the programme are expected to result in the mitigation of over 10,70 million tCO 2eq 
(Figure 9).  
 
Figure 4. Lifetime emissions (tCO 2eq) mitigated as a result of the programme 
 
 
Financial markets overview  
Commercial banks can offer credit to SMEs for green projects through conventional credit lines, however very few LFIs 
have dedicated and specialized green financial products that allow them to identify, evaluate and finance these projects 
in a suitable way ( Figure 10). There is a gro wing interest from LFIs to get involved in financing climate change projects, 
however there is a general lack of understanding by majority of LFIs on the market potential and characteristics of 
sustainable projects, resulting in the misalignment of credit evaluations and characteristics of financing provided. Only 
16% of 56 LFIs evaluated by CAF in the four participant countries have dedicated green financial products. A detailed 
market assessment for the target countries and sectors has been prepared to inform P rogramme design ( refer to Section 
2.3 of the Market Assessment within Annex 2 for detailed information).


---
*Page 14*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 73 
 
  
Figure 5. Number of LFI’s evaluated by CAF that do and do not offer Green Finance (total= 56) 
 
 
Number of LFIs currently offering financing for climate change projects  
The existing market for LFI -financed climate change projects in target countries is very small. Of the 9 LFIs evaluated 
that have dedicated green financial products , only two are specialized on land use while 7 focus on sustainable energy. 
Only 4 financial institutions offer green finance for both segments, sustainable energy and land use . For further details 
on market overview, please refer to Section 2 ‘Market assessment and baseline report’ of the Feasibility Study.  
 
Table 3: Number of LFIs offering green finance in target countries  
Country  Number of LFIs  Type of products (energy &/or land use)  
Panama  1 Both 
Ecuador  4 Both 
Peru  2 Both 
Chile  2 Both 
 
In this unfavourable context, the COVID -19 crisis has made the situation even more difficult. The participant countries 
have been impacted by the global outbreak and will need larger support for facing the economic downturn. In response, 
CAF has approved a USD 50 mm Emergency Loan to each of its country -members directed towards the health sector 
and a USD 2.500 million Emergency Credit Line which will allow authorities to contribute to the continuity of business 
operations and the recovery of their economie s. The GCF funding will come to provide further support and generate 
synergies through this programme, at a key time for fostering post -crisis low -carbon development.  
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages  plus diagram ) 
Challenges and Barriers for Investing in Climate -Change Mitigation Projects  
All participating countries have substantial energy and agricultural emissions . The forest sectors in three  out of the four 
countries, except for  Chile, contribute to GHG emissions as well. While there is a strong knowledge base d on proven 
and effective low -carbon technologies and practices for the target sectors, it remains a challenge to scale up and 
properly incentivize their adoption due to var ious barriers.   
One of the main barriers for investing in climate change mitigation technologies includes high upfront investment costs 
for low -GHG  technologies and practices , often  with unattractive payback periods. Practices with the highest mitigation 
potential in terms of emission savings are production systems that incorporate trees and sequester carbon in their 
woody biomass. At the same time, such systems take years (coffee an d cocoa) or decades (high value timber 
plantations) to reach full harvest potential and generate little cash flow in the meantime. Conventional credit products are not designed to service such investments. While barely “profitable enough” in the short term , inefficient land use 
systems such as cattle raising on degraded land, are not profitable in the long run and incentivize area expansion , often


---
*Page 15*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 73 
 
  
13 IFC 2014  
14 Goldman Sachs 2014  at the expense of forests . Sustainable intensification in the form of mitigation investments can reverse the tr end if 
financial risk s (high upfront cost, long paybacks) are overcome.  
On the finance supply side, LFIs often do not have the technical skills or the financial backing needed to evaluate, 
finance and monitor climate change projects. Projects are also per ceived by LFIs as being too risky, and thus many 
LFIs may not decide to develop green credit lines.  
On the demand side – SMEs and farmers (end users) often do not fully understand how projects benefit them, or how 
to identify appropriate projects. End user s often view new, climate friendly technologies as high risk. The high upfront 
costs of climate friendly solutions, and high cost of credit are common barriers to investments in climate friendly 
solutions.  
When projects are identified, end users typically  face high transaction costs and unattractive terms for project financing 
through larger commercial banks. Nonetheless, awareness of climate change issues and appropriate responses 
remains low among most market actors, as well as in the general population.  This limits people’s willingness and ability 
to adopt sustainable technologies and practices.  
Other barriers include the lack of knowledge about green land use investments at  the commercial LFI level, so that 
decision makers at LFIs are not in a position to create credit lines that service the above described project types. Apart 
from the perceived inherent risk, potential borrowers of climate loans also tend to have risk profiles that do not match 
LFIs’ lending appetite. A better understanding of land use SME profiles, improving  match making between LFIs and 
project developers, as well as supporting intermediation on a performance- based  level, can help overcome this gap. In 
addition, local sustainable development opportunities are not yet equal for men and women in the region. F inancial 
inclusion remains a challenge for many women globally, where there is a funding gap of $287 billion for financing SMEs 
owned by women.13 It has been further estimated that 70% of women- owned SMEs in developing countries have 
inadequate or no access to financial services.14 
The following table outlines how each barrier will be addressed by the proposed program, while figure 11 depicts the 
Programme’s theory of change.   
Additional challenges (such as financial needs, and needs for strengthening LFIs institutional capacity), ar e outlined 
in section D.4 Needs of recipient  below.  For further details on barriers related to women accessing funds, and how 
dedicated budget and activities have been assigned, please refer to Annex 8 - Gender Assessment and Action Plan.  
Table 4. Key market barriers to local climate project development and how the programme addresses them  
Market 
actor 
facing 
barrier  Barrier 
type Barrier  How barrier will be addressed by programme  
LFIs Financial  LFIs have insufficient suitable capital 
(interest and tenor) to finance climate 
change projects in SMEs.  • Activity  1.1 - Green finance credit line: Will 
increase the volume of financing available for 
local projects.  
TSPs, 
SMEs  Financial  TSPs/SMEs  currently face high 
interest rates and unattractive loan 
tenor and grace periods to finance 
their commercial activities  • Activity  1.1 - Green finance credit line: The 
credit line for LFIs will have more attractive terms 
than are available through larger commercial 
banks.  
TSPs, 
SMEs  Financial  TSPs/SMEs  do not have trusted 
relationships with mainstream 
commercial banks, or their projects 
are too small to be of interest to 
commercial banks  • Activity  1.1.1 - Green finance credit line : 
Dispersing climate project financing through LFIs 
takes advantage of their capillarity, through their 
local presence and knowledge of local markets.  
All Know -
ledge  Lack of  knowledge of the Programme 
and available financing as well as 
climate change, mitigation projects, 
targeted sectors and countries .  • Activity  2.1.1 - Climate change and 
mitigation awareness raising:  workshops for 
LFIs, and potential beneficiaries SMEs and TSP.  
All Know -
ledge  Local market actors - including TSPs , 
LFIs and SMEs  - do not have 
sufficient connections to get the help • Activity  2.2.1 – Matchmaking  between LFIs 
and TSPs : The programme will connect market 
actors to facilitate climate change projects. For 
example, the programme will connect SMEs  with


---
*Page 16*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 73 
 
 they need to develop climate change 
projects  specific technology needs with appropriate 
TSPs.  
TSPs, 
SMEs  Know -
ledge  There is a lack of trust from SMEs on 
how to negotiate and deal with green 
climate investments. This generate 
lack of trust. Contractual 
arrangements between TSP and SME 
are not very clear to reduce risks for 
investors.  • Activity  2.2.2 – Country opportunities for 
standardized performance -based contracts: 
The objective is to help to standardize 
contractual arrangements and payments to the 
provider according to the performance.  
LFIs Know -
ledge  LFIs do not have the tools or the 
knowledge to effectively evaluate the 
viability of climate change projects  • Activity  2.3.1.1 - Technical support for LFIs : 
Classroom and on- the-job training, and ongoing 
technical support for LFI personnel on project 
assessment and evaluation.  
LFIs Know -
ledge  LFI need to strengthen their internal 
environmental and social risk 
management systems and gender 
policies to reduce risk and drive 
corporate engagements and green 
lending  • Activity  2.3.1.2  –Strengthening 
Environmental and Social risk management 
systems and skills: Strengthens internal 
environmental and social risk management 
processes and gender policies and sets the 
framework at participating LFI level to manage 
sub-borrower/ end-user beneficiary risk  
LFIs Know -
ledge  LFIs do not have the tools or the 
knowledge to effectively  assess GHG 
baselines and MRV  Activity  2.3.1.3 – Technical support for GHG 
baseline definition and MRV  for LFIs : 
Development of MRV framework and training to 
strengthen skills among LFIs personnel.  
 TSPs, 
SMEs    Know -
ledge  TSPs and SMEs  do not have the tools 
or the knowledge to effectively identify 
climate change projects or understand their financial and non -financial 
benefits .  • Activity  2.3.2.1 - Technical Support for 
project development : trainings on mitigation 
projects, green business literacy for women- led 
SMEs , project pre- investment facility for SMEs.  
TSPs, 
SMEs  Know-
ledge  LFIs do not have the tools or the 
knowledge to effectively  assess GHG 
baselines and MRV  • Activity  2.3.2.2  – Technical support for GHG 
baseline definition and MRV for SMEs and 
TSPs : workshops on GHG baseline and MRV.  
All Know -
ledge  Actors need to access and manage 
information about the Programme in an effective manner.  • Activity  2.4.1 – Communication and 
visibility: communication and dissemination 
strategy, promotional material, programme website and information management platform, 
will allow to disseminate information on the 
Programme and have a platform for its general 
management.  
All Know -
ledge  Actors have insufficient information 
about the learnings that can be taken 
from the implementation of mitigation 
measures through intermediation.  • Activity 2.4.2 Lessons learned and 
stakeholders’ engagement activities : case 
studies, women- led SMEs succes s stories, 
learning workshops and targeted presentations 
for dissemination of lessons learned to key 
stakeholders will help to build alliances and 
exchange lessons learned.


---
*Page 17*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 73 
 
  
  
Figure 11: Theory of change


---
*Page 18*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 73 
 
  
15 Soanes and Shakya 2016  
16 The control will be implemented though contractual obligations. In the Credit Lines Agreements, the relevant clauses on 
this matter must be transferred to both: the LFI and the agreement with Beneficiaries/SMEs. In the Credit Lines Agreements 
there will be clauses that oblige Beneficiaries/SMEs and third parties to comply with such polici es. B.3. Projec t/programme description (max . 2000 words , approximately  4 pages ) 
Summary  
The proposed P rogramme supports national level GHG savings ambitions in all the target countries based on their 
NDCs under the Paris Agreement. All target countries have expressed interest in scaling up investment in energy 
efficiency, renewables and land use projects . All the NDCs expressed the need for additional international financial 
support to reach their GHG savings targets – as there are limited public resources to do so. This suggests a key role 
for the private sector in dispersing investments to help these countries meet the ambitions they set forth in their NDCs. 
This is particularly true of local climate change efforts, since national government spending tends to focus on larger -
scale, higher -visibility projects. Globally it is estimated that only 11% of climate change project funding has actually 
reached local populations within the period from 2003- 2015, emphasizing a major financial gap to support local 
populations to i nvest in low -carbon and climate -resilient measures.15 The proposed Programme thus aims to support 
LFIs to develop green credit lines and overcome existing barriers in order to improve access to finance for climate 
change projects in key sectors, primarily for SMEs in Latin America. The participant countries are Panama, Ecuador, 
Peru and Chile.  
Programme overview  
The Programme is designed to accelerate the development and volume of local climate change projects in Latin 
America by helping market actors overcome key financial and knowledge barriers (Figure 11). It targets projects in the 
energy and land use sectors with strong mitigation benefits, supporting countries to reduce emissions from two sectors 
that comprise a large share of their national GHG emissions.  
Using a combination of funding sources, including loans and grants, the Programme will conduct activities across two 
Programme components – (1) Financial, (2) Technical Support and Awareness Building – to boost local markets for 
climate change projects.  
Programme beneficiaries  
The beneficiaries of the refundable resources (Component 1) are SMEs and TSPs of the eligible productive sectors.  
The beneficiaries of non- refundable technical assistance resources (Component 2) are SMEs, TSPs and LFIs.  
i) LFIs – Local Financing Institutions : LFIs are the Local Financial Institutions that have been selected by 
CAF for the implementation of this Programme. Numerous eligible LFIs have already been identified in 
each target country ( Please refer to Annex es 2 and 3 for further details ). In principle, any LFI that meets 
the following criteria could be eligible for the green finance credit line:  
o Criteria 1: Sustainability and green finance goals  
o Criteria 2: Have in place an environmental and social risk management system  
o Criteria 3: LFI is a client of CAF.16 
ii) SMEs – Small and Medium Enterprises:  Categories of SMEs eligible for the Programme are summarized 
in the table below.  
 
Table 5. Eligibility of SMEs  
Criteria  Description   
Sales cap  Up to USD 100 MM  
Types of SME  Small and medium enterprises  producing goods and services in the eligible sectors.  
Sectors  Industry  - Agroindustry  
- Food processing and beverages  
- Textile, leather and shoe manufacturing 
- Furniture and wood sector  
- Cement and aggregates sector  
- Construction materials and finishing products  
- Paper and pulp


---
*Page 19*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 73 
 
 - Metallic and mechanical industry  
Services  - Hospitals and clinics  
- Hotels  
- Restaurants  
- Educational and sport centers  
- Cultural and entertaining facilities (cinemas, theatres, etc.)  
Commercial  - Big surfaces, supermarkets, department stores, malls  
- General commerce facilities  
- Office, residential and public buildings  
 
iii) TSPs - Technology Services Providers:  Eligible TSPs under the Programme are SMEs (sales cap up to 
100 MM USD). TSP and SM Es create a mutual beneficial arrangements or business linkage, such a 
mutually beneficial supply chain structure to penetrate new markets, increase market share or increas e 
profitability.  
TSPs for Energy investments are companies of the services sector whose core business is the 
development and/or the construction and/or operation of Renewable Energy plants or co- generation 
projects or energy efficiency projects .  
TSPs for Land Use investments  can be Anchor firms ( that facilitate and strengthen an enabling environment 
to penetrate new markets, expand market share, increase profitability ), cooperatives that  can provide sub-
loans to their members/constituents, and other TS Ps such as Social enterprises or other private and non-
governmental organizations with the potential to provide sub- loans and/or technical assistance (advisory 
services, trainings, etc.).  
 
TSPs shall demonstrate legal status/right to operate within the host/beneficiary country to undertake 
intended activities, demonstrate relevant experience in the sector or implementing project activities, have 
access to national, regional and international  markets. TSPs that act as intermediaries providing sub- loans 
to SMEs shall commit to transfer the concessional terms and conditions of the loan received from LFI to 
the final beneficiary.  
 
Please refer to Section 3.3 of the Feasibility Study for further description  of beneficiaries .  
 
Description of Programme Components  
Components, outputs and activities are structured as shown in the figure below.  
 
Figure 12. Summary of Components, outputs and activities of the Programme


---
*Page 20*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 73 
 
 Component 1 – Green finance credit line s for LFIs  
 
Activity 1.1.1: Green finance credit lines for LFIs  
 
Financing : Loans will be provided through Local Finance Institutions (LFIs) .  
Outputs  resulting from this activity  include:  
• Output 1 .1 Financially viable climate change mitigation projects are identif ied and financ ed.  
 
Deliver y: 
A climate finance credit line with adequate financial terms and conditions will be made available for LFIs from countries 
participating in the programme to finance local distributed renewable energy, energy efficiency, and land use climate 
change mitigation projects. Loans will be made available to SMEs  and TSPs  to improve or grow their businesses.   
Access to these credits will be enhanced by ensuring that the GCF concessionality is passed on to L FIs and 
beneficiaries, and with the support  provided by activities in Component 2.  
The use of loan proceeds by an eligible LFI will comply with a binding “Policy Statement” included in the loan agreement 
between CAF and the LFI. This will also contain GCF requirements. LFIs will on -lend funds to Beneficiaries/SMEs for 
investments in programs/projects defined in the eligibility  criteria.  
Each project will have CAF’s approval before their disbursement. See Section B.7 Implementation arrangements . The 
Draft OM (Operations Manual) submitted with this proposal provides further description on this procedure.  
Detailed project eligibility criter ia have  been established to define the scope of investment of the climate finance credit 
line and specific climate change and environmental, social, and economic co -benefits indicators.  
CAF, in coordination with LFIs, will promote the participation of women- owned SMEs  according to the objectives of the 
Gender Action Plan (GAP).  
 
Eligibility criteria  
 
i) Eligibility of projects  
Projects will need to comply with the eligibility criteria listed in Table 6 and Table 7 that provides an overview of the 
assessment and prioritization criteria that will be followed.  
 Table 6. Project eligibility criteria  
Eligibility 
Criteria  Energy  Land Use  
Exclusion List  Subproject activities are not included in CAF and Programme Exclusion List (Section 3.4.3) 
and ESMF (Annex 6)  
E&S Category  Category B and C  
Subprojects category A are excluded.  
Indicative 
Mitigation 
Technology  • Renewable Energy  
• Energy Efficiency  • Silviculture, production and 
conservation  
• Agriculture and livestock  
Financing 
thresholds  • Renewable Energy: USD 5k to 
USD 10 million  
• Energy Efficiency: USD 5k to 
USD 2 million  • All Land Use projects: up to USD 1 
million  
Minimum 
Objectives  Eligibility of  technology  based on 
minimum reductions  in Table 8.  10% reduction of water and fuel consumption 
plus 10% reduction of GHG emission.  
Other  • Documentation Check: E&S, 
stakeholder, farm management 
plan, etc .  • Documentation Check: E&S, 
stakeholder, farm management pl an, 
etc.


---
*Page 21*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 73 
 
 • The project should involve the 
deployment of proven EE and RE 
technologies.  
• The EE and RE technologies 
must be new (not second hand or 
reassembled systems).   
 
Table 7. Project assessment and prioritization criteria  
 
GCF Investment 
Criteria  Subproject Assessment and Prioritization Criteria  
 
Paradigm Shift  Innovation: innovative revenue model, financial structure, and/or blended finance instrument, 
with diversified products and mitigation potential.  
Catalytic effect: (i) be replicated in diversified markets, (ii) achieve environmental and social 
co-benefits.  
Long -term sustainability of the results  
Impact Potential  Reduction of Tons CO 2 Emissions  
Number of Beneficiaries  
Associativity Potential  
Sustainable 
Development  Number of jobs generated by the subproject  
Women led SMEs/TSPs prioritized  
Additional income or savings generated by the subproject  
Locally developed technology  
Diversification:  
• Energy: Combination of EE&ER Technologies  
• Land Use: Livelihood and productive diversification  
Environmental:  
• Land Use: Restoration of degraded lands and reduction of soil erosion  
Value -Added:  
• Land Use: Increased value- added potential in the agriculture and forestry chain 
(certifications, access to equipment, wood/timber of high quality).  
Access to Market  
Needs of the 
beneficiary  Rationale to overcome SME/TSP barriers and necessities  
Priority by country  Investments’ alignment with National Priorities (NDCs and National Communications), 
considering investments prioritized in Section 3.5 of the present Feasibility Study.  
Efficiency and 
effectiveness Financial Viability  
Cost Efficiency: Ton CO 2/ USD invested  
Equity Contribution from subproject proponents  
The Feasibility Study and the Draft OM submitted with this proposal include further detail on assessment and 
prioritization criteria  of investments , including country  priorities . The Final OM will include further precisions about 
priority measures and the tools for ensuring that these priorities are addressed by the Programme.  
 
ii) Eligibility of technologies  
Eligible criteria for Energy and Land Use investments are shown below in Tables 8 and 9.  
Section 3.3.1 of the Feasibility Study provides further detail on the eligible and excluded technologies.  
 
Table 8:  Eligible Energy technologies and minimum objective s (non -exhaustive)  
Energy  
Energy Efficiency  Renewable Energy Generation


---
*Page 22*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 73 
 
  
17 Solar water heaters can be considered as a Renewable Energy project or Energy Efficiency  depending on the application 
of the technology . High efficiency furnaces  
High efficiency motors  
High efficiency lighting  
Energy cogeneration  
Fuel replacement  
Improvements of boilers and steam systems  
Air conditioners  
Refrigeration  
Compressed air systems efficiency  
Automation and control systems  
Solar water heaters17 Micro hydropower plants  (less than 10MW).  
Small wind turbines  
Bioenergy projects  which include biogas and 
biomass for heating or electricity generation 
(waste to energy projects) (up to 5MW)  
Photovoltaic power generation  
Solar water heaters23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technology type  Minimum objectives  
Reduced energy 
consumption (%)  Reduced GHG 
emissions (%)  
Energy Cogeneration    10 10 
Fuel replacement    10 20 
High Efficiency Lighting    30 30 
Boilers and steam systems    10 10 
Air conditioners    20 20 
Refrigeration    15 15 
Water Heating with Solar Energy    50 50 
High efficiency furnaces    10 10 
Compressed air    10 10 
Photovoltaic solar energy    10 10 
Automation and process control    10 10 
Micro hydropower    N/A 100 
Small wind turbines    N/A 100 
 
Table 9:  Eligible Land Use technologies (non-exhaustive)  
Land Use  
Silviculture, production and conservation  Agriculture and livestock systems  
Forest conservation & avoided deforestation:  
• Management of uneven- aged areas 
dedicated to value- added timber 
productions under recognized forest 
certification schemes.  
• Conservation schemes.  Agrisilviculture:  
• Alley cropping & windbreaks  
• Multipurpose trees on crop lands  
• Plantation crop combination 
• Improved fallows and rotation fallows  
• Intensive farming with land sparing  
• Maintenance or renovation of old 
plantations  
Reforestation and afforestation:  Silvopastoral systems:  
• Trees in rangeland or pastures


---
*Page 23*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 73 
 
 • Sustainable management of even -aged 
stands for high- value timber production.  • Protein banks  
• Intensive silvopastural systems  
• Tree Alleys & pastures  
• Multipurpose woody hedgerows  
• Apiculture with trees  
• Aqua forestry  
Forest landscape restoration:  
• Innovative and multipurpose forest 
landscape restoration approaches and 
techniques that respond to the need for 
mitigating to climate change in highly 
vulnerable deforested and degraded rural 
lands.  Agriculture resource use and production 
efficiency:  
• Low-energy irrigation systems  
• Rice integrated crop management 
practices  
• Technological improvements in the 
agriculture value chain processes,  
 
Technical references are presented in Section D.6 and detailed in A ppendi x 2 of the Feasibility Study. The Programme 
will use validated technologies in the region. References of validated technologies, guidelines, and reference manuals 
for the Programme's investment decisions.  
 
Component 2.0 – Technical Support and Awareness building  
 
Financing: Activities  will be financed by a GCF grant of USD 4.765  million and a co -financing of USD 200,000 from 
CAF. This grant managed and monitored directly by CAF through the Programme Management Unit (PMU) (see 
Section B.7 Implementation arrangements ).  
 
Beneficiaries of this component are: LFIs receiving loans under Component 1, SMEs  and TASPs.  
 
The objective  of the component is to facilitate the implementation of the Programme by increasing knowledge on 
climate change, mitigation projects and the Programme, supporting enabling activities to facilitate the development of 
Projects, providing support to LFIs, SMEs and TSPs to strengthen their capacities,  as well as ensuring dissemination 
of lessons learned and general learning throughout the Programme.  
 
The specific objectives of the component are:  
- Raise awa reness on climate change, mitigation, and the operational aspects to access resources for the 
Programme.  
- Generate an enabling environment for development of mitigation projects by developing standardized contracts 
and matchmaking among TSPs and LFIs .  
- Strengthen capacities and provide technical support for IFIs, SMEs and TSPs for the identification and 
development of Projects, improve ESMS systems, ensure baseline development and adequate MRV of 
Projects .  
- Ensure dissemination and learning on the Programme.


---
*Page 24*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 73 
 
 Figure 13. Outputs and Activities of Component 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Subcomponent 2.1 Climate change and mitigation awareness raised  
Activity 2.1.1  Climate change and mitigation awareness raising  
The goal of this subcomponent is to increase knowledge of the Programme and available financing as well as climate 
change, mitigation projects, targeted sectors and countries of the Programme, highlighting the benefits of such 
projects and operational aspe cts important for accessing the financing. For the organization of the workshops, the 
following table provides further details to consider regarding participants to convene and the proposed content.  
 
Table 9: Potential participants and content of Climate C hange Mitigation Workshops  
 
Participants  LFIs with a current Credit Line with CAF and interested in disbursing funds for 
the Programme.  
SMEs who could be potential beneficiaries for EE, RE, Land Use mitigation projects  
TSPs and anchor companies, which could be potential allies for implementing 
the mitigation solutions and potential borrowers of credits.   
Contents   Climate Change impacts on the region, adaptation and mitigation 
technologies, vulnerability and gender differentiated impacts.  
 Climate change mitigation: potential of different mitigation interventions 
focused on energy and land use to reduce GHG emissions, benefits of 
these technologies  
 Concepts of renewable energy sources and cogeneration.  
 Concepts of energy efficiency and typical projects f or each SMEs sector 
and technology.  
 Climate variability and extreme weather, as well as unsustainable 
agricultural and land management practices can jeopardize productivity of 
business and enterprises.  
 Project eligibility and assessment for participating in the Programme 
(financial and technical guidelines).  Description of the eligibility criteria for 
EE, RE and land use.  
 Environmental and social considerations of the potential interventions to 
reduce GHG emissions


---
*Page 25*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 73 
 
  
18 Including contractual agreements with Anchor Companies for Agroforestry and Resource Efficiency sector.   Awareness raising and gender considerations on gender gaps, barriers 
and additional issues women face in energy efficiency, renewable energy 
and land use sector.  
 MRV of mitigation projects  
 Operation and characteristics of the Programme: including components, 
access mechanisms, available finance and requirements of the 
Programme t o participate  
 Once the Programme is operational, information will be shared on actual 
projects being implemented and benefits experienced by the beneficiaries.  
 
 
Subcomponent 2.2 Enabling environment for development of mitigation projects  
The goal of this output is to contribute to create a trusting relationship between the TSPs, the LFIs and the SMEs. 
One of the main barriers identified for these technologies is that mostly due to lack of knowledge, LFIs and SMEs 
perceive it as risky investments. Thus , the Programme will promote matchmaking between LFIs and TSPs, as well as 
the identification of opportunities in each country for the standardization of contracts, to facilitate the development of bankable projects interesting for LFIs.  
 
Activity 2.2.1 Matchmaking between LFIs and TSPs 
The goal of this activity is to achieve connections between market actors to facilitate project development. Potential 
TSPs often do not have established relationships with LFIs. The same is true of LFIs – they often do not know TSPs.  
Through this activity’s funds will be available to:  
1. Identify potential TSPs, which could be engaged in the Programme per LFI and country and develop a database.  
2. Work to connect them through direct outreach and the organization of  workshops and information 
sessions.  
 
Activity 2.2.2 Country opportunities for standardized performance -based contracts  
This activity will contribute to create standardized contract templates for different identified needs in each country. 
The goal is to contribute to facilitate contractual agreements between clients and providers
18, which will have a clear 
and transparent standard to negotiate investments in energy efficiency, renewable energy or low -carbon land use. 
Contractual agreements will aim to create trust and transparency (not to subsidize payments).  
 
The following products will be developed:  
1. Market assessment  (one per country) to analyze regulatory and pre- investment requirements for the identification 
of adequate legal contracts to reduce risks for the different actors involved in the EE, RE, and low -carbon land use 
mitigation projects. The main goal is to de termine for each country, the most suitable contribution of the Programme 
to support mitigation projects in terms of standardized contractual agreements. Thus, these studies will explore the 
legal aspects needed for promoting potential eligible investments  among key actors, the priorities in each country 
regarding structured contracts, and the alignment with country strategies in the same sector and projects. The studies must include a gender sensitive approach.  
2. Contractual standardized agreements:  considering country needs and alignment with the gaps and opportunities 
identified through the market assessment, standardized agreements will be proposed for each sector. These 
contracts will contribute to reduce risk and to improve trust in the implementation of these projects, clearly stating 
obligations and rights of all the parties involved.   
Examples of these contractual agreements are contracts in the form of transparent, payment arrangements that 
are structured to provide an incentive for TSPs and Anchor Companies, to distribute risk to appropriate actors, 
and/or to guarantee savings. This mechanism functions as a reward for TSPs that achieve or exceed climate results


---
*Page 26*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 73 
 
  
19 For example: warehouse receipt credit  pre-established in their loan contract with LFIs. See description of potential financing mechanisms in Section 3.4 
of the Feasibility Study.   
Examples of performance- based contracts include pay -per-use contracts, leasing contracts, and energy 
performance contracts ; as well as trader credit, off -taker agreements, advance purchase agreements, physical -
asset collaterization19, financial leasing, among others.  
 
The contractual standardized agreements will be a valuable tool for the development of projects and will be presented and explained in the different workshops in activity 2.1 and 2.3.  
 
Subcomponent 2.3 Technical support and capacity building for LFIs, SMEs and TSPs  
The main objective of the output is to strengthen LFIs, SMEs and TSPs capacities for the development of mitigation 
projects, and to comply with the ESMS, MRV requirements.  
 
2.3.1 Technical suppor t for LFIs  
The following activities are directed at LFI who have already disbursed funds with the Programme or have committed 
to disbursing funds with the Programme.  
 
Activity 2.3.1.1 Technical Support in Project Development and Assessment  
This activity will suppor t LFIs to strengthen capacities of Officials, Executives and personnel participating in the 
Programme to identify potential clients, assess the potential beneficiaries and projects against the eligibility criteria, 
and to identify potential bankable projec ts and financial mechanisms for the development of a mitigation portfolio in the 
targeted sectors.  To this end the PMU shall organize:  
1. Trainings on Project Assessment : The training will consist on two modalities:  
a. Classroom training: The PMU will hire consultants to provide classroom or face to face trainings for the 
LFIs during the first year of implementation to provide a detailed introduction of all the important 
aspects of Project Assessment and the different characteristics of the mitigation projec ts in each sector  
b. On-the-job training: the PMU will contract consultants to assist LFIs executives on the job to further 
develop capacities on Project assessment with practical cases in each LFI.  
 
The PMU shall ensure the trainings cover at least the cont ent included in table 20. 
Table 10: Proposed content for training on Project Assessment  
General content   Verification of technical feasibility as well as capabilities to deliver, report 
and/or monitor expected results, as per defined indicators.  To the greatest 
extent possible, standardized forms for different technology types will be 
developed to facilitate project assessment (to be developed in the full 
version of the OM).  
 LFIs will be trained on how to conduct and utilize market assessments, i
ncluding data collection and analysis, selection of target clients, 
preliminary eligibility and creditworthiness assessment of projects. This will strengthen the selection of creditworthy TSPs/SMEs and support the 
identification of eligible projects at an early stage.  
 LFIs will also receive training on gender and how to improve access to 
finance for women -owned SMEs, and to improve gender mainstreaming 
and monitoring.  
 In general, women participation will be promoted in all workshops, 
trainings and conferences.  
Energy  Energy sector: The training program will cover at least the following 
topics:


---
*Page 27*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 73 
 
 - State of the art in Climate Change science.  
- Presentation of Local Country level GHG inventory, NDCs and 
Mitigation Programs  
- Concepts of renewable energy sources and cogeneration.  
- Concepts of energy efficiency and typical projects for each SMEs 
sector and technology.  
- Training on CAF’s specific manuals  
- Concepts of quantif ying GHG emissions. Identification of activity data.  
- Generalities of Technical procedures for measuring the consumption 
of electricity and liquid, solid and gaseous fuels.  
- Analysis of the technical feasibility procedure of the OM Component 
2 
Low-carbon la nd 
use  Land use sector: The training program will cover at least the following 
topics:  
- General concept of LULUCF investments, its importance, socio -
economic benefits and potential to mitigate GHG  
- Examples of exit strategies and programs in LULUCF sector ( include 
lesson learned)  
- Available financial instruments to leverage LULUCF investments  
- Risk mitigation for carbon offset programs  
- Available low -carbon technology for land use projects, tendencies, 
strategic partners, etc.  
- National GHG inventories and the role of LULUCF sector in this 
context  
- Technologies and methodologies to estimate/calculate Carbon 
sequestration, Carbon stocks or quantification of GHG removals 
(desktop review and in- situ)  
- Silviculture and Agroforestry concepts, syste ms, sustainable 
management: practices, others.  
- Climate service tools, concept and strategies  
- Other technologies and platforms with potential to improve land use sector projects, for example: use of remote sensing, etc.
 
  
2. Technical Assistance to develop a pipeline of bankable projects . Support will be provided for LFIs to develop 
specific financing mechanisms to overcome current market barriers. The financing mechanisms would be 
tailored to each bank and could include energy savings insurance; and/or pay per use model for the energy sectors.   
 
Activity 2.3.1.2 Strengthening environmental and social risk management systems and skills  
The objective of this activity is to develop improved environmental and social risk management systems within LFIs 
engaged with the Programme; and strengthen their capacities on the field.  For interested LFIs, the Programme will 
provide the  following  technical support : 
- Gap analysis: to identify the current status and needs for improvement of LFIs’ current ESMS.  
- Provision of technical support (external consultancies, trainings) to LFIs to strengthen their ESMS systems to enhance their ability to invest in sustainable projects and ensure robust environmental and social management systems are in place.  This i
ncludes managing for gender benefits and reducing gender related risks (e.g. 
supporting development or strengthening of gender strategies, policies, and procedures), to ensure that both men 
and women benefit from projects financed by the LFI, promoting gender -responsive monitoring of investments, and 
ensuring that supported investments do not widen gender gaps or produce adverse impacts.  
- Independent audits: to assess the adequate implementation of ESMS .


---
*Page 28*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 73 
 
  
20 For land -use investments   
The PMU will ensure proper coordination and implementation of lessons learned from the Environmental and Social 
Management Program for Financial Institutions (PGASIFs), a platform implemented by CAF to promote and enhance the management of environmental and social impacts in the financial sector of the Lati n-American region, while also 
transferring knowledge and promoting good practices in environmental and social and Governance (ESG) to strengthen 
the adoption of ESG principles in LFIs. The PMU will work closely to the Programme to ensure synergies and that  
appropriate and robust procedures and safeguards are in place for implementing climate change projects in the energy 
and land use sectors.  
 Activity 2.3.1.3 Technical support for GHG baseline definition and MRV  
To support LFIs in the estimation of GHG ba seline and the implementation of the MRV, the PMU will contract a 
consultant to further develop the monitoring and reporting framework and methodology, to facilitate the monitoring and 
aggregation of climate results.  Then, the PMU will organize trainings t o strengthen skills among LFIs personnel on the 
monitoring and reporting framework. The following content  shall be  included in the workshops .  
 
Table 11: Proposed content of GHG baseline and MRV  
Content  Training on CAF’s specific framework.  
Concepts of quantifying GHG emissions. Identification of activity data.  
Generalities of Technical procedures for measuring the consumption of 
electricity and liquid, solid and gaseous fuels.  
Analysis of the technical feasibility procedure of the OM Compone nt 2. 
LFIs should identify SMEs who could request this technical assistance 
and provide information on the facility.  
MRV Complexity of methods for measurement, reporting and 
verification, and capacity barriers in implementing these methods.  
Analysis and training in reporting and MRV procedures specific for the Programme.  
Energy and land use indicators of the program: description on how LFIs 
will consolidate the projects reports.  
Remote sensing, GIS database and platforms to support MRV.  
 
Ongoing support by the PMU and CAF experts will be available throughout the implementation to ensure 
understanding of the methodology .  
 
2.3.2 Technical support for SMEs /TSPs  
The goal of this output is to strengthen capacities and provide technical suppor t to SMEs and TSPs for an effective 
project development and implementation of mitigation projects.  
 
Activity 2.3.2.1 Technical support for project development  
 
This activity aims at training potential SMEs and TSPs beneficiaries of the Programme with the skills and project pre-
investment facilities to better understand and be able to develop mitigation projects in the targeted sectors.  
To this end, the PMU is responsible of setting up the following activities:  
1. Training on mitigation projects  how to str ucture bankable projects, ESMS, standardize contracts and operational 
aspects of the Programme. At least 2 training per country in year 1, 2 and 3 shall be organized directed at SMEs, 
TSPs and Anchor Companies20. The following content is presented at each workshop : 
Table 12: Proposed content for training on Mitigation Projects  
 
Content of the 
training  - Beneficiaries/SMEs (including TSPs) on how to structure 
bankable projects and present them to LFIs for financing. To the 
extent possible, standardized formats for different technology 
types will be prepared to facilitate the presentation of the


---
*Page 29*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 73 
 
 projects (t emplates to be developed in the full version of the 
OM).  
- Local legal framework for energy trading 
- Barrier analysis of the program activities and contract solutions  
- Description, benefits and examples of Pay per use or power 
purchase agreement models  
- Descri ption, benefits and examples of Energy Savings 
Insurance model  
- Description, benefits and examples of other potential types of agreements  
- Potential Environmental and Social risks of the technologies, mitigation plans  
- Awareness raising and gender considerati ons on gender gaps, 
barriers and additional issues women face in energy efficiency, renewable energy and land use sector.  
- low-carbon technology (remote sensing, GIS database and 
platforms).  
- General: Improve access to information, for example, access to 
weather information and early warning systems would enable 
farmers to take better and informed decisions.  
- Risk reduction: Diversification options in agriculture and forestry 
productions systems and income access (short, medium - and 
long- term investments). T hrough integrated crop management 
and agroforestry practices, SME have more and better options 
to obtain revenue and incomes through the harvest of using 
annual and perennial crops, livestock, and forest plantations.  
- Improve resource management, efficienc y in the use of inputs 
and natural resources.  
- TSP: Knowledge: knowledge about green land use investments and available low -carbon technology  
- Available technological package for improving the design and monitoring of Land Use investments. Good management practices for silviculture and agroforestry sector.  
- Reducing carbon footprint in agro -process value chain and 
forest products and by -products . 
 
2. Training on green business literacy for women- led SMEs  
The goal of this activity is to foster participation of women -led SMEs in the Programme, in line with the Gender Action 
Plan. To this end, workshops on green business literacy  will be  directed at  women- led SMEs in the energy and land 
use sector together with women’s organizations and LFIs in participating countries.  
To this end, the PMU shall procure the required consultancy services to organize 1 training per country in year 1, 2 and 3 and ensure a widespread communication strategy to ensure participation of the targeted beneficiaries.  
 
3. Project pre -investment facility (only for SMEs):   
Only SMEs, potential borrowers of LFIs participating in the Programme can be eligible for this facility. The faci lity will 
support the performance of audits and technical feasibility studies at beneficiary sites for the identification of project development opportunities for EE, RE or low -carbon land use mitigation projects. Support for financial evaluation and 
financial aspects of projects can also be eligible.  SMEs will request this support to the PMU through a participant LFI. 
Procedures are described in the Draft OM.  
 Financing:  up to 5.000 USD per feasibility per SME will be available on a rolling basis until re sources are finished.


---
*Page 30*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 73 
 
 Destination of resources:  
SMEs  will be able to request the use of resources for the following destination:  
i. Final design of climate change mitigation projects.  
ii. Audits at project site for project development.  
iii. Environmental Assessments.  
iv. Financial evaluations.  
v. Consulting or support for the final design of a business plan to obtain financing.  
vi. Other advisory activities or prior studies required by SMEs for the viable and effective 
implementation of climate change m itigation investments for subsequent financing.  
 
Activity 2.3.2. 2 Technical support for GHG baseline definition and MRV  
 
The goal of this activity is to train potential beneficiaries and SMEs and TSPs who have already been allocated credits 
through the Programme in the adequate GHG baseline definition and the MRV framework of the Programme, to 
guarantee and effective monitoring and reporting.  The proposed contents of the workshops are described below .  
. 
Table 13: Proposed content on GHG baseline and MRV for SMEs and TSPs workshops  
Content  Training on CAF’s specific framework.  
Concepts of quantifying GHG emissions. Identification of activity data.  
Generalities of Technical procedures for measuring the consumption of 
electricity and liquid, solid and gaseous fuels.  
Analysis of the technical feasibility procedure of the OM Component 2.  
Energy and land use indicators of the program.  
MRV Complexity of methods for measurement, reporting and 
verification, and capacity barriers in implementing these methods.  
Analysis and training in reporting and MRV procedures specific for the 
Programme.  
Description and how SMEs/TSPs shall report to LFIs. Use of standardized information platform.  
Remote sensing, GIS database and platform s to support MRV.  
 Additionally, the PMU shall procure the required services to develop educational material to support the training on 
GHG baseline and MRV.  make available through the website of the Programme on practical “how -to” videos along 
with webinars to support SMEs  and TSPs in the definition of GHG baselines and the adequate MRV of the project.  
 
Subcomponent 2.4 Dissemination and learning reinforced  
 
The goal of this output  is to ensure a wide dissemination of the Programme in the targeted countries and among the 
key stakeholders as well as Programme beneficiaries; and to ensure learning, including sharing of lessons learned and 
best practices among key stakeholders.  
 
Activi ty 2.4.1 Communication and visibility  
- Communication and Dissemination Strategy: The Programme will develop and implement a communication 
and dissemination strategy that includes measures to engage women, women’s organizations and women-owned SMEs  
 
- Developm ent of promotional material  of the Programme: include webinars, explainer videos, story -telling 
videos, communication material, and publications, two- pagers, among others.  
 
- Programme Website: Develop of a Programme website to share information on the Programme and on 
mitigation projects in the targeted sectors.


---
*Page 31*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 73 
 
 - Information Management Platform , which will allow to disseminate information on the Programme, and will 
work as a platform for the general management of data and information on project eligibil ity, monitoring and 
reporting of LFIs and beneficiaries.  
 
Activity 2.4.2 Lessons learned and stakeholders’ engagement activities  
- Case studies: Identifying throughout the project at least 3 case studies with lessons learned in each of the 
sector: EE, RE, Land Use. Selected successful projects in the different countries will be selected and identified by the PMU to learn what made them succeed, w hat were the main benefits of the project and lessons learned 
to be later on shared in the Program website, presentations, among other formats. In the selection of the stories 
both men -led as well as women -led SMEs projects must be included, and when inter
viewing project 
beneficiaries,  it must be guaranteed the voice of women and men are equally included.  
 
- Women- led SMEs success stories: Develop a case study of inclusive finance in mitigation projects identifying 
women led- SMEs which were allocated a credit  for the first time for mitigation technologies: EE, ER and land 
use projects.  
 
- Learning workshops : 2 workshops will be conducted during the lifetime of the Project: one in the mid- term of 
the Project implementation and another in year 5. The goal of the workshop will be to present lessons learned 
with relevant stakeholders, including government, other organizations working in mitigation projects, and 
beneficiaries.  
 
- Targeted Presentations for dissemination of lessons learned to key stakeholders :  
During y ear 2 and year 4, the PMU will organize targeted presentations in each country. The PMU will 
consolidate and build alliances with key stakeholders (e.g., government sector, trade or commercial 
associations ). The  information sessions will consist of bilater al meetings between the PMU and country 
executives of the Private Sector Vice- Presidency of CAF with the following stakeholders:  
 
I. Government institutions : NDAs and relevant government institutions in each country related 
to the targeted sectors .  
 
II. Industrial/sectorial association of SMEs , which could be interested in mitigation credit lines .  
 
III. TSPs: potential TSPs in the countries and TSPs, which have already been allocated credit to 
the project will be convened for targeted presentations.  
: 
Programme Management  
 
A Programme Management Unit (PMU) will be established and will have a dedicated team to guarantee all components 
and activities are carried out according to the Programme design, to ensure that all expected results will be achieved on time and within budget. This unit will have at least five full-time positions including a Programme Coordinator, an 
Energy Specialist, a Land Use Specialist, an  Environmental , Social and Gender  Specialist, and a Capacity Building 
Officer. Support for adm inistrative functions will as well be hired.  Thes e specialists w ill work within the existing CAF’s 
structure and
 will articulate with the monitoring and evaluation specialist (covered by CA F as Accredited Entity). 
Commercial officers that are already part of CAF for the management of intermediated programmes will be assigned 
for this Programme. The composition and functions of the PMU are largely described in Section C.7 Implementation 
Arrangements.  Please refer to Section H.2 for a description of the M&E activities to be performed by CAF as Accredited 
Entity.   
The programme activities described above are designed to produce outputs (Figure 13) leading to core GCF outcomes 
and expected results  (Figure 14). These outputs include :  
• Output 1 .1. Financially viable local climate change projects are identified and financed.  
• Output 2.1.  Climate change and mitigation awareness raised  
• Output 2 .2. Enabling environment activities for development of mitigation projects  
• Output 2.3. Technical support and capacities built for LFIs, SMEs and TSPs  
• Output 2.4. Dissemination and learning reinforced.


---
*Page 32*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 73 
 
  
 
Figure 14 Programme inputs, activities and outputs  
 
 
  
Local distributed renewable energy, energy efficiency, and land use climate change projects conducted because of the 
programme will lead to the fo llowing outcomes and GCF level expected results  (Figure 15 ): 
• Increased amounts of low -emission power generation (Outcome 1)  and thereby reduced emissions through 
increased low -emission energy access and power generation (Expected Result 1), 
• Lower energy intensity of enterprises and energy using equipment (Outcome 2)  and thus reduced emissions 
from buildings, cities, industries and appliances  (Expected  Result 2), and;  
• Improved management of land or forest areas contributing to emissions reductions (Outcome 3) , leading to 
reduced emissions from land use, reforestation, reduced deforestation, and through sustainable forest 
management and conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks (Expected  Result 3).


---
*Page 33*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 73 
 
  
Figure 15 Programme outcomes and expected results  
   
 
 
Description of financial elements of the programme  
The programme aims to support local financial institutions (LFIs) in four countries  in Latin America to develop green 
credit lines to invest in renewable energy, energy efficiency and land- use projects, mainly targeting small and medium 
enterprises (SMEs). The programme will have a total volume of USD $ 150.2 million.  This includes USD $95 million 
from GC F reimbursable funding, USD $ 50 million in senior loans from CAF , USD $ 4.765 million  in grants  from the GCF 
for technical assistance, USD $0.2 35 million in grants for Programme Management and a USD $0.2 million grant from 
CAF (see Table B1.1).  
The programme is designed to support LFIs to develop their green credit lines by providing suitable financing and 
technical assistance. Technical assistance is required to develop LFIs´ capacities to invest in green projects, in 
particul ar in renewable energy, energy efficiency and land use. Such assistance will support them to strengthen their 
capacities and ability to identify ´ green ´ business opportunities, mitigate associated risks, and build synergetic 
commercial relationships betwee n key stakeh olders ( TSPs, and LFIs, among others).  
LFIs that receive reimbursable funding (senior loans) from the programme (USD $95 million from GCF and USD $50 
million from CAF) are well positioned to disburse these funds to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) to invest in 
renewable energy, energy efficiency and  sustainable land use practices . 
GCF grant funding will be managed and executed by CAF to support the implementation and monitoring of the proposed lending activities. The programme´s grant activity (USD $5 million from GCF and USD $0.2 million from CAF) will be 
used to provide technical assistance for at least 11 participating LFIs to strengthen their capacities, standardise 
processes, strengthen environmental and social management syst ems (ESMS), bridge information asymmetries, 
generate an initial pipeline of bankable projects, and support the dissemination of successful green financing cases and best practices.


---
*Page 34*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 73 
 
  
 
Table 14: Indicative Programme cost by main Activity and type of funding (million USD $)  
Main component  Funding 
type GCF 
Funding  Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient  Co-Financing-  
CAF Total for 
entire project  
1. Green finance credit line for LFIs  Loan  95 million USD 
dollars ($)  50 145 
2. Technical Support and 
Awareness Building  Grant  4.774 million USD 
dollars ($)  0.191 4.965 
Programme Management  costs  Grant  0.226 million USD 
dollars ($)  0.009  0.235 
Total program cost  - 100 million USD 
dollars ($)  50.2 150.2 
 
Barriers  
Key barriers that currently inhibit investments in small scale renewable energy, energy efficiency and land use sector -
related climate change mitigation projects include: i) high and undifferentiated interest rates, ii) unsuitable lo an tenors, 
iii) lack of access to suitable finance for many SMEs, iv) lack of visibility of LFIs, and v) limited knowledge of the benefi ts 
of such climate change projects. The programme has been designed to address these barriers and to strengthen lending 
for sustainable projects with climate change benefits in Latin America. A more detailed description on how the 
programme will overcome these barriers is outlined in Section B2, Barriers . Country -specific barriers will be further 
addressed through the technical assistance activiti es, which will include targeted support to develop financial 
mechanisms and/ or tailored business models to overcome such country - and sector -specific b arriers.  
 
Use of loan proceeds  
Loan proceeds will finance local energy efficiency, distributed renewable energy, and land use climate change projects. The sustainable technologies expected to be deployed are relatively consistent across the four target countries  while  
land use project t ypes considerably vary. Anticipated project types are described further below, along with project 
eligibility criteria. See section D.6. Technical  Evaluation for more details on project types.   
 
Regulation, Taxation,  and Insurance  
Between CAF and the LFIs, there is not a need to obtain any additional licenses or permits to carry out the proposed 
activities in this Programme. LFIs and recipients will comply with relevant regulations in each target country including, but not limited t o, the banks superintendence and environmental regulations. The interest rate that will be returned to 
the GCF  are free of withholding tax on interest.  CAF enjoys pr eferred creditor status in its shareholder countries.  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500  words , approximately  3 pages  plus diagrams ) 
The anticipated legal arrangements between the GCF, CAF, LFIs, and beneficiaries include (Figure 17): 
• CAF and GCF will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA)  for the programme in the framework of the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) entered between CAF and the GCF in November 2016 and effective 
since the 19th of March 2018. The FAA will outline the sectorial, technological, and geographical scope (the 
“Mandate”) of the proposed CAF/GCF programme.  
• GCF proceeds will be held in a Trust Fund.  
• CAF will enter into loan agreements or amend existing loan agreements with each of the individual LFIs 
participating in the programme. It will be a requirement in the eligibility criteria and credit rules that refinancing 
is not allowed.  These loan agreements will make available CAF financing and GCF co -financing for investments 
consistent with the Mandate of the programme. During programme implementation, CAF will be responsible 
for providing governance, oversight , and quality assurance in accordance with its policies, procedures, and 
with the FAA and AMA. CAF as per the loan agreement will have the ability to reject a sub- loan.  
• CAF will follow appropriate commercial practices and procedures for LFIs in all operations financed with GCF 
resources. In the provision of financing, CAF will perform a due diligence of the LFIs and carefully assess their ability to meet their obligations under the loan agreement. The LFI ‘s selected for the programme have been 
through a pre -assessment screening, based on the criteria included in Annex 2,  and in most case s have pre-
established financial relation s with CAF. An updated and robust due diligence will be in place before CAF


---
*Page 35*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 73 
 
 approves each LFI under this Programm e, where each due diligence will be presented to the CAF investment 
committee for review.  
• LFIs will disburse GCF and CAF loans to beneficiaries  (SMEs , TSPs)  consistent with the mandate of the 
Programme. As part of the Programme, CAF teams will provide technical assistance and capacity building to 
help LFIs conduct marketing activities, develop internal procedures to evaluate eligible technologies and/or 
projects, check compliance with the mandate and put in place monitoring systems. CAF will report to the GCF 
based on with the conditions established in the FAA and AMA.   PMU will review and assess subprojects 
eligibility.  In addition, contractual obligations will be stablished for both: the LFI and the agreement with 
Beneficiaries/SMEs .  
• CAF will enter into an agreement with each LFI. Conditions between CAF and the LFI’s will be set out in the loan contract. Conditions between SMEs and the LFI will also be set out in the loan contracts in line with the 
GCF’s regulations.  
• CAF will contractually ensure that the conditions required by GCF are transferred to the Credit Line Agreements (thought amendment to those already executed). CAF may reject a sub -
loan that does not comply with 
programme eligibility criteria.  
• No project m ay be financed with GCF’s resources if it does not meet the conditions required by the GCF 
according to the FAA.  
       •    The programme will focus on SMEs. CAF will include medium companies that sell up to USD 100 MM.  
 
Figure 14: Fund s flow chart  
   
 
CAF will enter into an agreement with each LFI. Conditions between CAF and the LFI’s will be set out in the loan 
contract. Conditions between SMEs and the LFI will also be set out in the loan contracts in line with the GCF’ s 
regulations.  
LFIs agreements will contain AML/ CFT clauses that will  be transferred to the LFI's Beneficiaries/SMEs  (throu gh the 
loan agreements between the LFI and the Beneficiary/SME).  
 
Evaluation and due diligence of participating LFIs:  
The Responsible Executive, assisted by the team, is responsible for the evaluation of the LFIs.  The team must:  
• Identify the main risk factors of the operation and the client and determine their possible mitigators.


---
*Page 36*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 73 
 
 • Analyze the technical, institutional, market, financial, economic, environmental and social aspects, anti -money 
laundering, among others, of the operation and the client, in an exhaustive way to determine its viability.  
• In the case of non- sovereign risk operations, in addition to evaluating the client's ability to fulfill his contractual 
obligations, paying special attention to the economic -financial situation of the client, his payment experience 
and the macro- sector environment, as well as to other specific factors of the operation.  
The Responsible Executive will collect information about the operation and the client, ensuring that  it allows to know 
the real situation of the client and their perspectives. To the extent possible, the Responsible Executive will contrast or 
complement the information it receives from the client with external sources.  
The team will complete the credit e valuation document  included in annex 9. The evaluation is performed annually.  On 
a quarterly basis, selected financial indicators are reviewed  to identify financial deterioration.  CAF’s credit evaluation 
document of operations with financial institutions is included in Annex  9.  
Repayment:  
Loans will be repaid by the Beneficiaries/SMEs  to the LFIs, back to CAF and the GCF. The schedule of rep ayments is 
outlined in annex 3.  
 
Information on Project / Programme Sponsor ( Accredited Entity)  
CAF is a multilateral development bank created in 1970, and owned by 19 countries, 17 of which are  in Latin America, 
and the Caribbean, Spain and Portugal, as well as 13 private banks in the region. CAF  promotes a sustainable 
development model through credit operations, non -reimbursable resources, and support in the technical and financial 
structuring of projects in the public and private sectors of Latin America.  
With headquarters in Caracas, Venezuela, CAF has offices in Buenos Aires, La Paz, Brasilia, Bogota, Quito, Madrid, 
Mexico D.F,  Panama City, Asuncion, Lima, Montevideo and Port of Spain.  CAF’s mission is to provide sustainable 
development and regional integration through an efficient mobilization of resources for a timely provision of multiple financial services, with high value added, to clients in the public and private sectors of the shareholder countries. CAF is a competitive financial institution, client -oriented, sensitive to the social needs, and supported by a highly specialized 
staff. 
During 201 8, CAF's total  assets  reached  USD $ 40 billion, an increase of 5.3% compared with USD $38  billion reached 
in 2017 . At the end of 2018 , the Institution's  net worth reached USD $11. 9 billion, 7.2% over the amount registered the 
previous year, strengthened by the capital contributions made by the shareholder countries and by retained earnings.  At 
the end of 2018 , the total loan and investment portfolio reached USD $2 5.1 billion, more than 150 operations were 
approved for a total of USD $1 3.6 billion.  
CAF’s credit ratings are among the highest of Latin American debt issuers. CAF’s long -term credit rating is AA - (Fitch 
Ratings), AA - Standard & Poor’s, AA Japan Credit Rating Agency, and Aa3 Moody’s Investor Service.  CAF’s 
partnership s with public and private sector organizations have allowed it to play an active role in the promotion of 
projects and programmes that generate environmental benefits and to address climate change impacts. Over 28% of CAF portfolio includes green finance. Such projects have focused on energy efficiency, renewable energy solutions, 
sustainable transport and climate change adaptation through disaster risk reduction and ecosystem services. CAF is 
part of the International Development Finance Club (IDFC) through which, its member has  adopted green finance 
commitments. CAF has an aspirational target to reach 30% of its portfolio for green finance.  
CAF is a Regional Direct Access accredited entity to the GCF.  
 
Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver   
A strategic work area of CAF is to support the financial systems of its member countries at three levels (i) regulations, barriers and attracting investments; (ii) coordination at the level of the financial industry; and (iii ) financing and advisory 
at the level of financial institutions. These interventions include a wide range of activities, from regulatory change 
recommendations to create innovative financial products to providing finance directed to underserved sectors.  
 
In 1997, a vice- presidency for Financial Institutions was created with a portfolio of USD $1.2 billion of financial 
intermediation, representing 39% of the Bank loan portfolio. Through its successful track record, CAF has developed 
in-depth knowledge of the financial systems of its member countries, which enabled the establishment of business 
relationships  with key public and private financial institutions in the region.  
CAF currently offers its clients from the financial sector financing facilities tailored to its specific needs and to the relevant regulations . In 201 9, financing facilities for a total of USD $6.4 billion were approved for financial institutions 
in CAF member countries.


---
*Page 37*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 73 
 
  
21 More information on PGASIF can be found: www.pgasif.org/   
Moreover, since 2012, CAF has consolidated its Programme for Environmental and Social Management  for Financial 
Institutions (PGASIF)21, as a platform to promote and enhance the management of environmental and social impacts 
in the financial sector of Latin- America, as well as to transfer knowledge and good practice in environmental and social 
and Governance (ESG) for the adoption of ESG principles in LFIs. To date, 120 LFIs and mor e than 3, 000 people from 
15 countries of the r egion have received training supported by CAF on environmental and social safeguards, and green 
finance, including the publication of technical publications and guidebooks. In total, 10 client LFIs have received tailored 
support for the adoption and enhancement of Environmental and S ocial Management Systems and the development 
of green financing products in their portfolio.  
 
With regards to its experience with Energy projects , CAF has developed a Programme for Green Business and Energy 
Efficiency (PNVEE) to stimulate the expansion of  green credit lines to its LFIs clients. The programme includes technical 
tools to support LFIs in understanding opportunities in green business and EE. Through the PNVEE CAF will provide 
USD $95 million in co -financing for the Green Climate Fi nancing Facility for LFIs in Latin- America.  
The CAF -GCF Green Climate Financing Facility for LFIs in Latin- America seeks to build upon and scale up, CAF 
experience and relationship with client LFIs to accelerate the development and volume of local climate change projects 
in Latin America by helping market actors overcome key financial and knowledge barriers. This will help trigger a 
transition in the financial sector towards sustainable financing with positive climate change impacts.  
CAF has extensive expertise supporting the formulation and implementing of Land Use projects and programs . In 
terms of internal capacity to assess sustainable land use projects, CAF has a Vice -presidency of Sustainable 
Development with the purpose of promote and implement a regional agenda for sustainable and inclusive development 
in the region, by promoting growth that preserves biodiversity and is low in emissions and resilient to climate change, 
and which in turn facilitates access for the population to basic quality services  in the sectors and / or thematic areas of 
water and sanitation, urban development, education, health, biodiversity.  
This department is composed by four divisions, including Sustainability, Inclusion and Climate Change Division 
composed by 71 employees. U nder this division there are three units: Environment and Climate Change, Green 
Business and Inclusion and Gender Equity Unit. As part of the team there is 1 executive specialized in land use projects 
formulation and implementation. Further information on these resources is presented in Section 3.6 of the Feasibility 
Study.  
In addition, the programme will have a Programme Management Unit (PMU) that will include a Land Use Specialist who will be in charge to support the programme implementation including the projects’ assessment, supervision and 
monitoring and evaluation activ ities for this sector. Additionally, as part of the Technical Assistance Component it is 
included agreements with specialized organizations to conduct the monitoring and reporting activities for projects above 
1 million USD to ensure that produce the intended emissions reductions.  
CAF’s track record in Sustainable Land Use across Latin America is described in Section 3.6 of the Feasibility Study. 
It includes description on work performed with Forest Management, CDM projects for the generation of tCER of forestry activities, evaluation of the Eco Efficiency of the Forest Industry, Development of REDD+ projects in forests and private 
protected areas of Latin America, Agro -master plan, and other projects in the agriculture and agroforestry sector. In 
this same  Section of the Feasibility Study, two cases of partnerships with different LFIs are described.  
CAF has strategic partnerships in Sustainable Land Use with many organisations, such as:  
- Instituto Interamericano de Cooperación para la Agricultura (IICA)  
- International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT by its acronym in Spanish)  
- Tropical Agricultural Research and Higher Education Center (CATIE by its acronym in Spanish)  
- Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
- Korean Forest Service  
- Agence Française de Développement (AFD)  
CAF will seek the support of a Strategic Alliance for the optimal implementation and monitoring of the Programme.  
 
CAF’s functions as Accredited Entity and Executing Entity  
 
CAF will hold the roles of both Accredited and Executing Entity of the Programme, based on its experience of 
successfully carrying out similar programme activities involving financial intermediation, in the Latin American region.  
The existence of a central unit, within CAF’s sphere, will allow to guarantee compliance with technical standards and a 
close monitoring and follow -up by CAF to ensure consistent levels of progress in a unified manner across all four


---
*Page 38*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 73 
 
  
22 *Beneficiary:  Small and medium enterprises, the industrial and corporate sector, farmers, technology 
suppliers, producers, vendor s and installers  countries as well as a regular flow of informat ion where progress of activities can be contrasted against the plan. This 
allows taking corrective actions if necessary, during Programme's execution, ensuring it is cost -effective.  
 
The external auditing and the incorporation of observations and lessons l earned to arise from such studies are 
guaranteed. All execution will be conducted based on an Operations Manual arising from any such agreement as CAF 
may enter with the GCF, which will respect all understandings reached.  
GCF proceeds will be channelled by CAF onto Local Financial Institutions for the purposes of funded activities.  
Component 1.0 Green finance credit line for LFIs  
• Local Financial Institution (LFIs) and beneficiaries/SMEs22, as local and national actors exec ute 
projects/programmes  
Component 2.0 – Technical Support and Awareness Building  
CAF executes, carries out or implements activities under this component   
 
CAF as Accredited Entity  
CAF will maintain day -to-day oversight responsibility for Programme supervision and have direct responsibility for 
fulfilling the duties and obligations of a GCF Accredited Entity. It will be responsible for financial management and accountable for the use of GCF resources under the Programme. It will provide tec
hnical and administrative 
backstopping to the Programme Management Unit or PMU (see below) to ensure results -oriented management and 
proper administration of funds. It will maintain Programme accounts, monitor resource mobilization of baseline and co -
finance. Financial transactions will be subject to annual audits undertaken by internationally certified auditors. The AE 
functions involve the provision of monitoring and evaluation services as well.  
CAF will have permanent coordination with Programme staff and dialogue with Programme stakeholders.  
 
CAF as Executing Entity  
The Programme Management Unit (PMU) will be established in Panama at CAF’s Headquarters will have a dedicated 
team to guarantee all components and activities are carried out according to the Programme design. It will articulate with the monitoring and evaluation activities (covered by CAF as Accredited Entity) to ensure that all expected results will be achieved on time and within budget.  
This PMU will have a Programme Coordinator, an Energy Specialist, a Land Use Specialist, an Environmental and 
Social Specialist -  with demonstrated knowledge in Gender approach –  financed by CAF), and a Capa city Building 
Officer, that will as well provide administrative support of the PMU. Principal Executives of the Private Sector Vice-
Presidency, and that are already part of CAF for the management of intermediated programmes, will be assigned for 
this Progr amme (1 in each participant country). The PMU will work closely with them, with the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Specialist (covered by the AE fee), with the administrative areas within CAF (Legal, Procurement, Human Resources, etc.), and with CAF’s Sectorial  Specialists  (See Figure 15).  
Training of CAF’s Principal Executives will be prioritized for CAF to be able to provide more direct support to LFIs 
throughout the Programe.  
The PMU will ensure that Programme implementation proceeds smoothly through well -written work plans, Terms of 
Reference and carefully designed administrative arrangements that meet CAF and GCF requirements. PMU’s 
responsibilities will include the following:  
• Follow -up of the achievements of the Programme outcomes, outputs , and objectives .  
• To manage day -to-day implementation of the Programme, coordinating activities by the rules and procedures 
of CAF/GCF.  
• To provide overall administration, while acting as an independent and unbiased guarantor of cooperation and 
information exchange.  
• To provide technical input as appropriate to the outcomes.  
• To facilitate staff recruitment and procurement processes .  
• To ensure, together with CAF, to coordinate with the stakeholders and other relevant regional programmes.  
• To approve individua l SME/PST projects to be financed by LFIs .  
• To ensure, together with CAF, to convene quarterly Programme Implementation Meetings (PIMs) to review 
progress in implementing work plans.  
• To ensure, together with CAF, that specified tasks are outsourced to suitable sub -contracted providers or 
national and international consultants through competitive bidding processes. PMU responsibilities in this


---
*Page 39*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 73 
 
 regard include development of bidding docum ents and terms of reference  and monitor the overall progress of 
these processes.  
• To organize Programme -level meetings and workshops, e.g., inception workshop, etc.  
• To monitor financial progress reports and the financial balance provided by CAF’s operation al systems.  
• To prepare overall Programme reporting.  
• Planning and monitoring the technical aspects of the Programme, including regular field visits and periodic 
reporting.  
• Ensuring advanced funds are used following agreed work plans and Programme budget.   
• Preparing and adjusting commitments and expenditures to be authorized by CAF . Guaranteeing timely 
disbursements, financial recording and reporting against budgets and work plans.  
• Managing and maintaining budgets, including tracking commitments, expenditures and planned expenditures against budget and work plan.  
• Maintaining productiv e, regular and professional communication with other Programme stakeholders to ensure 
the smooth progress of Programme implementation.  
 Figure 15: The Programme Management Unit (PMU)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request  (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages)


---
*Page 40*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 73 
 
 GCF concessional loans and grants are required to supplement CAF funding for the programme to achieve the desired 
paradigm shift from an incipient to a sustainable market for local climate change projects across four countries with a 
total population of 72  million people. Th e main alternative funding source is private sector green bonds, which may be 
cost-prohibitive. Loans from national development agencies are more expensive,  and often not tailored for climate 
invest ments.  CAF is proposing to finance 50% of the programme, which ensures the effective use and leverage of 
GCF dollars. By co -financing the programme, GCF will be able to mobilize CAF’s network in Latin America to support 
the implementation of target countries´  NDCs. CAF is prepared to provide $95  Million in loans to LFIs to get this market 
off the ground but  requires a partner able to provide concessional resources to trigger investments from the LFIs in 
climate related investments. GCF is the only source of climate finance capable of providing the volume of co-financing 
required,  given the large size and geographic scope of the programme. Such support is particularly relevant due to the 
programme´s  potential for replication and scaling -up – in total, Latin America includes 20 countries, and has a 
population of 640 million people.   
CAF will serve as a bridge between GCF and LFIs – as the programme is designed to provide consistent and stable 
low interest financing with favourable tenors for local climate change projects in Latin America. To date, this market 
has been inconsistent and inadequate at best. This is because there is many demand-  and supply -side barriers to 
carrying -out local climate change projects. (see section B2 for a description of barriers).  
In addition,  grant resources to be provided by the GCF for the Component 2 – Technical Support and Awareness 
Building are essential to enable the successful  implementation of the programme, and ensure the long -term 
sustainability of the programme in promoting low -carbon investments in target countries and sectors .  
Previous experience with SME loan programmes for climate change mitigation activities has sh own that loan 
programmes (including concessional loan programmes) alone are not enough, and that it is critical to mobilise demand 
and remove barriers to uptake. Component 2 of this programme is designed to do this, by  (depending on the country 
and country needs) designing risk mitigation instruments for end users, developing standardised contracts to improve transparency, supporting banks to put in place efficient green loan disbursement systems and monitoring systems; 
matchmaking TSPs with Beneficiaries/SMEs  (clients), and LFIs; raising awareness and building capacity.  
The participant countries have been impacted by the global COVID -19 outbreak. Confinement and social distance 
measures, as well as the economic downturn will directly affect SMEs’ investments. In response, CAF has approved a 
USD 50 mm Emergency Loan to eac h of its country -members directed towards the health sector and a USD 2.500 
million Emergency Credit Line which will allow authorities to contribute to the continuity of business operations and the 
recovery of their economies . . This decision is of great i mportance for helping local MSMEs to deal with the economic 
downturn. The GCF funding will come to provide support  and generate synergies  through this programme, at a key 
time for  fostering post-crisis low -carbon development.  
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability  (max . 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The programme´s capacity building and technical assistance approach will ensure programme sustainability over the 
long term. In terms of LF Is, technical assistance elements will support LF Is to develop financial mechanisms and 
business models that can help overcome current market barriers (e.g. upfront costs, perceived high risks related to 
climate change projects, etc.). These financial mechanisms, such as pay  per use models, among others, are long- term 
and will continue to operate on the market after the implementation of the GCF programme. Capacity building for LFIs 
(Activity  2.3.1), will provide support for LFIs to develop internal processes to assess climate change mitigation projects 
and investments. It will further support LFIs to develop green li sts for low carbon  investments and draw attention to 
projects with negative impacts. This will ensure organizational strengthening and long -term capacity improvements, 
ultimately resulting in strengthened institutional structures to enable LFIs to continue to offer green lending opportunities 
in the long term.  
Related to beneficiaries, awareness raising activities are expected to have a long- term effect in increasing awareness 
on the value of climate change projects and green investments  by the stakeholder s of the prioritized sectors . Over the 
duration of the Programme, it is expected that sustainable investments will demonstrate their benefits and value with a 
critical mass of projects. A common barrier for investments in low carbon technologies and practi ces is the lack of 
confidence in new technologies. The programme will help overcome this barrier through a combination of financial and 
non-financial risk mitigation instruments (Activity  2.2), and proof of concept through the critical mass of demonstration 
processes. Ultimately , the programme will encourage Beneficiaries/SMEs  to continue investing in climate friendly 
technologies at market rates, beyond the programme´s lifespan.    
The pr ogram mes capa city building and technical assistanc e approach will ensure programme s ustainability in the 
long-term. Technical assistance elements involve supporting LFIs to develop financial mechanisms/business models 
that can help to overcome current market barriers (upfront c osts, high risk perceptions related to projects). These 
financial mechanisms (for example, pay per use models), will be long term and will continue to operate on the market


---
*Page 41*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 73 
 
  
 after the GCF programm e is implemented. Capacity building for LF Is (activity  2.3.1), and support for LFIs to develop 
internal processes to assess climate change mitigation projec ts (via the technical assistance element and the 
development of a positive and negative list for climate friendly projects), will ensure long term capacity improvements, 
as well as institutional strengthening and sustainable change in the LFIs, to enable them to continue offering green 
lending in the future.  SMEs and TSPs will as well be strengthened by the specific capacity building (Activity 2.3.2). 
The communication and lessons learned activities will further foster the long -term vision of the Programme actions.


---
*Page 42*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 73 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi  + vii) Total amount  Currency  
$100,000,000  USD  
GCF f inancial instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  $95,000,000 (pari-
passu)  10 years  (As defined in the 
term sheet ) years (As defined in 
the term sheet ) 
% 
(ii) Subordinated loans  NA NA years  NA years  NA % 
(iii) Equity  NA   NA % equity 
return  
 
(iv) Guarantees  NA NA years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  NA    
(vi) Grants  $5,000,000     
(vii) Result s-based  payments  NA    
(b) Co -financing information  Total amount  Currency  
$50,200,000  USD  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
CAF Loan  $50,000,000  USD  10 years       
0 years  Enter % pari-passu  
CAF Grant  $200,000  USD  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
$150,200,000  USD  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max . 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page ) Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from 
any type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee) .  
Please also explain other contributions such as in- kind contributions including tax 
exemptions and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.  
C.2. Financing by component  
Full programme budget is included in Annex 4.   
 
Compone
nt Output  Indicative 
cost 
Options  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
1: Finance  1.1: Green finance 
credit line for LFIs  
(note: funding from 
GCF and CAF is to 
be disbursed down 
to LFIs 
proportionally and 
at the same time.).  $145 '000'000   
$95'000'000  
  Loan  
  $50'000'000  
  Loan  
  
CAF 
 
2: 
Technical support 
and 2.1: Climate change 
and mitigation 
awareness 
raising  321,503  321,503  Grant  0  
Grant   CAF


---
*Page 43*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 73 
   
 awareness 
raising  2.2: Enabling 
environment 
activities for 
development 
of projects  362,460  357,860  Grant  4,600  Grant  CAF 
 
2.3: Technical 
support and 
capacity 
building  4,019, 654 3,853,304  Grant  166,350  Grant  CAF 
2.4: Dissemination 
and learning  261,383 241,383 Grant  20,000  Grant  CAF 
Programm
e 
managem
ent 3.1: Programme 
management 
costs 235,000  225,950 Grant  9,050 Grant  
 CAF 
Indicative total cost  (USD)  $150 ,200,000  $100,000,000  $50,200,000  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☒     No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☐     No ☒ 
Programme activitie s of Subcomponents 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4 of Component 2 Technical Support and Awareness 
Building are designed to increase knowledge and learning of market actors.   
This Component requires an amount of USD 4.96 5 million (USD 4.7 65 million funded by the GCF and USD 0.2 million 
co-financed by CAF). Please refer to Section B.3 for description.


---
*Page 44*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 73 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
This programme is expected to achieve 10.70 million t CO2eq of emission reductions through its lifetime , while training 
personnel at 11 LFIs on project assessment , and increasing climate awareness among 36, 42023 other local market 
actors . The programme will result in a total cost of USD $ 14.03 per tCO 2eq avoided.  
In addition, t he programme is projected to result in:  
• 1,270 GWh saved through energy efficiency projects  
• 1,168 GWh generated from distributed renewable energy projects  
• USD $ 8,51 Million in income generation from land use projects   
• 21,662 ha in land area managed under sustainable use  
 
Other relevant indicators  
Direct beneficiaries:  
• 1,214 SMEs directly benefiting through loans and projects (target of 39% women owned SMEs).24  
• 11 LFIs will receive technical assistance, and 110 LFI staff will be trained on the identification, administration, 
and MRV on climate change loans (target of 50% women attending training seminars and workshops).  
Indirect beneficiaries:  
• Approximately 36,420 people will be reached through awareness building effort s 
• GWh reductions through energy efficiency and renewable energy investments : 201.45 GWh per year  
• Income generation from land use projects:  USD $8 .51 Million per year  
Area under sustainable land use: 21,662 ha. 
See Annex 3, and Annex 6 for beneficiary indicator calculations.  
The above mentioned gender targets (within the beneficiary descriptions) have been established considering existing 
figures that around 39% of SMEs in Latin American countries are owned by women.25 In 2011- 2012, only 22%  of loans 
in LAC were provided to women -owned SMEs.26 Thus, we propose to target at least 39% women- owned SMEs within 
the programme to enhance the engagement of women in accessing financial services and loans . Additional gender 
targets for activities  are d escribed in the gender action plan.  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Paradigm shift  
The proposed programme is highly scalable and replicable, not only within Latin America but throughout the developing 
world because the market barriers the programme is designed to address (as described in the section B2 on barriers) 
are not unique to the target countries included in this proposal. Globally, these barriers – combined with the tendency 
of climate funds to prioritise large- scale results27 – means that less than 10% of international, national, and regional 
climate funds reach the local level.28 The programme seeks to change this tendency by making climate finance 
resources available at the local level through LFIs.   
The programme is scalable within target countries because it takes a comprehensive approach to developing local 
markets for clima te change projects. Increasing the volume of financing for local climate change projects through LFIs 
is one explicit output of this programme’s design, but for the programme’s on- lending financing structure to be 
successful requires a wide range of additi onal market interventions. Other programme financial activiti es include the 
development of standardized contracts that define contractual arrangements between SMEs and the TSP and aim to 
build trust and provide different performance incentives for TSP s who exceed the climate change goals in their 
contracts. Training, education and awareness building activities performed by the programme will teach LFIs how to 
 
23 Approximately 10 times the number of total projects estimated to be carried out over the 5-year project period  
24 A women-owned enterprise is: (A) ≥ 51% owned by woman/women; OR (B) ≥ 20% owned by woman/women; AND (i) has 
≥ 1 woman as EO/COO/President/Vice President; AND (ii) has ≥ 30% of the board of directors composed of women, where 
a board exists.  (IFC definition)  
25 IFC 2014  
26 Ernst & Young in IFC 2014  
27 Marek Soanes et at. Delivering Real Change: Getting International Climate Finance to the Local Level. IIED Working 
Paper. March 2017  
28 Ibid.


---
*Page 45*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 73 
   
 accurately assess climate change projects, directly connect local market actors (LFIs, TSPs, and technical service 
providers), and educate businesses on the benef its of carrying- out climate change projects.  
Ongoing programme monitoring and evaluation will enable a process of continuous programme improvement . Lessons 
learned can be used to develop the next generation LFI programmes in other countries. To facilitate the process of 
replication throughout the LAC region, CAF will develop a portfolio of success stories that demonstrates the value of 
the programme to LFIs, TSPs, technical service providers, and local governments. L essons learned and exemplary  
case s will b e published on the programme web site and be used by CAF to recruit market actors for participation in 
replicate programmes.  
The proposed programme targets four countries in the LAC region and will leverage existing CAF relationships with 11 
LFIs across the countries . Should this programme move forward successfully,  it could be replicated in additional  Latin 
American countries.  It could further integrate green financing for projects with adaptation benefits, some of which have 
been identified in the ESMS in Annex 6.  
 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Despite strong progress at the policy level in some count ries in Latin America, markets for climate change mitigation 
solutions - in particular small and medium size d projects - remain underdeveloped. The market environment for small 
to medium scale project requires support to dev elop at the pace needed to achieve national and global emission 
reduction targets.  
This programme, along with the ongoing support of CAF, is designed to foster the development of new markets for low 
carbon solutions by creating an enabling market environm ent for small and medium sized projects.  
Specifically, the following activities will contribute to overcome barriers, and create a long-term enabling environment 
for investments in low carbon solutions:  
• The project will put in place long- term robust stru ctures for green lending in at least 11 LFIs across Latin America. 
The green credit lines and technical support will involve the development of processes and procedures to evaluate 
green projects, which will have a long- term and sustainable impact.  
• The green lending and technical support will also involve the development of an inventory of best practice energy 
efficiency, renewable energy and land sector mitigation projects. This will enable impact well beyond the lifetime of 
the project and will als o enable the scaling- up of the programme within other LFIs. The project will enhance the 
ability of LFIs to understand and evaluate climate change projects and reduce the risk perception of the LFIs in 
relation to these projects.  
• Capacity building for mar ket actors, including financial institutions and TSPs will ensure that the market impacts 
are sustainable.  
• Green finance credit lines and awareness campaigns will support the development of demand for green products, 
and hence the development of new green markets in sectors that have been traditionally difficult to reach (for 
example, the SME sector). Beneficia ries/SMEs  will benefit from the awareness raising campaign and accessible 
and affordable finance (available through local and familiar financial institutions), to implement projects that will 
reduce their operating costs and increase their productivity. The early operation of the programme is expected to 
demonstrate to end users the value of the solutions, which will stimulate awareness and demand beyond the target 
financial institutions and target countries, to other market sectors and areas in Latin Ameri ca.  
• The project will also establish long -term alliances between trusted TSPs and financial institutions, putting the 
connections in place to enable the different market actors to collaborate.  
 
Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
All target countries have the necessary legal frameworks in place to systematically drive investment in climate change 
projects. The element that is missing, and which this programme is designed to address, is accessible and affordable 
financing, as well as th e establishment of  a strong green finance market.  
As outlined above, the project is well aligned with national emission reduction targets and priorities. Successful 
performance of the programme, and the creation of an enabling market environment, will enc ourage and support 
national and local authorities to prioritize strong policies in these sectors. To address any remaining barriers in the 
market, CAF will continue to carry out policy dialogue activities, not as part of the proposed programme but in paral lel 
in its function as a regional development bank. 
This programme will also build upon and complement existing agreements focussing on greening the financial  sector 
in Latin America, such as  the Protocol V erde (Green Protocol) and Protocolo de Sostenibilidad / Protocolo de Finanzas 
Sostenibles  (Sustainable Finance Protocol)  and the National Sustainable Finance Tables . The se voluntary protocol s 
provide guidelines to support the financial industry to address growing environmental and social issues.


---
*Page 46*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 73 
   
 This programme will support LFIs to understand and make the most of the business opportunity associated with green 
projects; hence, supporting the banking sector to green, even in the absence or more stringent green banking policies 
or regulations.  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Programme co -benefits include the following indicators and targets:  
Economic  
• Additional income from land use  investments and energy savings : Mitigation investments in land us e 
generate additional income in the form of sales revenues from timber and other land use products.  Energy 
efficiency and renewable energy projects reduce SMEs expenditure on energy bills and  improve productivity.   
o Target: USD $ 31million  in additional income generated by  the end of investment period.  
• Financing mobilized:  LFIs finance 70 -80% of total project costs (debt to capital ratio). The additional amount 
comes from the beneficiary SMEs themselves. The total financing mobilized by this program is the sum of LFI 
investme nts and the SMEs own capital.  
o Target: At least U SD $ 35 million mobilized from SMEs (project developers’  capital ). 
Environmental  
• Area under sustainable land use:  The main environmental co -benefit of land use mitigation investments will 
be new areas brought into sustai nable land use, measured in hectares.  
o Target: At least 21,662 hectares  under sustainable land use practices ( total) 
Adaptation  
• Area with enhanced resilience and SMEs with less dependency on energy supply:  Many of the eligible 
investments have potential adaptation co- benefits. For example, establishing production systems with a tree 
cover can lower the  risk of erosion due to heavy rain event s related to climate change,  if compared to a 
baseline without tree cover ; the adoption of adapted pastures increases resilience of the farming systems; 
renewable energy generation and energy efficiency measures lowers vulnerability by lowering the 
dependence on external energy supply.     
o Target: At least 21,662 hectares under sustainable land use practices; 289 land use sector projects; 
234 renewable energy projects and 691 energy efficiency projects.  
Social  
• Number of Beneficiaries/SMEs  (direct beneficiaries):  The number of direct loan beneficiaries directly 
translates from the number of projects financed, as we assume one project pe r beneficiary SME.  
o Target: 1,214 direct  beneficiaries  engaged in the programme, including 289 land use sector projects, 
234 renewable energy projects, and 691 energy efficiency projects  
• Number of LFI staff trained (direct LFI beneficiaries):  LFI staff will be trained in the identification, 
administration, monitoring and reporting of climate change loans (energy and land use together). We assume 
on average 10 participants per participating LFI and currently 11 participating LFIs.  
o Target: 110 participants from LFIs participate in trainings and workshops (50% women).  
• Number of jobs created from land use sector investments (indirect beneficiaries):  Land use mitigation 
investments tend to generate additional jobs, because system complexity increa ses with higher area efficiency. 
Example: Converting an extensive cattle pasture into a silvo- pastoral system requires additional management 
of cattle and the added management of the forestry component including labour for the establishment and 
continued m aintenance of the plantation. For the estimation, only additional on- farm jobs are taking into 
account, not indirect jobs created up-  and downstream the value chain, e.g. in tree nurseries and in wood 
processing. For pure forestry plantations, 0.1 full tim e equivalent positions created per hectare of investment 
is assumed, for silvo -pastoral systems 0.15 and for agro -forestry systems 0.3. The mathematical average of 
these is 0.18. The weighted average, based on the likelihood of investment types materializi ng per country and 
LFI, will yield a more precise estimate. A conservative estimate of the number of jobs created based on the 
area target and the mathematical average number of jobs created per hectare.  
o Target: 3,899 jobs created from low-carbon land use sector investments29 
• Number of jobs created from energy efficiency and renewable energy investments: It is estimated that 
14.4 jobs are created for every USD $1  million invested in energy efficiency. This is based on an average of 
 
29 Since the jobs created will be calculated by a coefficient per land use investment type, a gender -disaggregated target 
cannot be provided.


---
*Page 47*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 73 
   
 two sources including the European Energy Efficiency Industrial Forum and Apollo Alliance.30 This results in a 
total of approximately 989 jobs generated through the programme from energ y efficiency sub projects.  
• It is estimated that 6.65 jobs are created per MW installed for renewable energy sub- projects. This is based on 
an average estimate from four sources including Renewable Energy Policy Project (2006), the European 
Photovoltaic industry Association and Greenpeace (2006) and others.31 This results in a total of over 283 jobs 
generated through the programme from the renewable energy sub projects.  
o Target: 1, 272 jobs created from energy efficiency and renewable energy i nvestments . 
Gender  
• Number of participating LFIs with gender strategies, policies or procedures, or women- targeted 
financial products: The programme will include within their evaluation of LFIs the existence and quality of 
gender strategies, policies or procedures within LFIs, and whether or not they have any women- targeted 
financial products. Funds will be supported to develop and/or strengthen LFIs strategies as needed.  
o Target: All participating LFIs have gender strategy, policy or procedures, and/or women -targeted 
financial products . 
• Number of women participants in trainings , workshops  and conferences : The number of women and men 
attending programme supported workshops, trainings and conferences.  Gender -disaggregated lists of 
participants wi ll be collected.  
o Target: 50% of participants in trainings, workshops and conferences are women . 
o Target: 50% female LFI staff are trained within programme activities (50% of LFI staffed trained within 
the programme)  
• Number of beneficiary SMEs that are women -owned or -led: In Latin America and the Caribbean around 
39% of SMEs are owned by women,32 however only 22% of loans were provided to women- owned SMEs.33 
The programme aims to strengthen the provision of green credit lines to women -owned SMEs.  
o Target: At least 39% of beneficiary SMEs are women owned.  
• Amount of programme loans that reach women- owned or –led SMEs:  The amount of programme finance 
in senior loans that are accessed by women- owned or –led SMEs. Currently only ~22% of finance is accessed 
by women -owned SMEs in Latin America.34  
o Target: 30% of programme loans accessed by women- owned or -led SMEs  
• The programmes  Gender Action Plan ensures  cross -cutting gender -related mea sures have been integrated into 
all activiti es and the programmes  monitoring framework. It further addresses key barriers identified in the 
gender assessment that limit women´s access and/ or use of green finance through the provision of capacity 
building,  and targeted support for LFIs and beneficiary SMEs and other key stakeholders. A communication 
plan and dissemination strategy will be developed for the programme within the first year, which will include a 
strategy for how to engage women and promote gen der-sensitive development. LFIs will be supported to 
develop or strengthen their gender policies, strategies and procedures, in addition to strengthening their 
Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS), which will include monitoring of key environmental 
and social standards, including gender. In addition,  the programme management team will include a gender 
specialist to monitor the implementation of the GAP, support with gender -related trainings and activities, and 
provide support to LFIs to implem ent gender -related measures within the programme (for further information 
refer to the Gender Asse ssment and Action Plan in Annex 6 ). 
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
The programme addresses the economic development level, institutional strength and implementation capacity of the 
target countries by accelerating markets  for local climate change projects through concessional financing, training of 
LFI staff in project assessment and monitoring and verification, standardized contracts for TSPs  and SMEs , and 
matchmaking between LFIs, TSPs and SMEs beneficiaries. The program me fills a large ga p in local financing by 
focusing efforts on LFIs . Currently, most small and medium sized enterprises in target countries are facing high interest 
rates from commercial banks with no differentiation for climate investments, and/or they ha ve limited relationships with 
 
30 According to the European Energy Efficiency Industrial forum, (2012) 19 new direct jobs are created for every  one million 
Euros invested in energy efficiency (equivalent to 15.8 jobs per million USD). A ccording to the Apollo Alliance’s research, it 
is projected that about 13 full time equivalent jobs are created per million dollars invested into energy efficiency. An aver age 
of the two sources has been used and multiplied by the total expected investment s in energy efficiency.  
31 REPP, 2006 estimates  4.5 jobs per MWh installed, EPIA / Greenpeace, 2006 estimate 12.2 jobs per KWh installed; 
CAPPIRG, 2002 estimate 2.5 jobs per KWh installed, and IDEA, 2005 estimate 7.4 jobs per MWh installed. An average of 
6.65 was taken and multiplied by the total MWh to be installed as part of the programme.  
32 IFC 2014  
33 Ernst and Young in IFC 2014  
34 Ibid.


---
*Page 48*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 73 
   
 commercial banks. The programme’s awareness raising campaign and gender action plan are designed to increase 
awareness on the benefits of green projects and opportunities for LFIs and project developers, ultimately supporting 
social and gender -inclusive development.  
 
Economic and social needs for the SME segments in LAC  
The SME beneficiaries  of the program, SMEs, are key elements of economic and social growth within the four  
participating countries, in Latin America, and amongst developing and emerging economies worldwide. The  contribution 
of SMEs to total employment (when considering the micro segment as well) averages 67%, across all national income 
levels from low to high income countries.35 Against this background, supporting the economic growth of SMEs through 
concessional  loans for efficiency upgrades (which climate change mitigation loans are in effect, whether in energy or 
land use) can have a strong macro- economic benefit with associated social benefits for job creation in participating 
countries.  
SMEs, (including farmers), often need efficiency investments the most in order to generate cost savings and higher 
profit margins in the long run. At the same time, this segment relies more frequently on financing than larger busi nesses 
in order to be able to afford long term upgrades such as higher performance technologies. For example, investing in 
residential energy efficiency is a key measure in addressing the rising cost of housing. In land use, investing in improved 
cattle breeds and feed and incorporating trees into the production is an effective measure to generate additional cash 
flow and higher return per area.  
 
Financial needs – lack of adequate financial products for climate change investments  
The Latin American finance gap for SMEs is USD $ 1,098 billion.36 Given that 39% of SMEs are women owned (on 
average across sectors), the gender specific gap is 86 billion USD, the largest credit gap for women owned SMEs 
across global regions. This generic financing gap becomes more pronounced for longer term investment s as short -
term investments are often self -financed in this segment. SMEs often lack access to long term financing with adequate 
conditions (pricing, tenor, and grace periods) due to small loan sizes and relatively high transaction costs. According 
to a global OECD study  (2018), the average interest rate spread between loans to SMEs and larger enterprises was 
between 3.52 and 12.70 percentage points in participating Latin American countries; in Chile the difference was 5.29 
for example (with a decreasing trend). This diff erence in lending conditions based on company size is indicative of the 
difficulties SMEs face in accessing attractive financing that responds to their needs.  
In addition, lending for new technologies such as clean energy solutions and climate change miti gation practices in 
land use, creates another barrier on top. As outlined in previous sections, these technologies tend to offer longer than 
usual payback periods with lower returns and high upfront costs. While the trend is moving towards longer term SME 
financing (> 1 year) in general,37 tenors of more than 5 years are not available in target markets at adequate terms.   
 
Need for strengthening LFIs’ institutional and implementation capacity  
LFIs are interested in the SME segment, as well as in climate change investments, if a) financial incentives from external 
sources are made available; and b) capacities could be developed in- house to manage this type of credit product. In 
summary, LFIs face institutional and implementation capacity barriers throughout the entire loan cycle that hinder them 
from servicing climate change credits to SMEs:  
• Client acquisition:  LFIs do not have trusted relationships with project developers, or projects are too small to 
be of interest; LFIs do not have sufficient connections to get the help they need to generate climate change 
loans to new or exi sting clients . 
• Credit sourcing:  Credit officers do not have the tools or knowledge to effectively identify climate change 
projects or understand their financial and non- financial benefits . 
• Credit rating:  LFIs do not have the tools or knowledge to effectively evaluate the financial viabilit y of climate 
change projects; the perceived level of risk of financing climate change projects is too high for LFIs . 
• Credit pricing and condition setting:  LFIs have insufficient suitable c apital to invest in climate change 
projects  
• Monitoring & evaluation:  LFIs do not have the ability to monitor and report on project results.  
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
 
35 ILO 2013  
36 IFC, MSME Finance Gap,  2017. <  https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/03522e90-a13d -4a02-87cd-
9ee9a297b311/121264-WP -PUBLIC -MSMEReportFINAL.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=m5SwAQA>  
37 OECD 2018


---
*Page 49*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 73 
   
 All of the target countries have the national policy frameworks and the ambition needed to foster local climate change 
projects. Commitme nts such as countries´ NDCs to the UNFCCC, and other relevant policies are outlined in Section 
B1, strategic context,  and the market assessment. This programme has been designed to support selected LFIs that 
will contribute to the national targets set out  countries´  NDCs , ensuring alignment with relevant policy documents  and 
supporting other internatio nal commitments (Sustainable Development Goals, Aichi Biodiversity Targets, etc.) . 
Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
During the preparation of this proposal, CAF has engaged with the four -target country’s NDAs with regards to this 
Programme through face- to-face meetings, presentations and email correspondence.  After consultations made during 
2018 -2019, CAF has continued holding meetings with the NDAs. In 2020, meetings with NDA representatives ser ved 
to follow up on the advances of the proposal’s preparation, to receive improvement requests that were responded 
satisfactorily and to address queries regarding a diverse set of issues such as beneficiary eligibility, interest rates, 
programme timeline,  synergies with other projects and programmes, and monitoring and evaluation. The Funding 
Proposal and its annexes were adapted to fulfil the NDAs’ suggestions and were submitted to them. CAF is committed 
to maintaining fluid communication with governments  throughout the implementation of the program. In addition to 
maintaining an open channel, the program includes specific and structured activities to maintain dialogues with these 
actors and share the progress and lessons learned from the program (see Sub- component 2.4).  
CAF has been active in these four countries providing support for policy dialogue activities. For example, in Chile, CAF 
is supporting the National Development bank (CORFO) for developing a green investment platform (GIP), and CAF 
has been engaging directly with loc al authorities in Panam a, Ecuador, Peru and Chile, with regards to sustainable 
energy, energy efficiency  and land -use policy formulation, implementation and financing. Additionally, CAF has 
extensive multi -stakeholder engagement experience in the target countries in topics relat ed with transportation, hydro, 
biomass, sustainable land use.  
CAF collaborates with LFIs that are part of this Programme, and has direct communication with governments, 
authorities and the civil society, to uphold the principle of country ownership via dir ect partnerships through their national 
offices (CAF has offices in the four countries); via country representatives on CAF’s Board of Directors (all member 
countries are represented), and via the provision of country and sect or strategies that are developed with the relevant 
country’s involvement and in consultation with key stak eholders.  
During the preparation of this proposal, CAF  has held roundtables w ith LFIs, one- on-one meetings with banking 
associations and TSPs. CAF has also engaged with SMEs, SMEs representatives, SMEs associations and entities with 
recognized knowledge on SMEs and the sectors targeted by this proposal. All t hese actors helped to identify the key 
needs and barriers, and to design the Programme. Interviews have also served to draw a list of potential subprojects 
that could be considered by the Pr ogramme in early stages of the implementation.  Consultations with women- led SMEs 
have been carried out. However, additional consultations are planned during program implementation, in line with the 
Gender Action Plan.  Please refer to Annex 2. Feasibility study and market assessment and Annex 7. Stakeholder 
consultations and stakeholder engagement plan, for further details on the consultation processes in each of the 
participant countries.  Table 15 summarizes the main actors approached.  
Table 15: Consulted LFIs and entities in each country  
 
Panama  Ecuador  
LFIs: Banistmo, Multibank  
SMEs, TSPs, actors with informed opinion: Sindicate of 
Industries, National Cleaner Production Centre, Induplast, 
Plásticos Generales S.A. , SN Power –  Association of mini 
hydropower plants , Union of Industrialists of Panama .  LFIs: Procredit, Produbanco, Banco P ichincha, Banco 
Bolivariano, Banco Guayaquil, CFN, Banco Pacífico, Mutualista 
Pichincha, Asociación de Bancos Privados del Ecuador.  
SMEs, TSPs, actors with informed opinion: Quito’s Chamber of 
Commerce, Agromache, Agroapoyo.   
Peru  Chile  
LFIs: Scotiabank, BCP, BanBif, Interbank  
SMEs, TSPs, actors with informed opinion: ENGIE 
Services Peru, Energy Efficiency Directorate (MINEM), 
National Society of Industries, Inter -American  Finance 
Bank, Reforesta Peru, Atria Energía.  LFIs: Banco del Estado de Chile, Banco BICE, Banco de Crédito 
e Inversiones (BCI) .  
SMEs, TSPs, actors with i nformed opinion: Chilean Development 
Corporation (CORFO), Sustainability and climate change agency, 
Wood Certification Corporation, Santa María University, chair of 
environmental economics , ANESCO, National Association of 
Energy Efficiency Companies, local experts in climate 
investments.


---
*Page 50*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 73 
   
 D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions (mitigation only)  
 
(a) Total project financing  USD $150.2 million   
(b) Requested  GCF amount  USD $100 million   
(c) Expected lifetime emissi on reductions overtime  10.70 million tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  USD $ 14.03 / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b / c)  USD $ 9.34/ tCO 2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators  (d) and (e) above.  
A bottom -up assessment of project potential by country by project type was performed. Refer to  Annex 3 for further 
details on the calculation.  
• Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and because of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)   
• Private  
o US$145 Million, from participating LFIs (through programme)  
o US$35 Million, beneficiary contributions  (SMEs)  
• Public: US$0  
The leveraged ratio of the GCF Funding is 0.852:1.  
This is the ratio of CAF contribution and beneficiary contribution, to GCF contribution.  
The LFIs are not contributing additional funding. The LFIs receive the Funding to create green credit lines  with th e aim 
to allocate these funding and repay the loan commitments to CAF and the GCF. However , the LFIs will be take the 
credit risk of project and the SME borrower.  
A bottom -up assessment of project potential by country by project type was performed. Please see Annex 3 for further 
details.  
Economic and Financial Analysis  
A bottom -up economic and financial analysis was performed by techno logy type, and by country – please refer to Annex 
3.  
Unsuitable financing options – including high and undifferentiated interest rates for climate investment, and short -term 
loan tenors are one of the key barriers to investments in energy efficiency, renewable energy an d land sector mitigation 
projects in Latin America. SMEs tend to prioritize other non -green investments that are more “attractive” in terms of 
risk-return.  
Concessional funding from the GCF and CAF will be used to make these investments competitive against other 
investment opportunities. The provision of concessional financing, with longer loan tenors are key elements to support 
LFIs to continue to engage in this sector. The concessionality will be determined for each country and LFI, while also 
considering  the corresponding market needs based on the principle of least concessionality.  
Concessional loans and grants from the GCF along with CAF’s investment wil l create and foster new markets for climate 
change projects at the local level in the target countries. Concessional financing provided by the GCF would allow to 
LFIs to provide suitable conditions for these projects , enabling investments in low -carbon sol utions . 
In the case of GCF financing for the forestry sector, that is, productive -oriented forestry projects, the additionality is 
given in the possibility of exploring mechanisms that ensure certain stability on the voluntary market price through an 
agreed minimum price of carbon credits; depending on the carbon sequestration, which, although they do not represent 
a significant income to the activity, significantly improve cash flow, becoming a mechanism that underpins the economic 
sustainability of the ac tivity.


---
*Page 51*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 73 
   
 Technical Evaluation  
Loan proceeds will finance local energy efficiency, distributed renewable energy, and land use climate change projects  
as described in Section B3, programme description. The  sustainable energy  technologies expected to be deployed are 
relatively consistent across  the four target countries while land use project types considerably vary.  
Appendix 2 of the Feasibility Study includes a comprehensive list of technical references, guidelines and manuals that 
will serve as guide for the implementation of the Programme. Some of the most relevant are:  
Energy:  CAF guidelines for Air conditioners , Compressed air , Automation and process control , High Efficiency Boilers , 
Water Heating with Solar Energy , Energy Cogeneration, photovoltaic solar energy , high efficiency furnaces , High 
Efficiency Lighting, High Efficiency Motors , Refrigeration, Fuel replacement .  
Additionally, CAF has Sectorial Manuals for financing energy efficiency : Food and Beverage Manual for I fs, Manual 
Public Lighting Company , Manual Hotels and Hospitals Company , Manual Agribusiness Compani es, Agro industrial 
Manual for I fs, Manual Food and Beverage Company , Public Lighting Manual for Ifs , Cement Companies Manual , 
Cement Manual for Ifs , Manual Large Company Surfaces , Manual Large Surfaces for I fs, Hotels and Hospitals Manual 
for Ifs, Manual Pulp and Paper Companies , Pulp and Paper Manual for I fs, Steel and Metalworking Manual for I fs, Steel 
and Metalworking Manual for Companies , Textile Manual for Companies , Textile Manual for I fs.  
Land Use:  numerous FAO publications have been taken as references for the Programme, with regards to 
Agroforestry, landscape restoration in degraded lands,  integrated soil and nutrient management,  low-carbon livestock, 
and aquaculture. Other publications by J ICA, the Convention of Biological Diversity or IFC provide highly relevant 
knowledge on Agroforestry, natural forest management, silviculture. GHG tools and standards for the Sector are found 
relevant, e.g. Multicriteria HGH tool selector (FAO), Ex -act User Manu al: Estimating and Targeting GHG mitigation in 
Agriculture (FAO), AFOLU requirements for the VCS Standard and Gold Standard. IFC guidelines on different Land 
Use aspects such as Annual Crop Production, Aquaculture, Dairy processing, Forest Harvest Operatio ns, among 
others, have been as well been identified for guiding the technical quality of the Programme investments.


---
*Page 52*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 73 
   
 
 LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project /programme ’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes  
as a whole, including in respect of any  co-financing .  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please select  the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
X Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
E.2. C ore indicator targets  
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project /programme . 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A.  
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation  
and cross -cutting  only)  Annual   535,228 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  10,704,562 t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lif etime emission 
reductions ( mitigation  and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project  financing  $150,200,000        
(b) Requested GCF amount  $100,000,000    
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions   10,704,562   t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t  CO 2eq (d = a / c)  $14.03   Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed  
(e = b / c)  $9,34   Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation  and 
cross -cutting  only)  (f) Total finance leveraged  $85,200,000  
   
(g) Public source co-financed  NA   Choose an item.  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  $ 85,200,000  
= 
$50,200,000  (CAF 
contribution) . 
$35,000,000 (beneficiary 
contribution)     
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 0,852: 1 
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  NA  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  0,852: 1    
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct   
• 1,214 direct SME beneficiaries receiving loans and 
implementing projects as part of the programme.  (39% 
women -led) 
• 110 individuals from LFI’s trained on E&S (50% of female)  
 
Indirect  • 5,171 jobs created  in climate friendly industries  
• 36,420 people reached with climate change information 
and mitigation solutions  
 
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 1 7. 
Direct  Click here to enter text.   (Expressed as %) of country(ies)


---
*Page 53*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 73 
   
   E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Indirect  Click here to enter text.   (Expressed as %) of country(ies)  
For a multi -country proposal,  leave blank and  provide the data per country in annex 17 .


---
*Page 54*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 73 
   
 E.3. Fund- level impacts  
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key result areas and  corresponding  
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected 
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above.  Add rows 
as needed.  
Expected Result s Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Basel
ine Target  Assumption
s Mid-term  Final  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -emission 
energy access and 
power generation  1.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided as a result of 
Fund funded 
projects/programmes –
gender -sensitive energy 
access power generation (sub-indicator)  LFIs with 
CAF oversight  
 
 
  
 0 57.620  
tCO2e  
 
 
 
 218.775  
tCO2e  See Annex 
3 (Financial 
Model) .  
Methodology explained 
in Annex 11 
(Monitoring 
and 
Evaluation 
Plan)  
Project 
lifetime: 20 
years  
Justification 
of project 
lifetime: 
useful life of 
technology.  
Annual emission 
reductions:  
80,171 
tCO2e  
Lifetime emission 
reductions: 
1,341,168 
tCO2e  
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances   3.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided as a result of 
Fund funded projects/programmes – 
buildings, cities, industries, and 
appliances subindicator  LFIs with 
CAF 
oversight  
 0 29.627 
tCO2e  
 
 112.137  
tCO2e  See Annex 
3 (Financial 
Model)  
Methodolog
y explained 
in Annex 11 
(Monitoring 
and 
Evaluation Plan)  
Project 
lifetime:  20 
years  
Justification 
of project 
lifetime:


---
*Page 55*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 73 
   
 useful life of 
technology.  
Annual 
emission 
reductions : 
37,012 
tCO2e  
Lifetime emission 
reduction:  
630,307 tCO2e  
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from land use, 
reforestation, reduced 
deforestation, and 
through sustainable 
forest management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks   
 4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided (including 
increased removals) as 
a result of Fund- funded 
projects/programmes  – 
forest and land- use 
sub-indicator  LFIs with 
CAF 
oversight  
 0 285.279  
tCO2e  
 
 1.300.983  
tCO2e  See Annex 
3 (Financial 
Model)  
Methodology explained 
in Annex 11 
(Monitoring 
and Evaluation Plan)  
Project lifetime:  20 
years  
Justification 
of project 
lifetime:  
default 
values 
according to 
IPCC 
2006
38.  
Annual 
emission 
reductions:  
530.864 
tCO2e  
Lifetime 
emission 
reductions:  
1,300,983 tCO2e  
Economic co -benefits  Number of new green 
jobs from low -carbon 
investments  
  0 0 5,171 
jobs 
 See Annex 
3 (Financial Model)  
Assuming no major 
productivity 
change for 
 
38 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories , Vol. 4 Chapter 2. The length of time that land remains in 
a conversion category after a change in land use is by default 20 years.


---
*Page 56*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 73 
   
 the selected 
technologie
s  
E.4. Fund- level  outcomes  
Select the appropriate outcome (s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key expected outcomes  and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be 
selected per expected outcome . Add rows as needed.  
Expected  Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Assumptions  Mid-term ) Final 
M6.0 Increased number 
of small, medium and 
large low-emission 
power suppliers   6.3 MWs of low 
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a result 
of GCF support.  LFIs M&V 
with CAF 
oversight  
 0 15.94 
MW (at 
generat
or)  42.5 
MW 
(at 
gener
ator) See Annex 3 
(Financial 
Model)  
Assuming 4 yrs 
of 
implementation  
(credit 
disbursements 
start in Year 2)   
M7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances  ☐ 7.1 Energy 
intensity/improved 
efficiency of buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances as a result 
of Fund support.  LFIs M&V 
with CAF 
oversight  
 0 190,473
.19 
MWh 
(avoided 
energy 
at 
meter)  507,9
28.51 
MWh 
(avoid
ed 
energ
y at 
meter)  See Annex 3 
(Financial 
Model)  
Assuming 4 
years of 
implementation 
(credit 
disbursements 
start in Year 2) .  
Lifetime of EE:  
10 years  
Justification of 
project lifetime: 
useful life of 
technology.  
Lifetime MWh: 
1,269,821 MWh 
will be avoided.  
M9.0 Improved 
management of land or 
forest areas contributing 
to emissions reductions  ☐ 9.1 Hectares of land 
or forests under 
improved and effective 
management that 
contributes to CO2 
emissio n reductions  LFIs M&V 
with CAF 
oversight  
 0 4,332 
ha 21,66
2 ha See Annex 3 
(Financial 
Model)  
Methodology 
explained in 
Annex 11 
(Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan) 
including 
expected 
improvements in 
land and forest 
management


---
*Page 57*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 73 
   
  
E.5. Project/programme  performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected Results  
outputs  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Bas
eline Target  
Assumption
s Mid-term  Final 
1.1 Financially viable 
climate change 
mitigation projects are 
identified,  and financed  a. Total project 
financing volume  
b.  Number of SMEs 
benefited  LFIs M&V 
with CAF 
oversight  0 
 
0 
 
0 US$ 58,5 
Million  
b.364 
SMEs (39% 
women)  a. US$ 145 
Million  
b. 1,214 
SMEs, with 
39% of 
women -led 
SMEs.  
 See Annex 
3 (Financial 
Model)  
Assuming 
interest of 
LFIs in 
financing 
mitigation 
projects  
2.1 Climate change and 
mitigation awareness 
raised.  a. number of 
workshops .  
b. number of 
participants  at 
workshops  LFIs M&V 
with CAF 
oversight  0 a. 4 
workshops  
b. 144 
(39% 
women)  a.  12 
workshops  
b. 360 
participants 
at workshops 
(39% 
women).    
2.2 Enabling 
environment  for the 
development of 
mitigation projects  a.  number of TSPs 
databases developed  
b. number of 
participants  at 
matchmaking events  
 
 
 
c. number of 
standardised contracts 
created, or specific 
contracts supported.  CAF 
reporting  0 a. 11 
databases  
b.40 
participants  
(25% 
match 
women)  
 
 
 
 
c. 12 
contracts  a.11 
databases of 
TSPs  
b. 40 
participants 
in 
matchmaking 
events  (25% 
match 
women)  
 
c. 12 
contracts 
(one per 
country for 
each sector -
EE; RE, land 
use) At least 
one 
standardise
d contract 
per 
country.  
Assuming 
participatio
n of TSPs 
and LFIs in 
the 
proposed 
activities  
2.3 Technical support 
and capacities built for 
LFIs, SMEs and TSPs  
 2.3.1 Technical support 
and capacities built for 
LFIs 
a. LFIs personnel 
trained in Project 
Assessment  
b. pipeline of bankable 
projects  LFIs M&V 
with CAF 
oversight  0 a.88 
individuals 
at LFIs 
trained  
 
b. 9 
pipelines of a. 110 
individuals  at 
LFIs trained 
in Proje ct 
Assessment 
(50% 
women)  
b. 11 
pipeline s of See Annex 
3 (Financial 
Model)  
Assuming 
participatio
n and 
interest of 
LFIs in the


---
*Page 58*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 73 
   
   
c. Total number of LFIs 
assessed and 
supported for improving 
ESMS systems  
 
d. LFI personnel trained 
regarding ESMS 
systems including 
gender considerations  
e. LFIs personnel 
trained on GHG 
baseline and MRV  
f. LFIs with MRV 
system implemented  bankable 
projects  
c.8 LFIs 
supported 
for 
improving 
EMS 
system  
d. 70 LFI 
personnel 
trained on 
ESMS 
systems 
(50% 
women)  
e. 110 LFIs 
personnel 
trained  
f. 11 LFIs 
with MRV 
system  bankable 
projects  
c.11 LFIs 
supported for 
improving 
EMS system  
d. 110 LFI 
personnel 
trained on 
ESMS 
systems 
(50% 
women)  
e. 110 LFIs 
personnel 
trained on 
GHG 
baseline and 
MR (50% 
women)  
f. 11 LFIs 
with MRV 
system 
implemented  proposed 
activities  
2.3.2 Technical support 
and capacities built for 
TSPs  
a. Number of 
SMEs/TSPs trained in 
mitigation project s 
development  
b. Number of women-
led SMEs trained in 
green literacy  
 
c. Number of SMEs 
supported with pre -
investment activity  
 
 
d. Number of 
SMEs/TSPs trained in 
GHG baseline and 
MRV  
   a. 216 
SMEs/TSP
s trained 
(39% 
women)  
 
b.30 
women -led 
SMEs 
trained  
c.60 SMEs 
supported 
(39% 
women -led) 
d. 216 
SMEs/TSP
s trained in 
GHG 
baselines 
and MRV 
(39% 
women)   
a.720 
SMEs/TSPs 
trained on 
mitigation 
projects  
b.60 women -
led SMEs 
trained in 
green literacy  
c. 200 SMEs 
with pre -
investment 
support  
(feasibility 
study)  -39% 
women -led. 
d. 720 
SMEs/TSPs 
trained in 
GHG 
baseline and 
MRV  (39% 
women -led) 
 Assuming 
participatio
n and 
interest of 
SMEs in 
the 
proposed 
activities  
2.4 Dissemination and 
learning reinforced  a.  Communication and 
Dissemination Strategy  
developed  LFIs M&V 
with CAF 
oversight   a. 1 
 a. 1  
 (under the 
respective 
activities ).


---
*Page 59*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 73 
   
 b. Promotional material 
developed  
 
c. Programme website  
d. Information platform  
 
e. Number of case 
studies  
f. Number of  women -
led SME case study  
g. Number of  learning 
workshops  
h. Number of  key 
stakeholders  reached 
with targeted 
presentations  CAF 
reporting 
on 
activities.  N/A 
 
 
c. 1 
d. 1 
 
e. 0 
 
f. 0 
 
g. 0 
 
h. 30 
stake holder
s b. at least 2 
videos  
 
c. 1 website  
d. 1 platform  
 
e.3 Case 
studies (1 
per sector)  
f.1 women -
led SME 
case study  
g. 2 learning 
workshops  
with 100 
participants  
h.240 key 
stakeholders  
reached with 
targeted 
presentations  
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be 
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.   
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1.1.1 Green finance credit 
lines for LFIs  A climate finance credit line 
with adequate financial 
terms and conditions will 
be made available for LFIs 
from countries participating 
in the programme to 
finance local distributed 
renewable energy, energy 
efficiency, and land use 
climate c hange mitigation 
projects. Loans will be 
made available  to 
Beneficiaries/SMEs , and 
TSPs to improve or grow 
their business es  
Participating LFIs will be 
finalised and agreements 
will be entered. Numerous 
eligible LFIs have already 
been identified in each 
target country (See Annex 
3). In principle, any LFI that 
meets the following criteria 
could be eligible for the 
green finance c redit line:  
• Criteria 1: 
Sustainability and 
green finance goals  
• Criteria 2: Have in 
place an 
environmental and 
social risk 
management 
system  Green credit lines in place 
in collaboration with at 
least 11 LFIs.


---
*Page 60*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 73 
   
  
39 The control will be implemented though contractual obligations. In the Credit Lines Agreements, the relevant clauses on this matter must 
be transferred to both: the LFI and the agreement with Beneficiaries/SMEs . In the Credit Lines Agreements there will be clauses that oblige 
Beneficiaries/SMEs  and third parties to comply with such policies.  • Criteria 3: LFI is a 
client of  CAF.39 
The use of loan proceeds 
by an eligible LFI will 
comply with a “Policy 
Statement” included in the 
loan agreement between 
CAF and the LFI. LFIs will 
on-lend funds to TSPs for 
investing in pre- approved 
technologies or project 
types, or 
technologies/projects 
approved by experts 
procured by CAF.  
Detailed project eligibility 
criteria have been 
established to define the 
scope of investment of the 
climate finance credit line 
and specific climate change 
and environmental, social, 
and economic co -benefits 
indicators.  
 
This component will be 
financed by  Loans  
2.1.1 Climate change and 
mitigation awareness 
raising  Organization of workshops 
on climate change, 
mitigation projects in the 
targeted sectors and operational aspects of the 
programme, including 
eligibility, mitigations technologies, ESMS, MRV 
and financing, promoting 
the benefits of such technologies. These 
workshops will be 
organized in the different 
targeted countries during 
the first 3 years and will be 
directed at LFIs, SMEs and TSPs.   The goal of this 
subcomponent is to 
increase knowledge of the 
Programme and available 
financing as well as climate change, mitigation projects, 
targeted sectors and 
countries of the 
Programme, highlighting 
the benefits of such projects 
and operational aspects 
important for accessing the 
financing . This activity is 
financed through non 
reimbursable resources.   
 
 
 
12 workshop s for 
awareness raising on 
climate change impacts, 
mitigations technologies 
benefits and operational 
aspects on the programme.  
2.2.1 Matchmaking 
between LFIs and TSPs:  The programme will 
identify TSPs and connect  
them  to facilitate project 
development.  
 Matchmak ing b etween 
LFIs, and TSPs 
Connections between 
market actors will be 
strengthened to facilitate 
project development. 
Potential TSPs often do not 
have established 
relationships with LFIs. The The programme will 
connect market actors to 
facilitate project 
development. Potential 
TSPs often do not have 
established relationships 
with LFIs. The same is true 
of LFIs – they often do not 
know TSPs. The 
programme will develop a


---
*Page 61*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 73 
   
 same is true of LFIs  – they 
often do not know TSPs.  
Through this activity , the 
programme will develop a 
database of local market 
actors and work to connect 
them through direct 
outreach, the programme 
Website, and through other 
mediums.  
. 
 database of local market 
actors and work to connect 
them through direct 
outreach, the programme Website,  workshops and 
information sessions.  
 
 
2.2.2 Country opportunities 
for standardized 
performance -based 
contracts . 
  
Develop standardize 
contractual arrangement templates that can be used 
by TSPs and SMEs to 
negotiate and deal green 
investment opportunities 
and increase trust in the 
proposed technologies.  
  
 
  
 
This activity  will help clients 
and providers to have a 
clear and transparent 
contractual arrangement to negotiate investments in 
energy efficiency, 
renewable energy or low -
carbon land use. 
Contractual agreements 
will aim to create trust and transparency ( not to 
subsid ize payments).  
Contracts can be in the form of transparent, payment arrangements 
that are structured to 
provide an incentive for 
TSPs, to distribute risk to 
appropriate actors, and/or 
to guarantee savings. This 
mechanism will function as 
a reward for TSPs that 
achieve or exceed climate 
results pre- established in 
their loan contract with 
LFIs.  
Examples of performance -
based contracts include 
pay-per-use contracts, 
leasing contracts, and 
energy performance 
contracts.  
This component will be 
financed by Grants   
 
Contribute to TSPs and 
SMEs to negotiate and 
transparent the deals. 
Establish different type of 
performance -based 
payment contracts that 
would be structured to 
provide an incentive for 
TSPs, to distribute risk to 
appropriate actors, to 
guarantee s avings and 
create trust  
2.3.1 Technical support for LFIs 
 2.3.1.1  Technical Support 
in Project Development 
and Assessment :   
*1. LFIs will be trained on 
how to conduct and utilize market assessments, including data collection 
and analysis, selection of 
target clients, preliminary 
eligibility and Training will be provided to 
LFIs, enabling them to 
assess projects presented 
to them. There will be 
“classroom” and on -the-job 
training, as well as on-going  
technical support for LFI 
personnel.   
Project assessments are 
likely to include: verification Training will be provided to 
LFIs to develop specific 
financing mechanisms to 
overcome current market 
barriers and build a green 
credit line. Technology 
TSPs will be trained to 
present and build a pipeline 
of bankable projects.


---
*Page 62*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 73 
   
 creditworthiness 
assessment of projects. 
This will strengthen the 
selection of creditworthy TSPs/SMEs and support 
the identification of eligible 
projects at an early stage.  
* 2.Technical Assistance to 
develop a pipeline of 
bankable projects. Support 
will be provided for LFIs to 
develop specific financing 
mechanisms to overcome current market barr iers. 
The financing mechanisms would be tailored to each bank and could include 
energy savings insurance; 
and/or pay per use model 
for the energy sectors.   
2.3.1.2 Strengthening 
environmental and social 
risk management systems and skills: directed to LFIs  
to enhance their ability to 
invest in sustainable projects and ensure robust 
environmental and social 
management systems are 
in place, including 
managing for gender 
benefits and reducing gender related risks.  
2.3.1.3 Technical support 
for GHG baseline definition 
and MRV , aims to 
strengthen capacities and 
provide technical support 
to LFIs for an effective 
GHG baseline definition 
and the effective monitoring, reporting and verification.  
 
 
 
-  
 
-  of technical feasibility and 
financial viability, findings 
and conclusions, cash- flow 
forecasts, financial viability 
parameters (net present 
value (NPV), internal rate of 
return (IRR)), sensitivity 
analysis and risk analysis.  
LFIs will be trained on how 
to conduct and utilize 
market assessments, 
including data collection 
and analysis, selection of 
target clients, preliminary 
eligibility and 
creditworthiness 
assessment of projects. 
This will strengthen the 
selection of creditworthy 
TSPs and support the 
identification of eligible 
projects at an early stage.  
 
The technical assistance 
activity  will also involve 
support for LFIs to develop 
specific financing 
mechanisms to overcome 
current market barriers. T he 
financing mechanisms 
would be tailored to each 
bank  and could include 
energy savings insurance; 
and/or pay per use model. 
These business models are described in detail below.  
Technical support will be 
provided to LFIs to identify gaps in the ESMS, develop improvements and audit the 
implementation of the 
ESMS to ensure robust 
systems for E&S risk 
analysis and mitigation.  
Based on gap analysis, 
identify current status and 
needs for improvement of 
LFIs’ current ESMS.  
This includes managing for 
gender benefits and 
reducing gender related 
risks (e.g. supporting 
development or 
strengthening of gender 
strategies, policies, and 
procedures).  
Independent audits to assess the adequate 
implementation of Strengthen the LFIs ESMS 
systems to enhance their 
ability to invest in 
sustainable projects and 
ensure robust 
environmental and social 
management systems are 
in place.  
This includes managing for 
gender benefits and 
reducing gender related 
risks.  
Independent audits to 
assess the adequate 
implementation of ESMS.  
 
Reporting by the LFIs to 
CAF will be consolidated to 
evaluate programme 
results, and to provide 
information to participating 
country governments to 
inform them of the 
programme’s contribution 
to NDCs and other relevant 
national climate change 
goals.  
The efficiency and 
effectiveness of the 
programme will be 
evaluated throughout its 
lifetime. Final evaluations 
on the success of the 
programme will be 
prepared.  Capacities of 
LFIs strengthen to 
determine baseline and 
monitor, report and verify 
impact of mitigation 
projects.


---
*Page 63*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 73 
   
 ESMS. The PMU will 
organize trainings to 
strengthen skills among 
LFIs personnel on the monitoring and reporting 
framework  to ensure 
appropriate reporting of 
results of the Programme.  
 
This component will be 
financed by Grants  
2.3.2 Technical support for SMEs and TSPs:  2.3.2.1:  Technical support 
for project development includes   
This activity aims at training 
potential SMEs and TSPs 
beneficiaries of the 
Programme with the skills 
and project pre- investment 
facilities to better 
understand and be able to 
develop mitigation projects 
in the targeted sectors.  
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 2.3.2.2 Technical support 
for GHG definition and 
MRV for SMEs and 
TSPs.aims at providing 
technical support to 
enhance GHG baseline definition and MRV systems.  
 Technical support for 
project development 
includes:  
*Training on mitigation 
projects how to structure 
bankable projects, ESMS, 
standardize contracts and 
operational aspects of the 
Programme  
*Training on green 
business literacy for 
women -led SMEs . The goal 
of this activity is to foster 
participation of women -led 
SMEs in the Programme.   
*Pre-investment facility for 
SMEs, potential borrowers 
of LFIs participating in the 
Programme can be eligible 
for this facility. The facility  
will support the 
performance of audits and technical feasibility studies 
at beneficiary sites for the 
identificati
on of project 
development opportunities 
for EE, RE or low -carbon 
land use mitigation projects. 
Support for financial 
evaluation and financial 
aspects of projects can also 
be eligible.  
 
Technical support for GHG 
definition and MRV for 
SMEs and TSPs.  
The goal of this activity is to train potential beneficiaries 
and SMEs and TSPs who 
have already been 
allocated credits through 
the Programme in the 
adequate GHG baseline 
definition and the MRV 
framework of the 
Programme, to guarantee Workshops on project 
development  
Workshops on green 
business literacy for 
women -led SMEs  
Audits, technical f easibility 
studies and technical 
support for project 
development.  
Workshops on GHG 
baseline and MRV  
Educational material to 
widely disseminate 
operational aspects of 
mitigation projects 
development, GHG 
baseline estimation and 
MRV.


---
*Page 64*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 73 
   
 and effective monitor ing 
and reporting.  
Production of audio- visual  
educational material to 
support wide dissemination 
among beneficiaries of the 
above- mentioned topics.  
2.4.1: Communication and 
visibility:  Communication and 
visibility activities  aim to 
ensure appropriate 
information management, 
dissemination  of the 
information and activities 
organized by the 
programme and to ensure gender sensitive communication and reach.  
 
:  Subactivities include: 
Communication and 
Dissemination Strategy: 
The Programme will 
develop and implement a 
communication and 
dissemination strategy that 
includes measures to engage women, women’s 
organizations and women -
owned SMEs  
Development of 
promotional material of the 
Programme: include 
webinars, explainer videos, 
story -telling videos, 
communication material, and publications, two -
pagers, among others.  
Programme Website:  
Information Management 
Platform, which will allow to 
disseminate information on  
the Programme, and will work as a platform for the general management of 
data and information on 
project eligibility, 
monitoring and reporting of 
LFIs and beneficiaries  
 Communication strategy 
and gender sensitive 
approach.  
Promotional material.  
Website 
Information Management 
platform.  
 
 
2.4.2  Lessons learned and 
stakeholders’ engagement 
activities  
 With this activity, lessons 
learned will be promoted throughout the 
implementation by 
identifying case studies with best practices and 
women -led successful 
interventions. Knowledge 
management and 
stakeholders’ involvement 
with the programme will be fostered through 
workshops and targeted 
presentations.  
 -Case studies: Identifying 
throughout the project at 
least 3 case studies with 
lessons learned i n each of 
the sector: EE, RE, Land 
Use. Selected successful 
projects in the different 
countries will be selected 
and identified by the PMU 
to learn what made them 
succeed, what were the main benefits of the project 
and lessons learned to be 
later on shared in the 
Program website, presentations, among other 
formats. In the selection of 
the stories both men- led as 
well as women -led SMEs Case studies with lessons 
learned.  
Targeted presentation to 
key stakeholders  
Learning workshops


---
*Page 65*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 73 
   
 projects must be included, 
and when interviewing 
project beneficiaries, it 
must be guaranteed the voice of women and men 
are equally included.  
-Women -led SMEs 
success stories: Develop a case study of inclusive 
finance in mitigation 
projects identifying women 
led-SMEs which were 
allocated a credit for the 
first time for mitigation 
technologies: EE, ER and 
land use projects.  
-Learning workshops: 2 
workshops will be 
conducted during the 
lifetime of the Project: one 
in the mid -term of the 
Project implementation and another in year 5. The goal of the workshop will be to 
present lessons learned 
with relevant stakeholders, including government, 
other organizations 
working in mitigation projects, and beneficiaries.  
Targeted Presentations for dissemination of lessons learned to key 
stakeholders: (e.g., 
government sector, trade or commercial 
associations).The 
information sessions will 
consist of bilateral 
meetings and targeted 
presentation on 
programme progress and alignment in the country.  
E.7. Monitoring,  reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)


---
*Page 66*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 73 
   
 CAF will set up a monitoring framework at programme level that will apply to all participating LFIs across the four 
selected countries. For climate benefit monitoring at sub -borrower level, differentiat ed approaches will be implemented 
for clean energy and land use respectively at LFI level.  
For more details, Refer to Annex 110 for the Green Climate Financing Facility for LFIs in Latin America including a 
specific MRV plan for land use sector investments.  
Reporting from LFIs to CAF  
The programme will apply the standard procedures established by CAF for monitoring and evaluation of investment 
operations. Based on the proposed results and a monitoring and evaluation plan to be agreed between CAF and 
participating LFIs, the evolution of indicators should be reported periodically during the programme execution. In 
coordination with CAF, participating LFIs will compile and maintain all information, indicators and parameters necessary 
for the preparation of programme reports, including annual reports, midterm review and final evaluation.  
It will be the responsibility of participating LFIs to ensure that the sub- borrower is eligible for funding from the programme 
in accordance with the progr amme’s eligibility criteria, as defined for clean energy and sustainable land use. Monitoring 
of disbursements for eligible expenditures will be reviewed by the CAF ex - post. In coordination with participating LFIs, 
CAF may schedule supervision visits to m onitor and verify the proper use of resources and compliance with contractual 
conditions of the programme with regards to the use of funds.  
Operations approved by participating LFIs and presented to CAF to be part of the programme must be properly 
identifi ed in the LFI’s accounting systems and be in compliance with what is stated in the specific loan agreements. 
These records should allow for identifying financial conditions of each transaction (e.g. currency, maturity, and interest 
rates), the value of the contract, loan proceeds and eventual use of proceeds for monitoring purposes, programme 
funds balances and default rates, if necessary.  
The monitoring process intends to follow up the execution of the programme in order to identify the intermediate 
milest ones achieved in each phase and evaluate its outcomes and fulfilment of proposed targets. The indicators to be 
monitored will be those included the log frame in section E.  
Participating LFIs will collect the necessary data for monitoring and present annual reports to CAF. SMEs will also be 
trained to be able to contribute with the MRV system and to provide accurate data. In some cases, CAF will make 
calculations required for some indicators, based on the information provided by the LFIs’ in the annual reports. The 
participating L FIs’ own information systems will undergo a gap assessment by CAF to analyse whether they are 
sufficient and appropriate for monitoring the proposed indicators.  
Participating LFIs will deliver these annual reports within thirty (3 0) calendar days after the end of each year of 
programme´s implementation. The reports will include information regarding the evolution of the indicators, as well as 
financial information regarding the use of the resources. CAF will be entitled to request additional information, if 
necessary. In addition to the annual reports and the scheduled activities for monitoring of the operations described 
above, CAF will contract an independent midterm evaluation within thirty (30) months from the effective date of the loan 
contract or when 50% of the programme resources have been disbursed – whichever occurs first. Finally, participating 
LFIs will present a final report to CAF up to six (6) months after the day of the last disbursement and CAF will contract 
an independent final evaluation. The LFIs final reports shall contain all relevant information to assess if objectives of 
the programme and targets for each indicator have been met. Based on this report CAF will also prepare a Project 
Completion Report (PCR), whic h evaluates the fulfilment of targets, reviews the overall results of the operation and 
describes lessons learned, among other relevant aspects.  
 
Reporting from CAF to GCF  
Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements will comply with CAF´s Accreditation Master Agreement and GCF 
policies, as well as the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA). CAF will provide annual progress reports on the status of the 
funded activity throughout the relevant reporting period, based on the above described logical fr amework, and reporting 
from LFIs to CAF.  
CAF will consolidate above described annual, mid- term and final reports from LFIs and send them to the GCF within 
additional thirty (30) days of the above -mentioned reporting periods by LFIs to CAF. In addition to these consolidated 
reports, CAF will report on the indicators defined in Section E. CAF  will deliver numbers in a logframe format a) annually 
within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of each year of pr ogram implementation; b) at mid- term w ithin thirty (30) 
months from the effective date of the loan contract or when 50% of the programme resources have been disbursed – 
whichever occurs first; and c) at programme end up to six (6) months after the day of t he last disbursement of a 
participatin g LFI.


---
*Page 67*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 73 
   
 An independent mid- term evaluation will be conducted within thirty months of the effective date of the loan contract or 
when 50% of the program resources have been disbursed – whichever occurs first. The mid- term evaluation will be 
based on a partic ipatory and inclusive process, and will involve the following:  
 Review of the institutional, technical, environmental, social, economic and financial aspects of the program  
 Review of the portfolio of sub- projects, including activities, planned outputs, exp ected impacts, cost and financing  
 Review of the achiev ement of planned impacts and indicators (according to the Logframe)  
 Assessment of the need to restructure or reformulate the program.  
MRV framework 
CAF will set up a monitoring framework at programme level that will apply to all participating LFIs, TSPs and SMEs 
across the four selected countries. All specific MRV actions and steps described below for clean energy and land use 
will be undertaken by the LFIs and SMEs/TSPs:  
• Energy:  
o Approach:  For energy efficiency and renewable energy projects, MRV and due diligence processes 
should be in proportion to the size of the project in order to avoid disproportionately increased costs. 
Different approaches are recommended for projects above and below a size threshold defined as 
project with a total investment of less than UDS 1 million (small), and projects with a total investment 
value of over USD 1 million (medium/large). Robust MRV procedures are important to ensure projects 
are delivering  the expected impacts, however, overly complex MRV requirements for small projects 
can cause the LFI to lose interest in such project, or can cause high transaction costs to increase 
meaning that the projects lose some of their economic benefit for the LFI  and/or the client.  
o Methodology:  The methodology for estimating baselines, energy savings, and greenhouse gas 
emissions reductions should be based on the International Financial Institutions (IFI) Framework for a 
Harmonized Approach to Greenhouse Gas Accou nting. The IFI approach for energy efficiency and 
renewable energy are included in the documents: IFI approach to GHG Accounting for Energy 
Efficiency Projects and IFI Approach to GHG Accounting for Renewable Energy Projects.  
• Land Use:  
o Methodology: Based on IPCC, the MRV system for all of the investments in land use will follow the 
same generic formula to calculate emission removals.  
o Approach: or the purpose of grouping the estimate of carbon dioxide emissions removals from different 
activities in the land use sector, each LFI will apply the Ex -Ante Carbon- balance Tool (EX -ACT) (FAO, 
2017). EX -ACT is a land- based accounting system, estimating carbon stock changes (i.e. emissions 
or sinks of CO 2) as well as GHG emissions per unit of land, expressed in equivalent tonnes of CO 2 per 
hectare and year. The tool helps project designers to estimate and prioritize project activities with the 
greatest economic benefit and potential for climate change mitigation. This GHG mitigation potential 
may als o be used for economic analyses and for allocating additional project funds.


---
*Page 68*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 73 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages )  
The main programme risks are : low program participation, technology performance, inappropriate use of loan proceeds, 
and macroeconomic factors. The risks are low to moderate in nature and CAF expects they can be largely mitigated 
through the implementation of planned programme activit ies.  
Further, CAF has more than 25 years of experience with project financing through local financial institutions, during 
which CAF created control mechanisms to mitigate key project and client risks. In general, during the due diligence the 
main aspects  that CAF considers in assessing risk of its clients (corporate / banks) are the following factors, which are 
weighted:  
Figure 6. Overview of evaluation factors  
Evaluation Factors  Overall Weight  Factor Type  
1. Country Risk  15% Macro  
2. Industry Risk  5% Industry  
3. Market  10% Client  
4. Sponsor - Shareholders  5% Client  
5. Management  7% Client  
6. Financing Options  5% Client  
7. Experience and Seniority  3% Client  
8. Financial Structure  8% Client  
9. Solvency  4% Client  
10. Indebtedness  3% Client  
11. Operating Cash Flow - Hedging  20% Client  
12. Financial Reports  5% Client  
13. Operation Type  2% Client  
14. Term  2% Client  
15. Guarantees and Insurance  6% Client  
CAF will also ensure that participating LFIs have an environmental and social policy and, based on it, have 
implemented an Environmental and Social Risk Analysis and Management System for the categorization of its 
operations and for  the evaluation of the environmental and social risk of  their portfolios. Technical assistance will be 
provided to support the strengthening of the ESMS if necessary , and independent audits will be performed to ensure 
the adequate implementation of ESMS. See section G. 
 
Below are described the main financial, technical and operational, social and environmental risks that might prevent 
the programme objectives from being achieved. Furthermore, the table below describes the risk mitigation measures.  
 CAF will ensure that LFIs comply with national regulations and currently all national regulations in the countries targeted in this program are align with the international standards.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include abuse, co nflict of i nterest, c orruption, r etaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as fraudulent, c oercive, 
collusive, and obstructive practices  
Selected Risk Factor 1:  Low levels of programme participation by enterprises   
Category  Probability  Impact


---
*Page 69*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 73 
   
 Technical and operational  Medium (5.1-20% of project value)  Medium  
Description  
Enterprises – including small and medium sized commercial and industrial businesses and farms – may develop 
fewer projects than expected. These entities have many competing priorities and limited time. Further, many of these 
entities are simply not aware of what projects could be conducted, what opportunities there are for financing, or the 
potential benefits of projects for their enterprises.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The programme is designed to mitigate this risk, specifically : 
• Activity  2.1.1: Climate change and mitigation awareness raising  
• Activiti 2.2.1: Matchmaking between LFIs  and TSPs  
• Activity  2.2.2: Country opportunities for standardized performance -based contracts   
• Activity 2.3.1: Technical Support for LFIs  
• Activity 2.3.2: Technical support for SMEs/TSPs  
• Activity  2.4.1.: Communication and visibility  
• Activity 2.4.2: Lessons learned and stakeholders’ engagement activities  
The probability of the risk occurring – given information currently available –  cannot reasonably be assumed to be lower 
than medium at this time.  
Selected Risk Factor 2: Climate technologies do not perform as expected   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Social and environmental  Medium (5.1- 20% of project value)  Medium  
Description  
Distributed renewable energy, energy efficiency and land use climate change projects implement may not perform as 
expected; if this occurs, they will have a lower impact on climate change than estimated.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The programme is specificall y designed to mitigate this risk, particularly:  
• Activity 2.3.1: Technical Support for LFIs  
• Activity 2.3.2: Technical support for SMEs/TSPs  
• Programme Management.  
 
Technical support and capacity building with LFIs will include development of technology -specific project assessment 
protocols.  The majority of projects is expected to involve the type of “prescriptive” technologies with relatively well 
under stood performance. In some cases, TSPs may propose technologies that are site- specific, or “custom”. The 
programme will also develop “custom technology” assessment protocols. As part of ongoing technical support for LFIs, 
experts retained by CAF will work with LFIs to review all “custom” project applications over a certain size (e.g., anticipated loan size) prior to loan approval.  
The Energy Savings Insurance (ESI)
40 Scheme being put in place in Peru, and Chile can also be used to mitigate this 
risk. ESI guarantees the energy savings promise of the TSP to the SME, using a surety insurance mechanism, a 
standardised contract, and an independent third-party  validation mechanism. The ESI and other models such as ESCO, 
servitisation (pay  as you use) models, among others would be proposed to the LFI according to the market 
characteristics. The TA support will guide and support the LFI in incorporating these innovative business  models for 
structuring and building demand for their green credit lines.  
Over time and with programme experience the probability of this risk occurring is expected to be low.  
 
40 The Energy Savings Insurance model developed by BASE, includes an insurance that guarantees the energy 
savings to SMEs and reduce the risk perception in energy effici ency investments.


---
*Page 70*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 73 
   
 Selected Risk Factor 3:  Use of loan proceeds outside programme requirements   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium (5.1- 20% of project value)  Low 
Description  
LFIs may disburse loans for projects that do not meet CAF or GCF requirements.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
An LFI’s receipt of programme loan proceeds will be contingent on the LFI’s compliance with their CAF programme 
agreement, which will include specific guidelines for project financing approval. CAF’s will supervise the compliance of 
the LFIs and review the portfolio of projects.  Ongoing programme monitoring by CA F will help ensure compliance.  
Selected Risk Factor 4:  Macroeconomic risks   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  High (>20% of project value)  Low 
Description  
Macroeconomic factors including exchange rate fluctuations, political instability and other factors that impact 
programme performance.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Market assessments for participating countries will include assessment of macroeconomic treats and opportunities. 
CAF is mitigating this risk by selecting a portfolio of target countries that are relatively stable. Further, CAF monitor s 
current events in t he LAC region, and will monitor potential impacts on LFIs and program performance. Partnering LFIs 
will be obligated to provide yearly updates to CAF on financial performance.  
Currency fluctuations could impact the value of reflows to CAF and partner inst itutions. As a hedging mechanism, LFIs 
generally conduct foreign exchange swaps with third party providers, as needed. Further, the target countries were selected in part based on their creditworthiness as rated by global financial rating agencies.  
Even with reasonable mitigation measures in place, the nature of macroeconomic risks does not warrant the anticipated probability of occurring to low.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5:  Risk related to COVID -19 outbreak  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  High (>20% of project value)  High 
Description  
COVID -19 outbreak and related measures taken by the participant countries may impact programme performance. 
Confinement and social distance measures, as well as the economic crisis derived from the economic downturn can  
prevent TA activities from being carried out, may prevent beneficiaries from coming forward to apply for credit, may 
prevent beneficiaries from taking the risk of committing themselves to a credit, may impede providers to comply with 
requests.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
In response, CAF has approved a USD 50 mm Emergency Loan to each of its country -members directed towards the 
health sector and a USD 2.500 million Emergency Credit Line which will allow authorities to contribute to the continuity 
of business operations and the recovery of their economies . This decision is of great importance for helping local 
MSMEs to deal with the economic downturn.  The GCF funding will come to provide further support and generate 
synergies through this programme, at a key time for fostering post -crisis low -carbon development.  
 
With regard to project activities, in the event of a health crisis CAF will make all means available to ensure that activities 
are carried out under the highest standards of prevention. In times of confinement, ways to continue with the 
implementation of the project will be eval uated, with the help of virtual tools where possible.


---
*Page 71*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 73


---
*Page 72*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 73 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
CAF has a strong working relationship with LFIs across Latin America and  works together with such institutions as well 
as project developers towards overcoming key barriers in fi nancing sustainable investments.  As described in B.4, since 
2012, CAF has been implementing the its Programme for Environmental and Social Management for Financial 
Institutions (PGASIFs ) - a platform to promote and enhance the management of environmental and social impacts in 
the financial sector of the Lati n-American region, while also transfer ring knowledge and promoting good practice s in 
environmental and social and Governance (ESG) to strengthen the adoption of ESG principles in LFIs . Such experience 
has been paramount for the design and elaboration of the proposed program and it’s ESMF, ensuring that appropriate 
and robust procedures and safeguards are in place for implementing climate change projects in the energy and land 
use sectors.  
 
Environmental and Social Planning at the Programme Level  
Together CAF and participating LFIs will ensure that comprehensive and robust environmental and social screening and management systems are in place, and program activities and investments are closely monitored, evaluated and 
reported in terms of social and envi ronmental impacts. During the due diligence phase of the LFIs, CAF will assess the 
ESMS of each institution and ensure that it is aligned with the ESMF of the P rogramme, including CAF´s Environmental 
and Social Safeguards and those of the GC F. 
Participating LFIs must have an environmental and social policy and, based on it, have implemented an Environmental and Social Risk Analysis and Management System for the categorization of its operations and for the evaluation of the 
environmental and s ocial risk of their portfolios. The measures to be applied by the LFIs include the following:  
• Verify that the operations it finances are not prohibited by law;  
• Verify that the operations it finances are not included in the Exclusions List of CAF, and the p rogram -specific 
exclusion list included within ESMF (Annex 6);  
• Require compliance with national legislation in terms of obtaining permits and environmental licenses, use of 
natural resources and activities with dangerous substances;  
• Categorize and evaluate the environmental and social risk of the operations it finances;  
• Verify that the amounts requested by their clients include the implementation of the measures established to 
minimize the environmental and social risks of their operations;  
• Present reports of the environmental and social management of its operations, according to the frequency 
established in the credit agreement, which will be fixed depending on the risks of its portfolio and the magnitude 
of the credit granted by CAF;  
• CAF will conduct a scr eening on all participating LFIs regarding the quality and robustness of their 
environmental and social standards. Technical support needs will be identified to ensure that LFIs ESMS are 
adequate to support the screening, approval, monitoring and evaluation of investments in the targeted areas. 
When ESMS systems are either not in place or are weak, CAF will provide technical to help establish or improve 
such systems, and where possible support LFIs to improve their ESMS to be able to participate within the 
program. LFIs with ESMS that do not meet GCF or CAF standards will not be able participate within the 
program.  
 
A gap assessment will be performed and when not fully aligned the LFIs will receive support to make the required 
adjustment and capacities for t heir participation in the Programme (within Activity 2. 3.1.2 ). This is an added value of 
the Programme which will contribute to strengthen LFIs ESMS, contributing to the long- term sustainability and 
transformational character of the P rogramme. In addition,  independent audits will be performed to ensure that the 
ESMS are implemented adequately.  
All sub -loans will be screened by LFIs for their environmental and social risks and impacts prior to credit approval. 
During this screening phase projects will be rev ised according to the LFIs’ Environmental and Social Risk Analysis and 
Management System to ensure they adhere to local regulations and laws, including ESIA requirements. Category A or 
high- risk projects will not be supported within the program, along with other investments described in the program 
exclusion list within Annex 3. The Programme will be limited to Category B projects and will not finance category A 
projects. As such it is qualified as I-2. 
Where necessary environmental and social management plans (ESMPs) will be either in place or developed at the final loan beneficiary level to manage identified risks and adverse impacts.


---
*Page 73*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 73 
   
 For this program, within the framework of eligibility require ments established for the sub -projects as described in the 
previous section, LFIs will manage loans according to the following requirements:  
1) An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) will be conducted by LFIs for all investments to identify 
potential risks. The ESA should include:  
a. A description of the area of influence of the operation, including the area of direct and indirect influence;  
b. Characterization of the environment, including information specific to the project site that has a level of 
detail and geographic scale according to the area of direct and indirect influence, that covers all of the environmental and social components/ factors that could be affected by the project. It should include 
information on climate change and climate va riability, as well as exposure to natural disasters. Such 
information such provide a clear baseline of environmental and social data.  
c. Identification and evaluation of environmental and social impacts  
d. Elaboration of an Environmental and Social Management Pr ogram (ESMP), compatible with the legal 
and institutional framework of the respective country, that identifies concrete prioritized measures and 
actions to prevent, mitigate, compensate or enhance environmental and social impacts that could be 
generated by  the operation.  
2) All investments will comply with all applicable environmental, social, health and safety, and labor regulatory 
requirements of the respective country where the project/ investments are implemented.  
3) LFIs will monitor and ensure that the part icipating Beneficiary/SME will comply with all applicable 
environmental, social, health and safety, and labor regulatory requirements of the participating country.  
4) During project screening by LFIs, sub -projects will be categorized into low, medium and high risks based on 
the preliminary environmental and social assessment. High risks projects will not be deemed eligible for financing.  
5) An exclusion list has been developed that identifies investments that will not be supported by the program (Annex I). This l ist will be integrated into the loan approval process, ensuring all supported projects comply with 
the exclusion list.  
6) Ensure the necessary stakeholder consultation is conducted during project preparation phase, as necessary.  
7) LFIs must appoint an Environmental and Social Officer, or equivalent position, for the duration of the Project to monitor the implementation of the environmental and social management plans, and to support the screening, 
evaluation, monitoring and reporting of environmental and social risks and impacts. This officer must provide 
regular reporting to the appointed CAF safeguard executive.  
8) For Energy Efficiency sub -projects, adopt a Decommissioning and Disposal Protocol for replaced equipment 
and materials acceptable to the CAF, to be pre sented by LFIs and approved by CAF as a condition prior to first 
disbursement. The protocol must ensure that any equipment replaced is not reused and is appropriately 
disposed. Once approved, said Protocol will be part of this ESMF and as such will apply t o the LFIs and each 
respective sub- borrower as pertinent to their respective responsibilities.  
9) For land use investments, LFIs will screen investments using a country -level deforestation risk matrix, to ensure 
that appropriate conditions are in place to ens ure that the supported investments will not result in deforestation. 
Such an assessment will identify deforestation risk at different administrative levels and provide tools and 
information to support LFIs and CAF for the screening and M&E of investments. A more detailed description of 
the assessment can be found in the Annex 6  
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1 page )  
The program will promote gender equality and women´s empowerment both at the fund - and project -level. The program  
will support the use of gender -disaggregated indicator systems, requiring participating LFIs to collect and report on 
gender -disaggregated data. While many of the LFIs have such systems, some may need to integrate or strengthen 
their M&E systems to ensure that such gender -disaggregated data is collected. In terms of financial products, the 
project will support the design and promotion of green sub- loans that enhance the participation of female -led SMEs. 
CAF will work with LFIs to target women´s organizations, support awareness raising campaigns, and set clear targets 
to target women- owned SMEs. Entrepreneurial development services will be further supported through the design and 
promotion of entrepreneurial development services (e. g. energy efficiency audits, promotion of green investment 
alternatives in land use, among others), in ways that enhance participation of female -led SMEs. Finally, the program 
will support financial education through the design and promotion of training pr ograms to enhance participation of 
female personnel and/or female- led SMEs within the Programme.  
A gender responsive M&E framework has been developed for the project, which will work with LFIs to track monitor and evaluate the impact of the program and it s project -level investments on gender. Tracked indicators include, among 
others, the percentage of female- owned SMEs accessing credit, the number of men and women who have accessed 
trainings, among various other indicators (see Gender Action Plan in Annex 6 for further information). A gender -


---
*Page 74*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 73 
   
 specialist will oversee the implementation of the gender action plan at the fund level and liaise with LFIs as necessary 
to ensure that their ESMS adequately meets gender -related requirements, to follow up on the M&E of  gender -related 
targets with LFIs, and to provide ongoing support as required on topics related to gender within the context of the 
proposed program.  
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
As per the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA), CAF, as the Accredited Entity, shall be responsible for the overall 
management, implementation  oversight  and supervision of the programme in line with its own internal rules, policies 
and procedures, including administering and managing the use of GCF Proceeds, as well as the monitoring, evaluation 
and reporting responsibilities.  
CAF will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement with the GCF, for the Loan and the Grant, which will describe the 
specific requirements regarding the financial management of GCF ´s resources  for the programme.  
For CAF and GCF loan resources to LFIs, CAF will enter into, or amend exist ing, loan contracts for credit lines with 
each participating LFI. Loan resources will be administrated as per CAF ´s Manual for the Credit and Equity Investment 
Process (MN/DCRR - 017) which has been reviewed by the GCF during CAF ´s accreditation process . The Manual 
guides the process for all the phases of the c redit, including : (i) Origination; (ii) Evaluation; (iii) Approval; (iv) 
Formalization; and (v) Administration.  GCF non-reimbursable resources will be executed by CAF, following its Manual 
for the Mana gement of Technical Cooperation Operations (MN /VPP – 064).  
The procurement processes will follow the last version of CAF´s Manual of Procurement of Goods, Consulting Services 
and Works (NM/DFLA -038). The Chapter VIII of this Manual includes all the details and thresholds for the procurements. 
These thresholds for the procurement of goods and services are presented in the table below.  
CAF guidelines will be used for acquisition and contracting of goods. These guidelines  have been included in Annex 
10. 
Exact items to be procured are outlined in Annex 4: Budget.   
Table 16 . Overview of process thresholds for the procurement of goods and services  
Threshold (Amount in USD)  Method  General procedures  
0 – 5,000  
(Only for the purchase of goods)  Direct contracting 1. Receive at least one offer.  
5,001 – 10,000  
(Only for the purchase of goods)  Market 
assessment  1. Market assessment;  
2. Receive at least two (2) offers  
3. Select the best offer based on the 
completion of an evaluation.  
0-10,000 (Only for the purchase of services, 
consultancy and works)  Direct contracting 1. Receive at least one offer.  
10,001 – 50,000  
(For the purchase of goods, services, 
consultancy and works)  Market 
assessment  1. Market assessment;  
2. Receive at least three (3) offers from 
different providers; and  
3. Select the best offer based on the 
completion of an evaluation.  
50,001 – 150,000  
(For the purchase of goods, services, 
consultancy and works)  Market 
assessment  1. Prepare Terms of Reference;  
2. Market assessment of potential 
providers;  
3. Receive at least three (3) offers from 
different providers; and


---
*Page 75*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 73 
   
 4. Perform an evaluation based on the 
criteria indicated in the terms of reference.  
150,001– Until the next amount indicated below, 
depending the type of purchase.  Private bidding Private bidding to select providers – 
Request for Proposal. An evaluation 
Committee will review the offers and select 
the provider.  
From 250,000 – For Consultancy services  
From 500,000 – for the purchase of goods and 
commercial or professional services  
From 2 ,000,000 – for the purchase of works  International 
Public bidding  International Public bidding process for the 
selection of providers – Request for 
Proposal.  
An evaluation Committee will review the 
offers and select the provider.   
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the followi ng two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and 
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.   
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 76*
---

H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 73 OF 73 
   
 • Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
 
. 
 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes   
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)  (template provided)   
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and /or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed b udget  plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation  timetable  including  key project/programme milestones  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):   
(ESS disclosu re form  provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS ) 
☐ Others (please specify  – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,  
Indigenous People ’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc. ) 
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule      
    
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 1 6 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ Annex 1 7 Multi- country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 8 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entitie s undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)


---
*Page 77*
---

Gabinete Subsecretario de Hacienda 
TLC 
E7695/2018 
Mr. 
Yannick Glemarec 
Executive Director of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) Santiago, Republic of Chile, January 16th, 2020 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Corporaci6n Andina de Fomento (CAF -Development Bank of Latin 
America) regarding the Green Climate Financing Facility for LFls in Latin-America 
We refer to the programme "Green Climate Financing Facility for LFls in Latin-America" which involve Chile 
as included in the funding proposal submitted by Corporaci6n Andina de Fomento (CAF -Development 
Bank of Latin America). 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Finance, the National Designated 
Authority/focal point of Chile. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)The government of Chile has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal;
(b)The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Chile's national priorities,
strategies and plans;
(c)In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the programme as included in the
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included in 
the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
74


---
*Page 78*
---

Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525  /  Quito - Ecuador  Teléfono:   (593 2) 398-7600 ●
www.ambiente.gob.ec
Oficio Nro. MAE-MAE-2020-0259-O
Quito, D.M., 19 de marzo de 2020
Asunto: Funding proposal for the GCF by Development Bank of Latin America (CAF)
regarding the programme "Green Climate Financing Facility for LFIs in Latin-America"
Señor
Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
GREEN CLIMATE FUND
En su Despacho 
Dear Mr. Glemarec, 
The following is In reference to the programme titled “Green Climate Financing Facility
for LFIs in Latin-America” in Ecuador, as included in the funding proposal submitted by
the Development Bank of Latin America (CAF) to us on March 17. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment of
Ecuador, which acts as National Designated Authority. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our No-Objection to the programme as included in the
funding proposal. 
By communicating our No-Objection, it is implied that: 
1.The government of Ecuador has no-objection to the programme as included in the
funding proposal;
2.The programme, as included in the funding proposal, is in conformity with
Ecuador’s national priorities, strategies and plans;
3.In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme,
as included in the funding proposal, is in conformity with relevant domestic
legislation.
As National Designated Authority, we underline that our national process for ascertaining
no-objection to the programme, as included in the funding proposal, has been duly
followed, therby being applicable to all projects or activities that will be implemented
within the scope of the programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
1/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux 
75


---
*Page 79*
---

Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525  /  Quito - Ecuador  Teléfono:   (593 2) 398-7600 ●
www.ambiente.gob.ec
Oficio Nro. MAE-MAE-2020-0259-O
Quito, D.M., 19 de marzo de 2020
Atentamente, 
Documento firmado electrónicamente
Lcdo. Juan Sebastián De Howitt Holguín
MINISTRO DEL AMBIENTE  
Copia: 
Señor Abogado
Steven Augusto Petersen Rojas
Viceministro del Ambiente
Señor Magíster
Carlos Arturo Espinosa Gallegos Anda
Subsecretario de Cambio Climático
Señorita Bióloga
Karina Patricia Salinas Heredia
Directora Nacional de Adaptación al Cambio Climático, Encargada
Señorita Ingeniera
Gabriela Jeanneth Vargas Luna
Especialista de Políticas de Cambio Climático 3
Señor Ingeniero
Ricardo Mauricio Proaño Cardenas
Especialista de Políticas de Cambio Climático
Señora Secretaria
Teresa Del Pilar Pérez Toscano
Secretaria de la Subsecretaria
rp/gv/ks/ce
2/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux 
76


---
*Page 80*
---

�� 
REPUBLICA DE PANAMA 
-GOBIERNO NACIONAL -MINISTERIO DE 
AMBIENTE 
Panama, March 301\ 2020 
OCTI-064-2020 
Mr. 
YANNICK GLEMAREC 
Executive Director 
Green Climate Fund 
Dear Sir, 
We refer to the project "Green Climate Financing Facility for LF/s in Latin-America" which 
involve Panama as included in the funding proposal submitted by Development Bank of Latin 
America (CAF). 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment of Panama, 
the National Designated Authority/focal point of Panama. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the project "Green Climate Financing Facility for LFis
in Latin-America" as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)The government of Panama has no-objection ' to the project as included in the funding
proposal;
(b)The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Panama's national
priorities, strategies and plans;
(c)In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project, as included
in the funding proposal, is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project, as included in 
the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all activities to be implemented within the scope of 
the project. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Sincerely, 
Head of the International Technical Cooperation Office 
GPC/LC/ad/jrnc/dc Albrook, Calle Broberg, Edificio 804 
Republica de Panama 
Tel.: (507) 500-0855 
www.miambiente.gob. pa 
Escaneado con CamScanner 
77


---
*Page 81*
---

MINISTERIO OE ECONOMIA Y FINANZAS 
DIRECCl6N GENERAL DE ASUHTOS DE ECONOMIA 
INTERNACIONAL, COMPETENCIA Y PRODUCTIVIDAD 
"OECENIO OE LA IGUALOAO OE OPORTUNIOAOES PARA MUJERES Y HOMBRES" 
"ANO OE LA UNIVERSALIZACt6N OE LA SALUO" 
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF") 
Lima, March 25th 2020 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the Development Bank of Latin America (CAF) regarding 
the Green Climate Financing Facility for LFls in Latin-America programme. 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the Green Climate Financing Facility for LFls in Lath-Amerli:.3 programme in Peru as 
included in the funding proposal submitted by CAF to us on March 17'h, 2020. 
The undersigned is the du'y authorized representative of the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the 
National Designated Authority of Peru. 
Pursuant to GCF decision 8.08/10, the oontent of which we acknowledge to have reviewed. Wf3 hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the programme as Included in the funding prop.osal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)The government of Peru has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal;
(b)The programme as included in the funding proposal i's m conformity with Peru's national
priorities, strategies and plan·s;
(c)In accordance with the GCF's envirenmental and social safeg1.1ards, the programme as 
included in the funding proposal is in conformity witb relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included 
in the funding propos1:1I has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be imp1emented within the 
scope of the programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
78


---
*Page 82*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information 
Project  or programme title  Green Climate Financing Facility for L ocal Financial 
Institution s in Latin -America  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
 
Accredited entity  Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF ) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I -2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Chile, Ecuador, Panam a, and Peru  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Wednesday, October 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Spanish  
Explanation on language  Spanish is the official language of the participant countries . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.caf.com/media/2825869/green -climate -
financing -facility -for-lfis-in-latin -america -environmental -
and-social -management -framework -eng.pdf  
 
Spanish:  
https://www.caf.com/media/2825870/programa -de-
financiamiento -verde- para -insti tuciones -financieras -
locales -en-america- latina -marco -de-gestio -n-ambiental -y-
social.pdf   
Other link(s) https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente -y-cambio -
climatico/proyectos/  
79


---
*Page 83*
---

Remarks  An ESM S consistent with the requirements for a Category I -
2 project is contained in the “ Environmental and Social 
Management Framework ”. 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Indigenous Peoples Plan ning Framework  (IPP F) / 
Wednesday, October 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Spanish  
Explanation on language  Spanish is  the official language of the participant countries . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.caf.com/media/2825869/green -climate -
financing -facility -for-lfis-in-latin -america -environmental -
and-social -management -framework -eng.pdf  
S
panish:  
https://www. caf.com/media/2825870/programa- de-
financiamiento -verde- para -instituciones -financieras -
locales -en-america- latina -marco -de-gestio -n-ambiental -y-
social.pdf  
Other link(s) https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente -y-cambio -
climatico/proyectos/   
Remarks  The IPP  Framework and scope of indigenous peoples plan  
is contained in Annex F of the “ Environmental and Social 
Management Framework ”. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Wednesday, October 7, 2020   
Place  Hard copies of the disclosure were made available at the CAF 
office branches, located at:  
C
hile (Montevideo Office)  
Ciudadela 1235 entre Reconquista y Camacuá, Montevideo  
E
cuador  
Av. 12 de Octubre  N.24 -562 y Cordero Edificio World Trade 
Center, Torre A, piso 13, Quito  
P
anama 
Vía Boulevard Pacífica, P.H. Oceanía Business Plaza, Torre 
2000, Piso 27, Ciudad de Panama  
P
eru 
Avenida Enrique Canaval y Moreyra No 380 Edificio Torre 
Siglo XXI piso 13, San Isidro, Lima  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  TBD  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, November 9, 2020  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
_
_______  
80


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 09 
Page 81 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP149  
Proposal name:  Green Climate Financing Facility for L ocal Financial Institution s 
in Latin America  
Accredited entity:  Corporaci ón Andina de Fomento (CAF)  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 Impact potential         Scale: Medium/High  
1. In many Latin American countries, the energy and land use sectors are responsible for 
the majority of greenhouse gas (GHG) emi ssions. Emissions from the energy sector vary 
substantially from country to country, but the region’s reliance on fossil fuels and growing 
energy needs imply that the sector will continue contributing to increasing global GHG 
emissions. Approximately 40  per cent  of GHG emissions in the region are produced by the 
agriculture, forestry and other land use sectors.  
2. Although investments in low -carbon technologies and land -use practices are generally 
recognized as effective for climate change mitigation, the adop tion of such technologies and 
practices remains limited in Latin America. Local financial institutions (LFIs) often do not have the technical skills or the necessary financial backing to evaluate, finance and monitor climate change projects. LFIs tend to view the projects as risky and are therefore hesitant to develop 
suitable financial products.  
3. Small and medium- sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and farmers are the primary investors for 
small- scale renewable energy (RE), energy efficiency (EE) and sustainable land use projects. 
They often view new, climate -friendly technologies as high risk and fail to understand how 
projects would benefit them and/or how to identify the most appropriate projects. Even if 
suitable projects are identified, these investors face high t ransaction costs and unattractive 
financing terms from LFIs . According to  the analysis  conducted by the accredited entity (AE) , 
the payback period of EE and RE investment s ranges from four to six yea rs in the participating  
countries. SMEs  regard such payb ack period s as unattractive given a general investment 
payback period of two years  for other investments in their businesses . 
4. Therefore , the key barriers that currently inhibit investments in small -scale RE, EE and 
sustainable land -use pro jects for climate change mitigation are primarily : 
(a) The unavailability of commercial bank financing with attractive pricing and longer tenor 
for investors ; and  
(b) The limited knowledge of investors and LFIs of low -carbon technologies and of the 
potential benefits of such climate change projects.  
5. The proposed programme aims to offer financial and technical assistance to local 
market players  such as LFIs, technology and/or solution providers (TSPs) , and investors  in the 
agriculture, forestry, comme rce industry and service sectors to overcome key barriers to 
developing small -scale climate change mitigation projects in the RE, EE and land -use sectors. 
With the programme’s support, 11  LFIs will develop credit lines designated specifically for


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 09 
Page 82 
 
 
climate change mitigation projects. The programme will also provide  technical assistance with a 
focus on education, technical support and awareness -raising for LFIs, TSPs and investors.  
6. The programme’s implementation period will be 10 years, including a five- year 
disbursement period.  
7. The participating countries are Chile, Ecuador, Panama and Peru , which have a 
combined population of 72 million. All participating countries produce substantial GHG 
emissions from the energy and agricultur e sectors.  Whil e there is a strong foundation of 
knowledge regarding proven and effective low -carbon technologies and practices for the target 
sectors, scaling up and properly incentivizing their adoption remains a challenge owing  to 
numerous barriers.  
8. The Corporaci ón Andina de Fomento (Development Bank of Latin America ( CAF )) is  
both an AE  and an executing entity.  
9. The programme will require a total funding amount of USD 150.2 million. This funding 
will come from multiple sources: a USD  95 mil lion GCF loan;  a USD  50 million CAF loan ; a USD  5 
million GCF grant ; and a USD  0.2 million CAF grant. Thus, the total funding of USD 100 million 
provided by GCF will consist of a USD  95 million loan  and a USD  5 million grant.  
10. The programme is comprised of two components:  
(a) A green  finance credit line for LFIs ; and  
(b) Technical support and awareness- raising .  
11. A USD  145 million credit line will be made available for 11 LFIs in the countries 
participating in the programme. The LFIs that receive funding from the programme will, in turn, 
lend to investors (SMEs and farmers) to invest in RE, EE and sustainable land  use projects. The  
sustainable land use projects will include s ilviculture  (sustainable forestry production and 
conservation ), agriculture and livestock  systems . 
12. The programme’s technical support and awareness -raising  component can be divided 
into six subcomponents:  
(a) Creating links between LFIs and TSPs ;  
(b) Develop ing standardized performance -based contracts between TSPs and beneficiaries ;  
(c) Providing technical support an d capacity -building for LFIs, TSPs and investors ;  
(d) Conducting an awareness -raising campaign among stakeholders , including government 
agencies ; 
(e) Enhanc ing the  environmental and social risk management systems and skills  of LFIs;  
and  
(f) Establish ing a monitoring  and reporting framework of climate results for LFIs.  
13. For the p rogramme, the AE has selected 11  LFIs from among those with existing 
business partnerships , those that have sustain ability and green finance goals  in particular , and 
those with an environmental  and social risk management system in place . Two to three LFIs  
have been selected for each participating country, and each LFI is expected to receive a credit 
line of USD 8–17 million.  
14. Of the USD  145 million provided for the 11 LFIs to on-lend, the AE estimates that USD  
55.2 million,  or 3 8.1 per cent,  will be used to fund  EE projects. Sustainable land use projects 
represent 30.0 per cent,  with a total amount of USD  43.5 million, while  RE project s represent 
31.7 per cent,  with a total of USD  46 million.


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 09 
Page 83 
 
 
15. The programme will fund 1,214 climate change mi tigatio n projects. Of these, 691 (or 
56.9 per cent  of the total) will be EE projects. There will also be 289 sustainable land use 
proje cts (23 .8 per cent  of the total) and 2 34 RE projects ( 19.3  per cent  of the total).  
16. The programme will achieve GHG emission reductions of 5.8 million tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (MtCO 2eq) over  its 10- year lifespan. More specifically, sustainable land use 
projects are expected to achieve GHG emission reductions of 4.8 MtCO 2eq, representing 81. 9 per 
cent  of the programme’s total GHG emission reductions. RE and EE projects are estimated to 
achieve GHG emission reductions of 0. 7 MtCO 2eq (12.4 per cent ) and 0. 3 MtCO 2eq (5.7  per cent ), 
respectivel y. 
17. Moreover, the funding proposal estimates total GHG emissio n reductions of 10.7 
MtCO 2eq over a period of  20 years, 10 years beyond the programme’s lifespan. This calculation 
can be considered reasonable for the impact projection of RE and sustainable land use projects, 
which, in general, have longer investment periods.  However, s uch a long impact projection 
period could lead to an overestimat ion of GHG emission reductions from  EE equipment and 
projects given the ir relatively short investment life.  
18. The programme will pro vide financial support for 1, 214 SMEs (including farmers) to 
promote investments in climate  change mitigation  projects in the participating countries. The 
AE aims to ensure that  at least 39  per cent of SMEs  supported by the programme  are women-
owned . In total, approximately 36,420 people will be reached through  the programme’s  
awareness- raising  efforts.  
19. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP)  considers the impact potential of the 
programme as “medium/ high ”. 
1.2 Paradigm shift potential      Scale:   Medium/High  
1.2.1.  Potential for knowledge -sharing and learning  
20. The k ey barriers that have been identified for investments in small -scale RE, EE and land 
use sector  projects  are primarily : 
(a) The lack of  suitably  priced  financing of long tenor ; and 
(b) The limited awareness and knowledge among LFIs and SMEs of the benefits and 
technology of c limate change mitigation projects.  
21. The programme will assist LFIs in overcoming  these barriers by offering funding  of 
longer tenor  priced at submarket  rates  to on-lend  to climate change mitigation projects . 
Additionally, the programme will assist not only LFIs but also TSPs and investors through 
capacity -building and awareness -raising .  
22. The programme will help LFIs, TSPs and SME investors to explore and develop an 
inventory of the best  and most suitable  technologies and practices in their respective sector s 
and national context. This will help to scale up and replicate the programme, which will 
contribute to promot ing a favo urable  environment for investments in climate chang e mitigation 
projects in the participating countries. The e xperience and track record  that  LFIs gain and 
establish through the programme is expected to revert the credit perspective  of LFIs regarding 
the financing of climate change mitigation projects . Nevertheless, the  scaling -up and replication 
of the programme may continue depending  on the  availability of  necessary  concessional funding  
of longer tenor and submarket pricing  that can be  offer ed to LFIs.


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 09 
Page 84 
 
 
1.2.2.  Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
23. Programme monitoring and evaluation will enable a process of continuous 
improvement. Lessons learned will be shared and applied to improve the programme in the 
participating countries  as part of the programme’s technical support . CAF will develop and 
implement a communication and dissemination strategy that will include measures to engage 
women and women- owned SMEs. A portfolio of success stories will be developed to help 
demonstrate  the programme’s value to LFIs, TSPs and government agencies. These lessons 
learned and success stories will be included in various promotional materials and published on 
the programme website.   
24. All participating countries have the necessary legal framewor ks in place to enhance 
investment in climate change projects. Moreover, t his programme is well -aligned with national 
GHG emission reduction targets and priorities. The programme’s s uccessful performance and 
the creation of a  favo urable market environment a re expected to encourage and support 
national and local authorities in prioritiz ing strong policies in the  RE, EE and land use  sectors.   
25. The independent TAP views the programme’s  paradigm shift potential  as 
“medium/ high ”. 
1.3 Sustainable development potential              Scale: High  
1.3.1.  Environmental co -benefits  
26. The programme will cont ribute to the development of 234 RE generation projects in this 
region, where fossil fuel generation remains the primary source of electricity. It will generate 
1,168 gigawatt hours (GWh ) of RE and achieve energy savings of 1, 270 GWh  over  the 
investment lifetime .  
1.3.2.  Economic co-benefits  
27. The program me is expected to convert 2 1,662 hectares (ha) of land area to sustainable 
uses, r esulting in production income from timber and other land use projects over the 
programme’s lifetime.  Productivity of SMEs would be  improved as a result  of efficient energy 
consumption. The AE estimates that additional income of USD 31 million in total would be  
generated by the end of the investment period.  
28. It is estimated that, for every USD 1 million that is invested in EE projects, 14.4 jobs are 
creat ed. Thus, the programme’s EE projects w ill generate approximately 989  jobs. For every 
MW installed for RE projects, it is estimated that 6.65 jobs are created. Through the progr amme, 
this will generate over 283 jobs.  
29. Furthermore , land use mitigation invest ments generate additional jobs because the 
system complexity increases in line with  the increase in area efficiency.  Therefore, it is 
estimated that 3,899 jobs will be created from low- carbon land use investments  based on the 
target area,  and the average number of 0.18 jobs created per ha. 
30. In total, the programme is projected to create 5,171 jobs in the climate change sector  in 
the participating countries.  
1.3.3.  Social co -benefits  
31. Of the 110  LFI staff (10 staff per each LFI) expected to participate in  the programme’s  
trainings and workshops, the programme aims to ensure female representation of 50  per cent .


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 09 
Page 85 
 
 
32.  The programme also aims to strengthen the provision of c redit lines to women- owned 
SMEs . It plans to make at least 39 per cent  of its beneficiaries (borrowers) women- owned SMEs 
and to offer at least 30 per cent  of its funding amount  to women -owned SMEs . In Latin America  
from 2011 –2012, only 22  per cent  of loans were provided to women- owned SMEs , even though  
they represent 39  per cent  of the total SMEs.  
33. The independent TAP assesses the  sustainable development potential of the programme 
as “high ”. 
1.4 Needs of the recipient                Scale: High              
1.4.1.  Absence of alternative sources of financing  
34. According to a global study undertaken by the Organisation for Economic Co- operation 
and Development in 2018, the average interest rate spread for loans to SMEs and larger 
enterprises was between 3.52 and 12.70 percentage points in participating Latin American 
countries. This difference in lending conditions, which is based on company size, is indicative of 
the difficulties SMEs face in accessing  attractive commercial financing.  
35. Securing commercial lending for new technologies  – such as  clean energy solutions and 
climate change mitigation practices in land use  – pose s additional challenges to SMEs.  These 
technologies tend to have higher upfront c osts and  offer lower returns , making their payback 
period longer than that of ordinary investments.  
36. The c ommercial banking market in the participating countries offer s SMEs short -term 
loan s. While the tenor for these loans  has recently  become longer , it r arely extends  to a tenor of 
five years with adequate terms.  
37. Therefore, GCF financing is critical for the  success of the  programme. Without GCF 
financing, the programme would be  unable to provide LFIs with long er-tenor , submarket -priced  
funding to overcome  the current market and financial barriers that limit the promotion of  small-
scale RE, EE and sustainable land use project s. 
1.4.2.  Need for strengthening institutions and implement ation  capacity  
38. The existing market for LFI -financed climate change projects in participating countries 
is very small. Very few LFIs offer  dedicated financial products that can suitabl y fund these  types 
of projects. According to  the evaluation conducted by CAF , only 9 out of the 56 LFIs that were 
assessed in the target countries offer  dedicated green financial products. Of these, only two 
specialize in land use , seven  focus on sustainable energy, and  four  offer green finance for both  
the sustainable energy and land use sec tors.  
39. Therefore, the  programme addresses the needs of LFIs to enhance institutional capacity 
and create a favo urable  environment in order to expand their involvement in financing small -
scale RE, EE and sustainable land use projects in the participating co untries. The programme 
will assist with the establish ment of  specific markets for local climate change projects by 
creating links  between LFIs and TSPs , and by standardizing performance -based  contracts 
between TSPs and beneficiaries   
40. The independent TAP regards the needs of the recipient as “high ”.


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 09 
Page 86 
 
 
1.5 Country ownership               Scale: High  
1.5.1.  Existence of a national climate strategy  
41. All four  participating countries have a national policy framework and relevant domestic 
policy to foster climate change mitigation projects in RE, EE and sustainable land use activities 
to counter climate change impacts. The programme will support selected LFIs that will 
contribute to the national targets set out in nationally determined contributions ( NDCs ). 
42. In accordance with its  NDC , Chile aims to reduce its GHG emissions by 30  per cent  below  
its 2007 level by 2030 (35–45 per cent  of these reductions will be contingent  on international 
financial support) . The NDC has identified energy, agriculture , land use, land -use change and 
forestry  (LULUCF)  as priority sectors for mitigation. Energy is the largest contributor to the 
country’ s GHG emissions , representing 75  per cent  of total GHG emissions , followed by 
agricult ure (15 per cent ). By 2025, t he country aims to increase the share of clean energy to up 
to 20  per cent  of energy generation and reduce energy consumption by 20 per cent.  The 
Government  of Chile ’s policies and initiatives in the agriculture  sector  recogniz e the importance 
of the sector in mitigat ing GHG emissions and include measures to support climate change 
adaptation and mitigation.  Chile is aiming  to re forest  100,000 ha of degraded land with its own 
resources by 2035.   
43. In its intended nationally determined contribution ( INDC ), Ecuador aims to promote RE 
to reduce GHG emissions in the energy sector by 20.4 –25.0 per cent  compared with the 
business -as-usual scenario. The e nergy sector and the agriculture, forestry and other land use  
sector  are the largest contributors,  accounting for 50 and 43  per cent  of the country's total GHG 
emissions , respectively. Ecuador’s INDC  further outlines targets to reduce GHG emissions from 
deforestation and forest degradation through reforestation  and the pro motion of  sustainable 
production systems.  
44. Panama's NDC highlights the importance of the energy and LULUCF sectors. The 
LULUCF sector contributes 80  per cent  of the country’s national GHG emissions , while the 
energy sector contributes 17.3  per cent.  The NDC confirms the Government  of Panama’s 
intention to promote RE and EE and carry out  reforestation and ecosystem restoration.  Panama 
is aiming to achieve a 30 per cent share of RE in all installed capacity by 2050 compared with a 
share of 7 per cent  in 2010 , excluding hydropower. In terms of the LULUCF sector , the country 
has set a target  of an increase in carbon dioxide (CO 2) absorption capacity of  at least 10  per cent  
by 2050 compar ed with the baseline scenario without the NDC. With international support , it 
could be further increased by up to 80  per cent.  
45. Peru’s INDC reaffirms  the importance of promoting RE  sources  and reducing 
deforestation and forest degradation. Half of Peru’s national GHG emissions are attributed to 
LULUCF. By 2030, Peru aims to reduce its GHG emissions by 30  per cent  compared with  the 
business -as-usual level,  which is also  subject to the availability of international financing and 
the establishment  of favo urable conditions. The country’s National Energy Policy for the period 
2010– 2040 promotes RE and EE  and the develop ment of  an energy sector with minimum 
impact on the envi ronment, including by reducing the sector ’s contribution to national GHG 
emissions. The National Strategy on Forests and Climate Change (2016) promotes a reduction in 
deforestation and degradation and the conservation of 54 million ha of primary forests as  a 
national priority.


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 09 
Page 87 
 
 
1.5.2.  Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver  
46. Created in 1970, CAF is a multilateral development bank owned by 19 countries  – more 
specifically, by 17 countries in Latin America, Portugal and Spain , and 13 private banks in the 
region. CAF promotes sustainable development and regional integration in Latin America by 
offering  financial assistance to both the public and private sectors. At the end of 2018, the total 
loan and investment portfolio of CAF amounted to  USD 25.1 billion, with over  150 operations 
approved for a total of USD 13.6 billion. The long -term credit rating  of CAF  is AA–  according to  
Standard & Poor’s and  Aa3 according  to Moody’s Investor Service.  
47. Over 28  per cent  of the portfolio of CAF includes green finance focusing  on EE, RE 
solutions, sustainable transport , and climate change adaptation through disaster risk reduction 
and ecosystem services. The objective  of CAF  is to achieve a 30 per cent  share of green finance 
in its portfolio. In 2019, CAF approved the financing of facilities totalling  USD  6.4 billion for 
financial institutions in its member countries.  
48. CAF has  also  developed the programme for green business and energy efficiency 
(PNVEE) to stimulate the expansion of green credit l ines to its LFI clients. PNVEE  includes 
technical tools to  help  LFIs to better understand green business and EE opportunities. Through 
PNVEE, CAF will provide USD 95 million to the programme.  
49. CAF  has direct investments in sustain able land use  projects across Latin America.  Its 
assistance includes financial and technical support for agriculture, sustainable forest  
management and REDD- plus.   
1.5.3.  Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
50. CAF supports government s in relation to sector policy and regulatory development. It 
has engaged  directly with local authorities with regard to susta inable energy, EE  and land  use 
policy formulation, implementation and financing. CAF also has extensive experience with 
multi -stakeholde r engagement in the target countries with respect to  the transportation, 
hydropower , biomass  and sustainable land use  sectors.  
51. During the preparation of the funding proposal , CAF engaged in discussions  with the 
participating countries’  national designated authorities  and LFIs . TSPs and banking associations  
were also  involved in the discussions , in addition to SMEs , SME associatio ns and entities with 
knowledge and interest in the sectors targeted by the programme. Consultations with women -
led SMEs  were also carried out.  
52. No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorities  of the four 
participating countries  are attached to the funding proposal . 
53. The independent TAP assesses the country ownership of the programme as “high ”.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 09 
Page 88 
 
 
1.6 Efficiency and effectivenes s                 Scale: Medium 
1.6.1.  Cost -effectiveness and efficiency regarding financial and non -financial aspects  
54. The programme requires GCF and CAF to contribute  USD  100.0  million and USD  50.2  
million,  respectively,  for a total of USD  150.2 million. The programme will achiev e GHG emission 
reductions of 5.8 MtCO 2eq over  its 10 -year lifespan, resulting in a cost  of USD  25.8 per tCO 2eq. 
The GCF cost per tCO 2eq is estimated to be USD 17.2. 
55. Taking into account  the long investment period of RE and sustainable land use projects 
and applying a projected 20-year mitigation period for the programme,  the programme’s total 
GHG emission reductions are  projected to amount to 10.7 MtCO 2eq. In this case, the cost of the 
GHG emission reductions is estimated to be USD 14.0/tCO 2eq. The GCF cost per tCO 2eq would 
decline to USD 9.3. 
56. The programme estimates that s ustainable land use projects will be the most efficient , 
achieving GHG emission reductions of 8.7 MtCO 2eq, or 81.6 per cent  of the programme’s total 
emission reductions , with a funding allocation of USD  43.5 million, which equates to 30.0  per 
cent  of the USD  145.0  million for LFIs to on- lend . RE projects are estimated to deliver  GHG 
emission reductions of 1.3 MtCO 2eq (12.5 per cent ) with a funding allocation of USD  46.4  million 
(31. 7 per cent ). With regard to  EE projects, a funding allocation of USD  55.2  million is 
anticipated,  result ing in GHG emission reductions  of 0.6 MtCO 2eq, or 5.9 per cent  of the total 
GHG emission reductions of the programme.  
57. Given the estimation that the performance of sustainable land use projects will 
determine the programme’s  overall success and efficiency , the TAP rea ched an agreement with 
the AE that the AE should  endeavo ur to maintain the distribution of financing among the RE, EE 
and sustainable land use sectors as presented in the funding proposal. More specifically, t he 
total amount of financing for the sustainable land use sector committed by LFIs to their 
borrowers/beneficiaries will not be equal to or less than 20 per cent of the total loan amount 
committed by LFIs in the programme, except in the two years after the  first disbursement.  The 
agreement is reflected in the term sheets.  
58. The programme’s funding of  USD  145.0  million will be  lent to LFIs, which in turn will on 
lend to SMEs  for RE, EE and sustainable land use projects.  GCF is requested to provide a USD  95 
million fund priced at submarket  rates  to incentivize SMEs to borrow and invest in RE, EE and 
sustainable land use projects. The c oncessiona lity of GCF fund ing will be  passed on to LFIs , and 
ultimately to SME borrowers.  
1.6.2.  Amount of co -financing  
59. GCF will contribute  funding  to the programme  in the total  amount of USD  100 million ( a 
USD  95 million loan plus a USD  5 million grant). The GCF contribution will be matched with USD  
50.2 million in funding from CAF ( a USD  50 million loan and a USD  0.2 million grant). 
Accordingly, the co-financing ratio is estimated to be 0. 50. 
60. The fund ing contributed by GCF and CAF, except  for a USD  5.2 million grant, will be lent 
to LFIs  and,  in turn, lent to investors  for investing in RE, EE and sustainable land use projects. 
While LFIs do not contribute their own funds, the  AE assumes that investors (borrowers)  will 
invest their own capital in the projects , amounting to a total of USD  35.0 million. Therefore, the 
GCF contribution of USD  100 million will leverage a tot al of USD  80.2 million (including the CAF 
loan and grant contribution) with  a ratio of 0.8.


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 09 
Page 89 
 
 
1.6.3.  Programme/project financial viability and other financial indicators  
61. The programme includes a technical assist ance component to train and support LFIs in 
assessing the technology and financial viability of RE, EE and sustainable land use projects. The 
projects’ f inancial viability varies depending on both the type of project and the country. As LFIs 
assume credit risk,  the potential projects’  financial and technical viability will be assessed and 
confirmed by LFIs with  the programme’s  technical support . 
62. GCF and CAF will jointly assume the credit risk  of LFIs . Participating LFIs have been 
screened and selected by CAF  out of  those that share sustainable and green finance goals, have 
an environmental and social safeguard management system in place, and maintain a satisfactory 
credit and operational history with CAF.  
63. The s ustainability of  the programme’s intervention in the target countries after the  end 
of the programme is likely to requ ire concessional funding . Financial and commercial 
bottlenecks hindering t he promotion of small -scale  RE, EE and sustainable land use projects 
will, however,  be eased as a result  of the programme’s intervention.  
1.6.4.  Industry best practices  
64. Through its technical support and awareness- raising  component, the programme will 
help LFIs to develop the necessary technical capacity to review and fund climate change 
mitigation projects effectively. As part of this component, standardized performance -based 
contracts between TSPs and beneficiaries will be developed. In addition , the capacity of LFIs, 
TSPs  and beneficiaries/SMEs will be improved and a monitoring and reporting framework of 
climate results will be established for LFIs .  
65. The programme also promotes suitable  technologies and practices for RE, EE and land 
use climate change projects. The sustainable technologies expected to be deployed for RE and 
EE are relatively consistent across the six participating countries. However, land use project types may vary considerably. CAF  has developed a comprehensive list of technical references, 
guidelines and manuals to be consulted during implementation of the programme . 
66. It is expected that industry best practices will evolve in the EE, RE and sustainable land 
use sectors in the participating countries a s technologies and practices are continuously 
reassessed by LFIs, TSPs and SMEs to adopt the most effective and efficient applications during the programme’s lifespan.  
67. The independent TAP assesses the programme’s efficiency and effectiveness  as 
“medium” . 
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
68. The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve the programme  as 
presented.  
69. The programme aims to reduce GHG emissions in Chile, Ecuador, Panama and Peru 
through locally financed and devel oped small -scale  climate change mitigation projects in the RE, 
EE and land use sectors. The programme will assist LFIs, TSPs and SME investors/borrowers in  
overcoming financial and technology  barriers by offering not only concess ional funding but also 
technical support for capacity -buildi ng and awareness -raising .


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 09 
Page  90  
 
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel  
assessment findings  (FP149)  
Proposal  name : Green Climate Financing Facility for L ocal Financial Institution s in Latin 
America  
Accredited entity : Corporaci ón Andina de Fomento (CAF)  
 
Impact potential  
 
AE concurs with iTAP assessment  
 
Paradigm s hift potential  
AE concurs with iTAP assessment  and remarks.  
 
The AE  acknowledges that the scaling -up and replication of the programme might  rely  on the availability 
of necessary  concessional funding of longer ten or as highlighted by the iTAP . Never theless,  the 
consulta tion process carried out also revealed  that major  barriers are  the lack of understa nding of the 
business of many LFIs , the lack of  prop er inf ormation regardin g these technologies  among SMEs and the 
lack of l inkages between TSPs , SMEs and LFIs . 
 
Thus, as part of the activiti es of the  Programme , emphasis will be given  to strengthen capaci ties to LFIs, 
TSPs  and SMEs  for reducing the knowledge and information gaps , includ ing among othe rs: developm ent 
of ba nkable projects pip elines within LFIs, devel opment  of standardize -perf ormance con tracts, which will 
help clients and providers to have a clear and transparent contractual arrangement to negotiate 
investments ; and activiti es to  increa se knowledge o f mitigat ion and  financial benefits , amo ng all SME s 
and LFIs . 
 
The replication and scalin g up is expecte d to be promoted through all these activities as well , which will 
also have a positive impact in  accessing  future resources fr om the LFIs for th ese technologies  and sectors, 
cons idering the knowledge a cquired through the programme.  
 
Sustainable development potential  
AE concurs with iTAP assessment  and remarks.  
Needs of the  recipient  
AE concurs with iTAP assessment  and re marks.  
 
Country ownership  
AE concurs with iTAP ass essment  and remarks.  
Effic iency a nd effectiveness


---
*Page 94*
---

GCF/B.27/0 2/Add.09 
Page 91  
AE concurs with iTAP assessment  and remarks.  
A
s stated in the iT AP’s assessment the AE acknowledges th at sustainable land use projects will be the 
most effic ient, and therefore w ill consider  different strategies during t he impl ementation of the 
Programme, aimed at targeting and e ngaging with potential beneficiaries of th is sector to ensure  the 
maintenance of the distribution of financing among the RE, EE and s ustainable land use sectors as 
presented in th e funding proposal ; and complying with the agreement inclu ded in the Term Sheet, 
namely, that the  total amount of financing for the sustainable land use se ctor committed by LFIs to their 
borrowers/benefici aries  will not be equal to or less than 20 per cent  of the total loan amount committed 
by LFIs in the  programme, except in the two years after the first disbursement. 
Overall remarks from t he in dependent Technical Advisory Panel : 
AE 
concurs with ITAP ass essment.


---
*Page 95*
---

ANNEX 8 – GENDER ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAMME 
LEVEL ACTION PLAN  
CAF has long -standing experience working on topics related to financing and gender in Latin 
America. 
This assessment and the resulting Gender Action Plan are based on key literature published, 
initial discussions with LFIs, and was informed by various studies, consultations and workshops conducted by CAF throughout Latin America. A notable recent effort co -financed by CAF was 
wide ranging study conducted in the financial se ctor throughout Latin America with the objec-
tive to present and promote different alternatives for Latin American financial institutions to improve financial services for women.
1 Further consultations will be conducted in the inception 
phase, and ongoing stakeholder engagement events, including events targeted at women -
owned SMEs, will ensure ongoing engagement of men and women.  
Gender Assessment 
Program Description2 
The program objective is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in Latin America through lo cally 
financed and developed climate change projects in Latin America. Specifically, the program will focus on the energy and land use sectors, both of which are major contributors to GHG emissions in participating countries (Chile, Ecuador, Panama, and  Peru). 
The program consists of a financial component and technical/ awareness raising component:  
Financial Component (Loan/ Credit Risk Guarantee)
-Output  1.1 Green Finance Credit Line for LFIs
Technical Support and Awareness Building  Component
-Output  2.1 Climate change and mitigation awareness raising
-Output 2.2 Enabling environment activities for development of Projects
o2.2.1 Matchmaking between LFIs and solution providers
o2.2.2 Standardized performance -based contracts for solution providers
-Output  2.3 Technical support and capacity building
o2.3.1 Technical support for LFIs
Technical support for project development and assessment
Strengthening environmental and social management systems
Technical support for GHG baseline definition and MRV
o2.3.2 Technical support for SMEs/TSPs
1 Accessible online under: https://www.ecobankingproject.org/catapultando -poder -financiero -la-mujer -caso -nego-
cios-instituciones -financieras -america -latina -ya-cuenta- version- ingles/?lang=en#.XABstttKipo  
2 A more detailed description can be found above in Section 3, or in the full program proposal submitted to the GCF. 
92


---
*Page 96*
---

 Technical support for project feasibility  
 Technical support for GHG baseline definition and MRV  
- Output 2.4 Dissemination and learning reinforced 
o 2.4.1 Communication and visibility  
o 2.4.2 Lessons learned and stakeholders’ engagement activities  
 
Through these components and sub -components, the project aims to:  
 Identify, finance and implement bankable climate change projects in the energy and land 
use sectors, providing improved incentives for solution providers  and LFIs;  
 Strengthen interest by LFIs in climate change projects, where LFIs increasingly see climate change projects are bankable and necessary projects;  
 Increase volume of finance, with suitable financing conditions, for low -carbon investments 
in the energy and land use sector in Latin American countries;  
 Improve awareness of solution providers on climate- change benefits, including financial 
and non-financial benefits;  
 Strengthen the capacities of LFIs for monitoring, evaluation and reporting for climate change projects; and  
 Improve opportunities for women to access finance for climate change projects in partici-
pating countries.  
 
Existing Gender Inequality: Overview   
The highest gender inequality index (GII) is in Panama (0.460), and the lowest is in Chile (0.288 ; 
Table 1 ).3 A study on the gender gap4 conducted by the World Economic Forum in 2018 found 
different results with Ecuador ranking 41st internationally, followed by Panama (45), Peru (52), 
and Chile (54).5 The following sub -sections will provide more detailed information on key areas 
related to gender inequality in the program´s target countries.  
 
Table 1: Overview of gender development index, gender inequality index, and global gender 
gap rankings  
 
 
3 UNDP 2019 
4 Assessed the gap across four categories: economic participation and opporunity, educational attainment, health 
and survival, and political empowement. In total 14 indicators are us ed to develop the overal Global Gender Gap 
Index used by the World Economic Forum. More detailed information on the indicators is available online: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2018.pd f  
5 World Economic Forum 2018  
93


---
*Page 97*
---

Country  Gender Development 
Index (GDI)6 Gender Inequality In-
dex (GII)7 Global Gender Gap 
Ranking8 (2018)  
Chile  0.962  0.288  54 
Ecuador  0.980  0.389  41 
Panama  1.005  0.460  45 
Peru  0.951  0.381  52 
Source  (unless noted otherwise): UNDP Human Development Reports, http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries ;  
 
Poverty  and i ncome  
Gender inequality is still a challenge in the program´s target countries, although all countries 
have made major advancements in promoting gender equality  along with socio -economic de-
velopment  during the last decades . In terms of the human development index, Chile has the 
highest average HDI ranking of the program´s target countries, ranking  42nd globally in 2019.9 
When focusing on the HDI disaggregated by gender, w omen have a lower HDI than men in all of 
the program countries, with the exception of Panama. 
 
Table 2: Human development index (HDI) disaggregated by gender  
Country  Human Development Index  
Female  Male  
Chile  0.828  0.860  
Ecuador  0.748  0.763  
Panama  0.794  0.790  
Peru  0.738  0.776  
Source:  UNDP Human Development Reports, http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries ; 
 
Education 
All countries have seen improvements in access to education for women and girls. The largest 
gap in women having secondary education is in Peru (57% women vs. 69% men), however this average is still higher than other countries such as Ecuador (52% ; Table 3). Nonetheless, there 
are still substantial differences when comparing urban versus rural areas, where women in rural areas are often less likely to access secondary education.
10  
 
 
6 “The GDI measures gender gaps in human development achievements by accounting for disparities between women 
and men in three basic dimensions of human development —health, knowledge and living standards using the same 
compon ent indicators as in the HDI. The GDI is the ratio of the HDIs calculated separately for females and males using 
the same methodology as in the HDI. It is a direct measure of gender gap showing the female HDI as a percentage of 
the male HDI.” - UNDP (No Da te): http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/gender -development -index -gdi  
7 “The GII is an inequality index. It measures gender inequalities in three important aspects of human development —
reproductive health, measured by maternal mortality ratio and adolescent birth rates; empowerment, measured by 
proportion of parliamentary seats  occupied by females and proportion of adult females and males aged 25 years and 
older with at least some secondary education; and economic status, expressed as labour market participation and 
measured by labour force participation rate of female and male populations aged 15 years and older.” – UNDP (No 
Date): http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/gender -inequality- index -gii  
8 World Economic Forum 2018  
9 UNDP 2019 
10  
94


---
*Page 98*
---

In terms of literacy  all countries have relatively high literacy rates. The lowest literacy rate for 
women is 92% of adult women in Ecuador, compared to 94% of men. Illiteracy is a barrier for 
many women to access information and services.  
 
Table 3: Literacy and population with secondary education disaggregated by gender  
Country  Literacy rate  
(% of adults 15 and above)*  Population with at least some sec-
ondary education  
(% ages 25 and older)  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
Chile  96A 96A 79.0%  80.9%  
Ecuador  92A 94A 51.9%  51.9%  
Panama  95B 96B 72.2%  74.8%  
Peru  92B 97B 57.4%  68.5%  
A: 2017; B: 2018 
Source:  UNDP Human Development Reports, http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries ; *ILO Estimate 2019 in World Bank 
DataBank  
 
Health  
While access to and quality of health services has improved in program´s target countries, 
women, especially in rural areas, tend to be more disadvantaged in accessing services. In 2017, the International Labour Organization identified 37 countries where inequities in legal health 
coverage for the rural population were considered ´extreme´, of which 9 countries were in Latin 
America.
11 
The maternal mortality rate has been in decline in all of  the target regions over the last decades. 
Nonetheless, there are still stark differences between the program´s target countries with the highest maternal mortality rate is in Panama ( 94 deaths/ 100,000 births), and the lowest rate is 
in Chile ( 22 deaths/ 100,000 births ; Table 4).
12 In terms of adolescent birth rates (births per 1,000 
women ages 15 -19), Chile has the lowest rate at 41 whereas the highest rates are in Panama 
and Ecuador with 82 and 79 respectively.13 Women have longer life expectancy at birth than 
men in all countries, with life expectancies in the range of 73 to 82 years .14  
 
Table 4: Maternal mortality ratio, adolescent birth rates, and gender -disaggregated lifespan  
 Maternal mortality ratio 
(deaths per 100,000 live births ) Adolescent birth rate (births 
per 1,000 women ages 15 -19) Life expectancy at 
birth  
Female  Male  
Chile  22 41.1  82.5  77.6  
Ecuador  64 79.3  79.6  74.1  
Panama  94 81.8  81.6  75.2  
Peru  68 56.9  79.3  73.8  
 
 
11 ILO 2017 
12 UNDP 2019 
13 UNDP 2019 
14 UNDP 2019 
95


---
*Page 99*
---

Source: UNDP Human Development Reports, http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries ;  
 
Political Participation & Decision Making 
At the international level, all participating countries are signatories or have acceded to the Con-
vention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).15 The pr o-
gramme will further support the Sustainable Development Goal 5 “ achieve gender equality and 
empower all women and girls ”.   
All participating countries are committed to strengthening gender equality. Each country has developed its own institutions, as well as targets, strategies and goals for enhancing gender 
equality within their constitutions, national developme nt plans, strategies and sector -policies 
(Table 5).  
 
Table 5. Examples of national institutions and policies supporting Gender Equality  
Country  Description of Key National Policies and Institutions  
Chile   Constitution of the Republic of Chile  
 National Service for Women in Chile  
 Ministry of Women and Gender Equity  
 Institutional Policy for Gender Equity in Science and Technology  
 Gender Agenda 2014- 2018 
Ecuador   Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador  
 National Development Plan 2017 -2021 
 National Council for Gender Equality  
 National Agenda for Women and Gender Equality  
Panama   Constitution of the Republic of Panama  
 Strategic Government Plan 2015 -2019 
 National Women´s Institute  
 Public Policy for Equal Opportunities for Women  
Peru   Constitution of Peru  
 Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations (since 1996) 
 National Plan for Gender Equality (2012- 2017) 
 Nonetheless, while the program target countries improved their legal framework s and policies  
promoting the political engagement of women, in practice women are still underrepresented in 
government and political decision making. Out of the program´s target countries, Ecuador has 
the highest share of seats in parliament for women (38%), whereas Panama  has among the low-
est share with only 1 8.3% (Table 6) .
16 All countries have see n increases since 2009, with the 
 
 
15 All countries except for Paraguay signed and ratified the convention, whereas Paraguay acceded to the convention 
(providing the same rights as the original signatory). For more information refer to: https://trea-
ties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV- 8&chapter=4&lang=en   
16 UNDP 2019 
96


---
*Page 100*
---

exception of Peru which has similar levels to 2009.17 Nonetheless, considering women make up 
~50% of the population, there is still needed improvement in improving the gender balance in 
political participation and decision making, and mainstreaming gender -equality throughout the 
legal and policy framework.   
 Table 6: Share of seats in parliament held by women 
Country  Share of seats in parliament for women (%)  
Chile  22.7%  
Ecuador  38.0%  
Panama  18.3%  
Peru  27.7%  
Source: UNDP Human Development Reports, http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries ;  
 
Resource Use & Labor Force  
The United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean as well as the 
International Labour Organization reported that there has been an 11% increase in women´s participation in the labour force over the last 30 years in Latin America and the Caribbean.
18 
Nonetheless, the same study found that there is still a substantial wage gap with women earning on average 17% below men of the same age and economic status, and unpaid labour is often 
placed on women resulting in an uneven balance of workload and compensation.
19  
Women’s  participation in the national labour force is within the range of 51 -70% the program 
region, with the highest participation in Peru and the lowest in Chile  (Table 7 ).20 In the agricul-
tural sector, women are employed less  than men with % of female employment in the sector 
ranging from 5% to 26%, in Chile and Peru respectively.21  
 
Table 7: Labour force participation and employment in agriculture (by gender)  
Country  Labour  force participation (% 
ages 15 and older)  2019 employment in agriculture *  
Female  Male  % of female employment  % of male employment  
Chile  51.0%  74.2%  5% 12% 
Ecuador  56.6%  81.8%  24% 29% 
Panama  52.5%  80.5%  8% 18% 
Peru  69.9%  84.7%  26% 29% 
Source: Source: UNDP Human Development Reports, http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries ; *ILO Estimate 2019 in World 
Bank DataBank  
 
 
17 World Bank DataBank  
18 ELAC 2019  
19 ELAC 2019 
20 UNDP 2019 
21 ILO Estimate 2019 in World Bank DataBank  
97


---
*Page 101*
---

Land tenure is a major barrier for women particularly in the land use sector, where women in 
many countries in LAC have lower access to land tenure or formal land use rights ( Table 8). This 
has major implications for women’s livelihood security and  makes it difficult for many women 
to access credit/ finance.  
 
Table 8. Distr ibution of i) agricultural holders and ii) agricultural landowners by sex (% female) 
Country  Distribution of Agricultural Holders by 
Sex – Females Distribution of Agricultural Landown-
ers by Sex - Females  
Chile  29.9% (2007)  N/A 
Ecuador  25.4% (2000)  51% (2010)  
Panama  29.3% (2001)  N/A 
Peru  30.8% (2012)  12.7% (2000)  
Source: FAO 2018;  http://www.fao.org/gender -landrights- database/data- map/statistics/en/   
 Advances in women´s access to resources includes increased access to bank accounts and/or 
mobile money -service providers. The following Table provides an overview of the percentage  of 
the female population (ages 15 and older) with an account at a financial  institution or with mo-
bile money service providers. The highest percentages are found in Chile (71%), whereas the 
lowest are in Peru (34%; Table 9 ).
22 While all countries show positive trends, the statistics still 
show a notable gap in the control and access to financial resources, and the importance of in-
creasing women’s ´ access to finance.   
 
Table 9: Percentage of women with an account at a financial institution or with a mobile 
money -service provider  
Country  Women with account at financial institution or 
with mobile money -service provider (% of fe-
male population ages 15 and older)  
Chile  71.3%  
Ecuador  42.6%  
Panama  42.3%  
Peru  34.4%  
Source: UNDP Human Development Reports, http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries ;  
 
Gender Violence  
Gender violence is still an issue in all of the target countries  (Table 10) . Statistics on violence 
against women (from an intimate partner), show that there is a drastic difference between tar-
get countries. In Panama 14% of women over the age of 15 have experienced violence from an intimate partner, whereas Ecuador has the highes t rate out of the target countries with 40% of 
 
 
22 UNDP 2019 
98


---
*Page 102*
---

women having experienced violence.23 Gender violence , however, i s often  under -reported, and 
it is possible that the actual statistics are much higher.   
Table 10: Violence against women experienced by the fema le population by an intimate part-
ner 
Country  Violence against women ever experience, intimate partner  
(% of female population ages 15 and older)  
Chile  Unavailable  
Ecuador  40.4%  
Panama  14.4%  
Peru  31.2%  
Source: UNDP Human Development Reports, http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries ;  
 Acknowledging issues related to gender violence, the following Table 11 summarizes efforts in 
each of the target countries to eradi cate gender violence. While there are women’s shelters in 
all countries, often the availability of services is limited in rural areas. During program imple-
mentation it will be important to include the dissemination of information on gendered violence  
(e.g. hotlines, brochures with an overview of rights, reporting, etc.), as well as available re-
sources available in each country.  
 
Table 11: Examples of initiatives to address gender -based violence in the program´s target 
countries  
Country  Examples of key institutions and initiatives to address gender -based violence  
Chile   Red Chilena Contra la Violencia Hacia las Mujeres:24 They provide gui des on 
how and where to report gender -based violence, as well as guidance for finding 
and accessing additional support services.  
Ecuador   CEPAM:25 Provides services and information on gender -based violence in Ecua-
dor 
Panama   El Instituto Nacional de la Mujer26 y su campaña ´A Todos y Todas Nos Toca´ : 
Campagin aims to prevent femicide and domestic violence . The Insitute  is also 
responsible for coordinating with shelters and short -stay centers for women 
who are victims of gender- based violence and provides information and guid-
ance for reporting gender -based violence and  accessing key services.  
 Establishment of the Comité Nacional contra la Violencia en las Mujeres (CON-
VIMU) in 2014, which focuses on issues related to gender -based violence  
Peru   Observatorio Nacional de la Violencia Contra las Mujeres y los Integrantes del 
Grupo Familiar:27 Provides educational information on gendered violence and 
domestic violence, including information on laws, statistics and other reports. 
 
 
23 UNDP 2019 
24 For more information, refer to: http://www.nomasviolenciacontramujeres.cl/   
25 For more information, refer  to: http://cepam.org.ec/experiencias/   
26 For more information, refer to: https://inamu.gob.pa/comite -nacional -contra -la-violencia -en-la -mujer/   
27 For more information, refer to: https://observatorioviolencia.pe/   
99


---
*Page 103*
---

Country  Examples of key institutions and initiatives to address gender -based violence  
In addit ion, they provide guidance and information on available services for re-
porting violent acts and  accessing other supporting services in Peru.     
 
 
Existing Gender Inequality: F inancial inclusion of women -owned SMEs in LAC  
Financial inclusion constitutes an important factor for the empowerment and economic auton-
omy for women. To improve access to financial products and services for women allows them to broaden their opportunities from a productive, personal and financial perspective. Nonethe-less, financial inclusion remains a challenge for many women globally, where there is a funding gap of $287 billion for financing SMEs owned by women.
28 It has been further estimated that 
70% of women -owned SMEs in developing countries have inadequate or no access to financial 
services.29 
 
 
Information Box: Key definitions  
Women -owned (IFC definition)30 If an enterprise is:  
(A) ≥ 51% owned by woman/ women,  OR  
(B) ≥ 20% owned by woman/women; AND (i) has ≥ 1 woman as EO/COO/President/Vice Presi-
dent; AND (ii) has ≥ 30% of the board of directors composed of women, where a board exists.  
 
 Such challenges are present in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), where it is estimated that 
around 39% of SMEs across all sectors are owned by women.
31 The number is much lower in 
sectors such as agriculture (see below) and can be assumed to be mostly true for the services sector. In 2011-2012, only 22% of loans in LAC were provided to women -owned SMEs.
32 Glob-
ally, the estimated financing gap for women -owned SMEs is the largest in LAC at 85,638 million 
USD (Figure 1). In LAC, SMEs have roughly the same distribution of women -owned formal enter-
prises across the three main economic sectors retail, services and manufacturing. This is im-portant for the green lending potential, as sustainable land use loans are only applicable under the category manufacturing (i.e. primary production and processing), while clean energy loans have potential demand across all three sectors.  
 
 
28 IFC 2014 
29 Goldman Sachs 2014  
30https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/industry_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/financial+institutions/
priorities/ifcs+definitions+of+targeted+sectors   
31 IFC 2014 
32 Ernst & Young in IFC 2014  
100


---
*Page 104*
---

 
Figure 1: Financing gap for women -owned  SMEs across continents  
Source: CAF 2018 based on IFC 2014 
 
Barriers for women- owned SME Development  
Related to enterprise development, barriers for women include limited business skills and net-
works, as well as other socio -cultural barriers. Women often do not have access to the same 
training as men and may have limited financial education or ´business literacy´, which can limit the formation  and growth of their businesses in a profitable and strategic manner.
33 Women´s 
networks often tend to be weaker than men’s networks, limiting women’s professional connec-tions, including professional support networks such as business mentors.
34 Socio-cultural factors 
can further limit enterprise development given the historical role of women contributing to un-paid household labor, where men are often more associated with enterprise development and 
commercial activities.
35 Such factors can limit women´s role in making decisions, accessing 
household resources and in the confidence to develop and enterprise.  
 
Barriers for Women -Owned SMEs to Access Credit  
Beyond barriers for women to develop SMEs, additional barriers exist that limit women-owned 
SME´s access to credit, including social barriers, unsuitable guarantee requirements, size of the 
credit and few cred it products are oriented towards women, among others.36  
With social barriers it is often related to restrictions on mobility and time availability, especially since many women are responsible for unpaid household labor.
37 The above described factors 
relat ed to SME development are further relevant, given the historical dominance of men in many 
commercial activities while women are often more associated wit h household labor.   
Guarantee conditions further limit women´s ability to access credit, as many of th e requirements 
reflect socio -cultural discrimination, often related to the control or resources, land ownership, 
 
 
33 Ibid. 
34 IFC 2014; CAF 2018; Barahona et al. 2018  
35 Ibid. 
36 CAF 2018 
37 Ibid. 
101


---
*Page 105*
---

collateral, among other requirements.38 Land tenure is a major barrier for women particularly 
in the land use sector, where women in many count ries in LAC have lower access to land tenure 
or formal land use rights (Table B1). If women do not have formal access to land tenure, it is 
often extremel y challenging for them to access credit for productive activities.   
Given the use of income as a main  factor to assess credit conditions and amounts, women are 
often only able to access smaller loans with unfavorable conditions (e.g. high interest rates).39 
While some institutions are designing financial products targeted at women, there is a gap in fully developing such products at scale that target women´s financial preferences and needs, 
while also addres sing the identified barriers that they face to access credit. Many banks focus 
on providing micro -credit lending for women, however, do not focus on le nding small and me-
dium loans to women.  
 
Women´s Organizations  
Various women’s organizations are active in each country, many working with the energy and 
productive sectors. The following Table 12 provides examples of such organizations where co-
operation could be pursued to support program implementation, especially related to aware-ness raising and capacity building activities.  
 
Table 12. Examples of organizations and associations working on gender -related topics in par-
ticipating countries  
Country  Examples of Organizations  
Chile   Asociación Gremial EmpreMujer 
 CreceMujer (Banco Estado)  
 Mujeres Emprendedoras  
Ecuador   Asociación  de mujeres  de Juntas Parroquiales Rurales del  Ecuador 
 Unión Nacional de Mujeres de Ecuador (UNME)  
 Centro Ecuatoriano para la promoción y acción de la mujer  
Panama   Asociación de Empresarias y Profesionales de Panama  
 Asociación de Mujeres Corporativas de Panama 
 Asociación de Mujeres Rurales  
Peru   Asociación de Mujer es Empresarias del Peru  
 Asociación Mujer Peruana  
 Asociación de Mujeres Industriales y Empresarias 
 Organización Internacional de Mujeres en Negocios  
 Flora Tristán 
 
Possible Impacts and Risks related to Gender  
As described above, there is a major financing gap for women -owned SMEs to access financial 
services in LAC. Thus, business as usual practices could impact women by continuing to maintain 
 
 
38 Ibid. 
39 Ibid. 
102


---
*Page 106*
---

or even broaden the gap if women are not effectively targeted and empowered through sup-
porting measures w ithin the program.  
The following social barriers  will be taken into account to the extent possible when working with 
LFIs: 
 Women face a greater workload in childcare and home responsibilities, which could affect 
the size and performance of a SMEs.  
 The level of education and training of women entrepreneurs is lower than that of men.  
 Women entrepreneurs have limited access to capital. Generally, women do not have access to financial resources, as their companies are very small, and their nature does not meet  the 
requirements requested by the banking institutions. Women entrepreneurs are normally fi-nanced through family or friend loans, personal savings or moreover from their suppliers.  
 Women entrepreneurs have less availability of access to credit in traditio nal commercial 
banks since sometimes they cannot cover the requirements to apply for a loan (for example: property titles, guarantees). 
 Capitalizing is very difficult for women given the high interest rates and short credit terms, which does not allow them  to have the financial support they need for growth. 
 Financial institutions are generally very conservative when dealing with poor people and par-ticularly with women. They tend to restrict their financial services, such as savings or credit, 
or prefer to s ervice property owners or members of households with high income levels and 
large companies. In this way, these women entrepreneurs are completely out of the financial system.  
 Women are often subject to discriminatory practices by financial institutions, even when their financial profile could be the same as that of men.  
 Usually women receive little or no financial education.  
 Women face negative stereotypes about their ability to do business. 
 Women's SMEs are located mainly in the services sector, have little growth access in financial terms and face structural deficiencies reaching relevant information, management training for their own company and scarce access to information technologies. That said, women still 
play a key role in the energy and land u se sectors, and a major barrier for them is accessing 
credit.  
 
The Programme is anticipated to have primarily positive impacts by improving the access of 
women to finance for climate projects in the energy and land use sectors, building the capacities of women for SME operation, and improving gender -responsive M&E systems within LFIs to pro-
mote the empowerment of women and effectively monitor and evaluate the impact of lending operations on women. Additional gender -related trainings will be conducted to support women-
owned SME development, and to support LFIs to strengthen their gender policy and design tar-
geted financial products for women – helping to address key barriers that limit women´s access 
to finance. The following section discusses key recommendations that have been integrated into 
the program to mitigate gender -related risks and promote positive impacts supporting the em-
powerment of women. These recommendations are further reflected in the Gender Action Plan.  
 
103


---
*Page 107*
---

Approach to Strengthen Gender within the Proposed Program  
While the financial inclusion of women -owned SMEs is not the main objective of the program, 
which is aimed at establishing green credit lines with commercial banks to increase investments 
in clean energy and sustainable land use at t he SME level, gender is seen as a cross -cutting meas-
ure to be included throughout all program components. It is of utmost importance that women 
are adequately included in all processes of the program at the LFI and final beneficiary level and that financia l products (sub loans to SMEs) are designed and promoted in a way that it encour-
ages uptake by women -owned SMEs.  
CAF’s recent report on financial inclusion of women in Latin America (CAF 2018), concludes that there are five areas of intervention for gender  mainstreaming in LFI transactions (Table 13): in-
dicator systems to account for gender impact, second tier financing, financial products, entre-preneurial development services, and financial education. The following table gives an overview of the areas that  are relevant for the proposed program and the impacts, risks and barriers iden-
tified in the previous sub-section.  
 
 
Table 13: Areas of gender mainstreaming under the Green Credit Line Program  
Area  Agent  Action  Program phase  Beneficiaries  
1) Second tier fi-
nancing  CAF Selecting LFIs that have a gen-der strategy or women -ori-
ented financial products; or LFIs that  are willing to develop 
gender -oriented financial prod-
ucts or a gender -strategy.  
 Programme prep-aration  Participating LFIs 
2) Gender indicator 
systems CAF, partici-pating LFIs  CAF to require gender disaggre-gated data on sub- loans, partic-
ipating LFIs to collect and re-port gender disaggregated data. Activity 2.5 to support 
LFIs to strengthen ESMS, in-
cluding strengthening gender -
related screening of projects, management of safeguards and additional benefits, and gen-der-responsive monitoring and 
evaluation.   Programme prep-
aration and im-plementation  Participating LFIs 
3) Financial Prod-ucts CAF, partici-pating LFIs  Design and promotion of green sub-loans in ways that enhance 
participation of female led SMEs  Programme im-plementation  Women -owned 
SMEs  
4) Entrepreneurial 
development ser-vices CAF, partici-
pating LFIs  Design and pro -motion of en-
trepreneurial development ser-
vices (e.g. energy efficiency au-dits, promotion of green invest-ment alternatives in land use, etc.) in ways that enhance par-ticipation of f emale led SMEs  Programme im-
plementation  Women -owned 
SMEs  
104


---
*Page 108*
---

Area  Agent  Action  Program phase  Beneficiaries  
5) Financial educa-
tion CAF, partici-pating LFIs  Design and promotion of train-ing programs in ways that en-
hance participation of female FI staff and/or female led SMEs Programme im-
plementation  Women -owned 
SMEs, staff at 
participating LFIs 
 
1. Second level financing : The program itself is designed in a way that gender considerations 
are mainstreamed throughout the preparation and implementation phase. This could have 
a demonstration effect in the industry and  will help establish the importance of gender 
mainstreaming in the financial sector of the programme countries and in the LAC region as 
a whole. However, it should be noted as the programme is targeting LFIs and their clients directly, no program outcome will s upport second tier financial institutions (for example  na-
tional development banks) per se, unless they decide to participate in exceptional cases like Chile, for example.  
2. Gender -responsive M&E system:  CAF will require participating LFIs to collect and report all 
information on sub-loans in a gender disaggregated manner. Most participating banks are 
doing this already, although for some this approach will be new. The consistent application 
of this guideline will help draw conclusions on the participation and performance (financial 
and in terms of mitigation ben efit) of female led SMEs vis -à-vis male led SMEs, as well as the 
overall average. The Gender Action Plan further provides key indicators and activities that will be implemented and actively monitored to  ensure the programme.  
3. Financial products:  Program design includes the promotion of green sub -loans that enhance 
the participation of female -led SMEs. Specifically, the program includes targets to ensure 
that on average 30% of program beneficiaries are women -owned SMEs. Additional trainings 
will be provided for LFIs on gender, including targeted financial products for women.  
4. Entrepreneurial development services : The program has been designed to promote entre-
preneurial development services in ways that enhance the participation of female-led SMEs. 
Trainings will be provided on SME-development for women, and through promoting part-
nerships with women´s networks and organizations in each participating country. 
5. Financial education: The program includes targeted trainings that aim to enhance the par-ticipation of fe male staff within LFIs, as well as female -led SMEs. Specific -targets have been 
established to ensure equitable participation of men and women within trainings, and spe-cific trainings will be targeted for women to overcome gender -specific barriers for acces sing 
credit and designing climate change projects.   
 
Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
The proposed program includes gender as a cross -cutting element, which has been main-
streamed into the various components and sub -components. It has been designed to promote 
gender equality and the empowerment of women through addressing key barriers which limit their access to financing in the energy and land use sectors in LAC.  
All loans within the program must comply with CAF´s environmental and social safeguards, in-
cluding gender equality (S09). CAF promotes gender equality in the operations it finances . For 
this, it demands that there is no gender discrimination in the operations that it finances, and it 
105


---
*Page 109*
---

encourages (more detailed information on the safeguard, and the environmental and social risk 
management process are provided in the program´s Environmental and Social Management Framework ).  
 
The project budget includes a total of 2 88,700 USD for gender mainstreaming activities (see 
Annex 4. Budget). This budget is for the hiring of local gender consultants  that will support all 
the processes, and for workshops that will support the capacity building activities. Thus, the 
Programme will ensure that there is accompaniment of gender consultants or demonstrable 
gender expertise in the activities of Output 2.1 "Climate change and mitigation awareness 
raised" to accompany the workshops; of Output 2.2, "enabling environment" for the revision of 
contracts with a gender perspective; of Output 2. 3 "Technical support and capacity building", in which activities they will accompany both LFIs and TSPs and SMEs - and in particular women-
owned SMEs - throughout the implementation of the Pro gramme; and those of Output 2.4 "Dis-
semination and learning", in which they will carry out systematization of success cases and in 
events and workshops to share learning.  The development of  Activity 2. 3.1.2  Strengthening en-
vironmental and social management systems, will have a significant weight in mainstreaming gender .  
 
In addition to this budget, PMU's Environmental and Social Specialist shall have proven 
knowledge and skills in gender issues to ensure that this approach is mainstreamed throughout the programme. This specialist shall co -ordinate the work of local consultants who are hired for 
different activities. In addition, this specialist shall co -ordinate with CAF's gender specialists.  
 
CAF will ensure that gender -sensitization will be integrated into all trainings, and program -staff 
will all undergo gender trainings  to ensure compliance with CAF´s safeguard 09.   
The following Table 14 presents the program´s Gender Action Plan (GAP). The GAP demonstrates 
how gender -related measures have been mainstreamed into the program to promote gender 
equality and the empowerment  of women, and to ensure that gender -related risks and potential 
adverse impacts are mitigated or avoided. The GAP will be used as a tool for gender-responsive 
M&E throughout the program´s duration.  
 
106


---
*Page 110*
---

Table 14. Gender Action Plan  
Action  Indicator  Timeline Responsible In-
stitution  Costs (USD)  
Financial Component  
Sub-component 1.1 Green finance credit line for LFIs  
Evaluation of LFIs: existence and quality of gender strategies, policies or 
procedures; women -targeted financial products  Baseline: 0  
Target: All participating LFIs ( 11 LFIs) have 
gender strategy, policy or procedures, or 
women -targeted financial products. If 
not, support will be provided within Activ-
ity 2.3.1.2  to strengthen and/or develop 
strategies, policies and/or procedures.  
MoV: Gender strategies, policies and pro-cedures.  Programme in-
ception phase  
CAF 
Included within 
monitoring  costs 
(AE fee ) 
 Program beneficiaries include women -owned SMEs.  
At program start LFI specific baselines will be established at portfolio level regarding gender gaps in land use and clean energy lending . Baseline: 0  
Target: An average of 25 % of beneficiaries 
are women -owned SMEs  
Baselines established at portfolio level 
MoV: Monitoring reports, LFI -SME con-
tracts and agreements By program 
end CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  
Program finance accessed by women  Baseline: 0  
Target: At least 25 % of overall program fi-
nance accessed by women- owned SMEs40 
MoV: Monitoring reports, financial rec-
ords  By program 
end CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  
Technical Support and Awareness Building  Componen t 
 
 
40 Note that currently 22% of finance meets women -own ed SMEs, thus 25% represents a realistic target given the baseline.  
107


---
*Page 111*
---

Action  Indicator  Timeline Responsible In-
stitution  Costs (USD)  
Output 2.1 Climate change and mitigation awareness raising  
This activity has the objective of i ncreas ing knowledge of the Programme  
(and available financing) as well as climate change mitigation project oppor-
tunities focusing on the targeted sectors and countries of the Programme, highlighting the benefits of such projects and operational aspects important for accessing the financing.  Participation of women -led SMEs will be ac-
tively promoted  and a wareness raising and gender considerations on gen-
der gaps, barriers and additional issues women face in energy efficiency, renewable energy and land use sector  will also be included in trainings . 
 Baseline: 0  
Target: At least 185 (39%)  women -owned 
SMEs  participate in these workshops .  
Training materials, agendas, attendance sheets, photos, meeting summaries By end of Year 
2 CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  Included within 
monitoring costs 
(AE fee). A por-
tion of the work-
shops’ costs (to-
tal $108,000) 
can be consid-
ered allocated to 
gender contents.  
 
Output 2.2 Enabling environment activities for development of projects  
Activity  2.2.1 Matchmaking between LFIs and solution provides  
Matchmaking  between LFIs  and solution providers includes projects oper-
ated by women (women -owned SMEs)  Baseline: 0  
Target: At least 25 % of matches41 made 
between LFIs and solution providers that 
support women -owned SMEs or that have 
a strong gender -empowerment compo-
nent.   
MoV: LFI -SME contracts  By program 
end CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  Included within 
monitoring costs 
(AE fee ). 
 
Activity  2.2.2 Country opportunities for s tandardized performance -based contracts  
Gender expert revises standardized contract template(s) for each country 
to ensure that the documents are gender sensitive.  Baseline: 0  
Target: At least 4 standardized contracts 
(1 per country), written in a gender sensi-
tive manner.  By program 
end CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs in 
each country  Gender consult-
ants’ costs in-
cluded in budget 
of activity 2.2.2 
 
 
41 A match is made when a meeting has taken place between the LFI, the solution provider and the SME, proven through minutes of the meeting.  
108


---
*Page 112*
---

Action  Indicator  Timeline Responsible In-
stitution  Costs (USD)  
MoV: Standardized contract templates  (20,000 USD).  In 
addition, t he 
Programme  
management 
team´s gender 
expert will revise 
the documents . 
 
Output  2.3 Technical support and capacity building  
Activity 2.3.1 Technical support for LFIs  
Activity 2.3.1. 1 Technical support for LFIs in Project Development and Assessment  
Gender consultants to perform the activity: "12 on -the-job trainings on pro-
gramme management and sectorial technologies (assuming 11 LFIs con-
firmed + 1 potential that enters de Programme). Each on -the-job pro-
gramme consists of 5 days  of training provided t o each LFI by 2 international 
consultants, 1 local facilitator and 1 national gender consultant".  
As part of this on -the- job training, trainings for LFIs on gender and how to 
improve access to finance for women -owned SMEs, and to improve gend er 
mainstreaming and monitoring for LFIs. Baseline: 0  
Target: 1 1 participating LFIs have been 
trained in programme management and sectorial technologies with gender per-spective.   
Target: 320 staff are trained  within pro-
gramme activities, out of which 50% or 160 are female LFI staff (50% of 320 LFI staffed trained within the programme)  
 
MoV: Training materials, agendas, attend-
ance sheets, photos, meeting summaries By end  of year 2  CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  $ 33,450 for gen-
der consulta nts 
and a portion of 
the workshops’ 
costs  
Activity 2.3.1.2  Strengthening environmental and social management systems  
Provision of technical support to LFIs to strengthen ESMS, including 
measures to ensure that both men and women benefit from projects fi-Baseline: 0  
Target: 1 1 participating LFIs have 
strengthened ESMS, including measures By end  of year 2  CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  $111,000 dedi-
cated for gender 
experts  within 
assessment 
109


---
*Page 113*
---

Action  Indicator  Timeline Responsible In-
stitution  Costs (USD)  
nanced by the LFI, promoting gender -responsive monitoring of invest-
ments, and ensuring that supported investments do not  widen gender gaps 
or produce adverse impacts.  
LFIs will be encouraged to also disseminate information on gender- based 
violence, and brochures/ information on available in- country initiatives and 
resources to report gender -based violence, as well as information on other 
relevant gender -related initiatives.  
LFIs must also provide information on the complaints and grievance redress 
mechanism to all beneficiaries (see ESMF Annex H for more detailed infor-
mation).  to enhan ce gender -sensitive and respon-
sive monitoring.  
MoV: revised ESMS for each LFI (docu-
mentation reports/ policies, etc.), LFI au-
dits to ensure its application  teams , however 
many other ac-
tivities will 
strengthen 
ESMS, including 
gender (total 
budget  of $1. 394 
million)  
Activity 2.3.1. 3 Technical support for GHG baseline definition and MRV  
One local gender consultant per country for assisting t he local consultants 
in providing capacity building in gender -sensitive M&E. They will be report-
ing to the E&S and Gender Specialist of the PMU.  Baseline: 0  
Target: 1 1 participating LFIs have 
strengthened gender -sensitive and re-
sponsive monitoring.  
MoV: Training materials, agendas, attend-
ance sheets, photos, meeting summaries.  By end  of year 2  CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  
$ 64,000 
Activity 2.3.2 Technical support fo r SMEs/TSPs  
Activity 2.3. 2.1 Technical support for Project feasibility  
Trainings on green business literacy for women -owned SMEs in the energy 
and land use sector together with women’s organizations and LFIs in partic-
ipating countries  Base line: 0  
Target: 60 women -led SMEs are trained in  
green business literacy in the energy and 
land use sector together with women´s 
organizations and LFIs in participating 
countries.  
50% of participants in trainings, work-
shops and conferences are women. By end of Year 
2 CAF in coordina-
tion with LFI  
$112,000  
 
 
110


---
*Page 114*
---

Action  Indicator  Timeline Responsible In-
stitution  Costs (USD)  
MoV: Training materials, agendas, attend-
ance sheets, photos, meeting summaries 
Activity 2.3. 2.2 Technical support for GHG baseline definition and MRV  
Workshops - Trainings for SMEs in developing GHG baselines: 3 workshops 
per year in year 1, 2, 3  (in total, 36 workshops)  Baseline: 0  
Target: 288 women- led SMEs are trained 
in developing GHG baselines (39% of par-
ticipation of women -led SMEs).  
 By end of Year 
3 CAF in coordina-
tion with LFI s  Included in mon-
itoring costs (AE 
fee) and respon-
sibilities of Pro-
gramme’s Gen-
der specialist.  
Sub-component 2.4 Dissemination and learning  
Activity 2.4.1 Communication and visibility  
Development of a communication and dissemination strategy that includes 
measures to engage women, women’s organizations and women -owned 
SMEs  Baseline: 0  
Target: Communication and dissemina-
tion strategy elaborated, including 
measures to engage women, women´s or-ganizations and women -owned SMEs.  
MoV: Final communication and dissemi-
nation strategy  By end of year 
1 CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  
$255,000 total 
cost of activity - 
$30,000 exclu-
sively for gender Implementation of communication and dissemination strategy, and aware-
ness raising campaigns targeted at women’s groups and women -owned 
SMEs  Baseline: 0 people reached through 
awareness raising, strategy not imple-
mented  
Target: Strategy implemented, with a fo-cus on engaging women.  
Target: 55,000 people reached through 
awareness building efforts (50% women)  
MoV: Attendance sheets/ records from 
workshops, webinars, and other stake-holder events  By program 
end CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  
111


---
*Page 115*
---

Action  Indicator  Timeline Responsible In-
stitution  Costs (USD)  
Activity 2.4. 2 Lessons learned and stakeholders’ engagement activities  
Women -led SMEs success stories : Develop a case study of inclusive finance 
in mitigation projects identifying women led -SMEs which were allocated a 
credit for the first time for mitigation technologies: EE, ER and land u se pro-
jects.  
 Baseline: 0  
Target: success story  elaborated.  
MoV: Final format By year 5  CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  
$22,500 
Learning workshops, targeted presentations for dissemination of lessons 
learned to key stakeholders with: i) government institutions; ii) indus-
trial/sectorial association of SMEs; iii) TSPs.  
Participation of women -led SMEs and representation of women from  the 
institutions will be promoted. Lessons learned on gender issues will be par-ticularly shared.  Baseline: 0  
Target: Learning workshops and targeted 
presentations , with a focus on engaging 
women.  
Target: 50% women participation.  
MoV: Attendance sheets/ records from 
workshops, webinars, and other stake-
holder events  By year 5  CAF in coordina-
tion with LFIs  Included in mon-
itoring costs (AE 
fee) 
Programme management  
Programme  management team includes a Gender, E&S specialist to main-
stream the E&S and gender issues throughout the implementation of the Programme.  Gender, E&S specialist included in Pro-
gramme Management Unit  Throughout 
programme du-ration CAF $215,000 for 
Gender, E&S 
specialist, in ad-
dition to  Local 
gender special-
ists 
 
Program me management team includes gender specialist to monitor the 
implementation of the GAP and support LFIs to implement gender- related 
components of the program.  
Budget dedicated for the ongoing monitoring of the GAP.  Gender specialist assigned for program 
evaluation and monitoring; Budget dedi-
cated for the monitoring and implementa-tion of the GAP  Punctual input 
throughout program dura-tion CAF 
Included in mon-
itoring costs (AE 
fee) 
112


---
*Page 116*
---

Action  Indicator  Timeline Responsible In-
stitution  Costs (USD)  
Regular reporting on GAP progress according to program timeline and mon-
itoring protocol  Project Reports include GAP progress (e.g. 
Inception report, annual program moni-
toring reports, final program report)  Throughout 
program dura-tion CAF and partici-
pating LFIs  
113


---
*Page 117*
---

Additional references:  
ELAC. 2019. More women in Latin America are working, but gender gap persists, new UN figures 
show. Available online: https://news.un.org/en/story/2019/10/1050121  
ILO. 2017. Global evidence on inequities in rural health protection. Available online: 
https://www.social -protection.org/gimi/gess/RessourcePDF.ac-
tion?ressource.ressourceId=51297  
UNDP. 2019.  Human Development Reports . Available online: http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries  
World Bank. No Date. DataBank. Available online: https://data.worldbank.org /  
World Economic Forum. 2018. The Global Gender Gap Report 2018. Available online: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2018.pdf   
 
 
114