=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20201019101549+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
/ModDate: D:20201021142156+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Adde ndum  VIII 
Funding proposal package for FP148  GCF/B.27/02/Ad d.08 
21 October 2020  Meeting of the Board 
9 – 13 November 2020 
Virtual me eting 
Provisional Agenda Item 11 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following five parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “ Participation in Energy Access Relief Facility (“EARF”)”
submitted by  Acumen Fund , Inc. ( Acumen );
b) No
-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorit ies or focal point(s);
c) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
d) R
esponse from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s
assessment; and
e) G
ender documentation of the funding proposal.
T
hese documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies ) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled  “Participation in Energy Access Relief Facility 
(“EARF”)” submitted by Acumen Fund , Inc. (Acumen)  is being circulated on a limited distribution 
basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain 
proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.27/02/Add.08  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                           1 
No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorit ies or focal point (s)                 7 5 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                           87 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                94 
assessment  
Gender document ation                                                                                                                                   9 5


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
2 
Project/Programme title:  Participation in Energy Access Relief Facility 
(“EARF”)  
Country(ies):  Uganda, Nigeria, Democratic Republic of 
Congo, Kenya, Senegal, Mozambique, Sierra 
Leone, Rwanda, Zambia ,  
Accredited Entity:  Acumen Fund, Inc.  
Date of first submission:  2020/07/07  
Date of current submission  2020/27/09  
Version number  V.6.3


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 1 OF 75 
 
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E  LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G  GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H  ANN EXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
● Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
● Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding prop osal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
● The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 
60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service 
standard time.  
● The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
● Under the  GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme  funding proposals will 
be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to 
the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited 
Entities are asked to fill out information on disc losure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 GREEN CL IMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 2 OF 75 
 
 A  
 
 
A. PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or private sector  Private  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals 
(RFP)  If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , indicate 
which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the Simplified Approval 
Process and REDD+.  
Not applicable  
A.4. Result 
area(s)   
Check the applicable  GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. For each 
checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. The total of the 
percentages when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
 
☒ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☐ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:    
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:     
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
 
100% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
A.5. Expected 
mitigation 
impact  1.33 million 
tCO2eq1 (see 
Annex 22a for 
detail on 
methodology)2 A.6. Expected adaptation impact  Not applicable  
Not applicable  
 
1 This GHG mitigation impact is expected to be achieved over a programme lifetime of 6 years, which includes 
the approximately 3 -year lifespan of off -grid solar units sold in Year 3 of the fund.   
2 Projected impact on emissions mitigation, companies funded,  MW of renewables installed, and beneficiaries,  
here and throughout the FP, are based upon an assumption that US $30 million of GCF funds is disbursed in 
loans to energy access companies. Actual disbursements, and therefore impact, may be somewhat lower.


---
*Page 6*
---

 GREEN CL IMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 3 OF 75 
 
 A  
A.7. Total 
financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  30,000,000 USD 
– 60,000,000 
USD   
A.9. Project size  Medium (up to USD 250M). 
Acumen was ‘Micro’ accredited at 
a time when the accreditation 
amount was based upon outflows 
to individual recipients, not on 
project totals. Individual loans or 
investments in this programme 
will not exceed USD 10M,  falling 
withi n the “micro” scope of 
accreditation.  A.8. Total GCF 
funding 
requested  30,000,000 
USD  
For multi -country 
proposals, please 
fill out annex 17.  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for 
the GCF 
funding  Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent with A.8.  
☐ Grant  Enter number   
☐ Loan  Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☒ Equity   $30,000,000  
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number


---
*Page 7*
---

 GREEN CL IMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 75 
 
 A  
A.11. 
Implementation 
period  Loan Funding 
Implementation 
Period:  multiple  
years in total . 
 
Year 1: Legal 
Facility set -up for 
GCF 
participation 
through Climate 
CV. 
 
EARF will 
commit Loans to 
eligible 
borrowers  
 
M&E and ESG 
monitoring and 
evaluation per 
the requirements 
of GCF  
 
Year 2:  EARF 
operation of 
loans.  
 
M&E and ESG 
monitoring and 
evaluation per 
the requirements 
of GCF  
 
Year 3: EARF 
operation of 
loans.  
 
M&E and ESG 
monitoring and 
evaluation per 
the requirements 
of GCF  
  
Year 4: EARF 
operation of 
loans.  
 
EARF will start 
transferring back 
loan repayments 
to GCF (via the 
participation by 
Climate CV). 
 
M&E and ESG 
monitoring and 
evaluation per 
the requirements 
of GCF  A.12. Total lifespan  4 years – 6 years


---
*Page 8*
---

 GREEN CL IMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 75 
 
 A


---
*Page 9*
---

 GREEN CL IMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 75 
 
 A  
A.13. Expected 
date of AE 
internal 
approval  This is the date 
that the Accredited 
Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own 
approval to 
implement the 
project/ 
programme, if 
available.  
 
8/24/2020  A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy and  
GCF ESS Standards  to assess your FP 
category.  
I-3  
A.15. Has this 
FP been 
submitted as a 
CN before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or PPF 
support been used to prepare this 
FP? Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the 
entity work 
programme?  Yes ☐    No ☒ A.18. Is this FP included in the 
country programme?  Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.19. 
Complementarit
y and 
coherence  Does the project/programme  complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing 
Entity 
information  If not the Accredited Entity, please indicate the full legal name of the Executing Entity(ies) and 
provide its country of registration and ownership type. Note that there can be more than one 
Executing Entity. Also indicate if an Executing Entity is the National Designated Authority. Refer 
to the definition of Executing Entity in the Acc reditation Master Agreement.  
 
Facility Manager  
Social Investment Managers & Advisors, LLC (SIMA):  
SIMA is a Delaware, USA -registered Limited Liability Company. SIMA is also a registered U.S. 
Securities and Exchange Commission Investment Adviser (registration # 801 -119020).  Note that 
SIMA will be serving in a dual capacity, as both Facility Manager of the EARF and General Partner 
of Climate CV. 
 
Loan Provider  
Energy Access Relief Fund B.V. (EARF):  
EARF will be set up as a Dutch private limited liability company (besloten vennootschap met 
beperkte aansprakelijkheid) incorporated under the laws of the Netherlands.  
 
Intermediary for GCF Participation  
Climate CV 
Climate CV will be set up as a Dutch limited partnership ( commanditaire vennoot schap ). SIMA will 
be the General Partner . 
 
  
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)


---
*Page 10*
---

 GREEN CL IMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 75 
 
 A  
Provide an executive summary of the project/programme including:  
1. Climate change problem  
2. Proposed interventions  
3. Climate impacts/benefits  
 
Climate Change Problem  
1. Sub-Saharan Africa faces unique and acute challenges in the global fight to mitigate and adapt to 
climate change. On one front, the impacts of climate change are predicted to be more severe: 
according to th e Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), temperature increases in Sub -
Saharan Africa are expected to be higher than the global mean temperature increase, impacting 
health, agriculture and food security. At the same time, 548 million people in Su b-Saharan Africa do 
not have access to electricity and must rely on kerosene and diesel generators for lighting, while 
another 900 million (85% of the population) lack access to clean cooking fuels and technologies, 
causing rapid deforestation and dangerou s levels of indoor air pollution. Countries in Sub -Saharan 
Africa must reduce emissions from the energy sector and help vulnerable people and health systems 
to adapt to climate change, while still expanding access to everyone. It is here that energy access  
companies are playing a major role, but now find their continued existence in peril, due to the effects 
of the COVID -19 pandemic.  
2. Energy access firms have made remarkable progress in mitigating climate change, with the majority 
of their impact in Sub -Saha ran Africa. 74 million metric tonnes of CO2e emissions have been avoided 
due to the technology of off -grid solar3, the equivalent of taking 19 coal -fired power plants offline for 
a year. The moment a household switches to solar from a kerosene lamp, that lamp ceases emitting 
black carbon, curtailing its climate -warming potential. As the energy access sector matures and 
scales, it is shifting the development pathway of Africa and Asia towards a renewable future: 
replacing gas generators with powerful solar home systems, firewood stoves with electric pressure 
cookers, and diesel water pumps with solar -powered irrigation.  
3. But that progress is now in peril due to COVID -19. Dramatically reduced sales and collections, 
coupled with disrupted supply chains, limited  cash reserves, and tightening funding sources, are 
crippling companies’ ability to fund operations. A recent survey found that 82% of energy access 
companies are struggling with limited reserves. Half of surveyed companies are contemplating lay -
offs for s ections of their workforce, and over half of solar companies view inventory management as 
a severe problem. Lay -offs could create financial stress for staff and their families. At the same time, 
the loss of the sector’s human capital threatens a downward s piral, where service deterioration 
causes even more customers to stop paying, and inventory stock -outs hamper a potential recovery.  
4.  If we do  not act now to support companies through this period of relief and recovery, we may see 
clean energy companies fal ter in their growth or fail altogether. Product s could go unserviced, 
forcing a widespread return to fossil fuels among existing renewable adopters. Even more troubling, 
we may lose future adoption of renewables as gaps appear in the clean energy ecosystem , just as the 
off-grid industry was beginning to hit significant scale.  Off -grid consumers may have fewer clean 
energy options, imperiling long term and sustainable progress against energy access and black 
carbon mitigation.  
Proposed Intervention  
5. The Energy Access Relief Facility (“EARF”) is a concessional debt fund that is intended to provide 
energy access companies with vital liquidity during this crisis, in the form of low -interest, unsecured 
junior loans.  GCF will not be a noteholder in EARF, but will channel its investment into an 
Intermediary, Climate CV, which will participate in EARF loans to eligible companies operating in


---
*Page 11*
---

 GREEN CL IMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 75 
 
 A  
NOL countries.  These loans are meant to enable companies to remain solvent, maintain staff and 
supply lines, and be p ositioned to drive the post -COVID -19 recovery. Loan covenants will require 
firms to demonstrate pre -crisis viability, document their need for concessionary funding, retain a 
significant portion of their local staff, and report regularly on the progress of their recovery  (see 
Schedule 1 of  the Term Sheet on ‘Key terms of the Loans’ for indicative covenants) . 
6. The concessional loans are intended to be priced at a low enough interest rate  depending on 
company size, to avoid over -indebting companies, while ensur ing that only companies which 
actually need the money will apply. The proposed EARF is expected to lend to borrowers operating 
in NOL and non -NOL countries. Climate CV is expected to be funded by a subscription for 
partnership interests, to be managed by the same manager as EARF , and to participate in EARF loans 
to borrowers operating in NOL countries . The legal structure of this facility will be described in full 
in an eventual final term sheet.  
Climate Impact/Benefits  
7. The AE has secured Letter s of No Objection from 9  countries (Kenya, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, DR 
Congo, Mozambique, Zambia , Senegal, Uganda and Rwanda ). In these  9 countries, 3 08 companies 
have expressed a need for relief funding, with indicative requests totaling ~$ 79.5 6 million, ra nging 
from $8,000 to $3 million in size. Together, we estimate that these firms serve over 85 million 
customers and employ over 2 0,000 staff.  
 
Figure 1: Amount of liquidity financing requested by energy access companies  
8. The EARF could enable these energy access pioneers to continue operations, which would ensure 
service continuity for their customers, continued employment for their staff, and an ability to 
recover sales growth post -crisis. Without relief, current operations may ce ase or slow, resulting in 
foregone renewable sales. 16. 3 million people may be prevented from accessing renewable 
household energy, producing incremental emissions of 1.3 3 million tons of carbon compared to a 
pre-COVID -19 baseline.  
 
3 https://www.gogla.org/resources/global -off-grid -solar -market -report -h2-2019 -sales -and-impact -data  0.0%10.0%20.0%30.0%40.0%50.0%60.0%70.0%80.0%90.0%100.0%
 $- $5,000,000 $10,000,000 $15,000,000 $20,000,000 $25,000,000 $30,000,000 $35,000,000
Kenya
Nigeria
Uganda
Mozambique
Rwanda
Sierra Leone
Senegal
Zambia
Congo DR
India
Tanzania
Others
Ethiopia
Bangladesh
USA
Benin
Myanmar
South Africa
Cameroon
Ghana
Zimbabwe
Liberia
China
Philippines
Cambodia
Madagascar
Burkina Faso
Cote d'ivoire
Mali
Colombia
Togo
Guinea
Somalia
Thailand
MexicoAmount Requested (NOL and non -NOL Countries)
Cumulative % Amount Requested (NOL Countries) Amount Requested (Non -NOL)Companies operating in NOL 
countries requested a total of $79.5 
million, 54% of the cumulative 
amount requested


---
*Page 12*
---

 GREEN CL IMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 75 
 
 A  
9. In addition to these direct benefits, energy access companies are also proving to be valuable 
partners in the fight against COVID -19. Microgrid operators are powering health facilities in Sub -
Saharan Africa and beyond. Clean cookstove companies are distrib uting and financing products that 
reduce household air pollution and can help mitigate respiratory comorbidities. And solar home 
system companies are keeping kerosene out of homes and darkness at bay while millions are under 
shelter -in-place orders.  
10. Over the last ten years, climate finance institutions such as GCF have catalyzed remarkable progress. 
Access to modern, renewable energy has surged in places where even basic access was sparse. Yet 
that progress is now threatened, at a time when the sector was just beginning to expand beyond its 
nascency. The EARF, through the efforts of committed and unshrinking partners like GCF, can help 
companies to weather the storm, keep customers out of the dark, and leap forward, unbroken, into 
the recovery.


---
*Page 13*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
 
B. PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Climate change problem: Describe the climate change problem the proposal is expected to 
address. Describe the mitigation needs (GHG emissions profile) and/or adaptation needs (climate 
hazards and associates risks based on impacts, exposure, and vulnerabili ties) that the proposed 
interventions are expected to address. Also describe the most likely scenario (prevailing conditions 
or other alternative) that would remain or continue in the absence of the proposed interventions. 
Include baseline information. The  methodologies used to derive such information, including the 
mitigation and adaptation needs, should be included in the feasibility study.  
 
Context: In describing the mitigation and/or adaptation needs, briefly describe the target 
region/area of the prop osed interventions including information on the demographics, economy, 
topography, etc.  
 
Related projects/interventions: Also describe any recent or ongoing projects/interventions that are 
related to the proposal from other domestic or international sourc es of funding, such as the Global 
Environment Facility, Adaptation Fund, Climate Investment Funds, etc., and how they will be 
complemented by this project/programme (e.g. scaling up, replication, etc.). Please identify current 
gaps and barriers regarding r ecent or ongoing projects and elaborate further how this 
project/programme complements or addresses these.  
 
Climate change problem  
1. Over the past decades, the ruinous consequences of climate change have become increasingly 
evident at a global level. Howeve r, its impact has been unequally distributed across different 
regions. In particular, Sub -Saharan Africa has experienced more frequent and intense climate 
extremes. These negative impacts will continue to increase if immediate action is not taken. 
Accordin g to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), temperature increases in 
Sub-Saharan Africa are expected to be higher than the global mean temperature increase, 
impacting health, agriculture and food security.4 With the aim of joining internati onal efforts to 
reduce climate change, all African countries signed the 2015 Paris Agreement and committed to 
contributing to the global effort to mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions that have a direct 
impact on global warming. The goal is to maintain global temperature increases to ‘well below 
2°C’ and to pursue efforts to limit warming to ‘1.5°C above pre -industrial levels’. This treaty also 
called for increased financial support from developed countries to support climate action efforts 
of developing  countries.5  
 
4 Ibid.  
5 IPCC. “Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems”. Chapter 3. 2018. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2019/06/SR15_Chapter3_Low_Res.pdf


---
*Page 14*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
2. To attenuate the grim consequences of global warming in this region, it is essential to mitigate 
GHG emissions coming from fossil fuels. In  Sub -Saharan Africa, around 53% of the population -
548 million people - still lack access to electrici ty6 and are forced to resort to carbon -emitting 
energy alternatives such as kerosene lanterns, biomass stoves, and fossil fuel generators, all of 
which produce high economic and environmental costs. Off -grid solar solutions, by contrast, 
offer the fastest  and most cost -effective way to reach millions of people who are not connected 
to the grid with clean and reliable energy.   
 
3. The energy access sector, made up of companies that manufacture, distribute, finance, and/or 
install solar home systems, microgrids, clean cookstoves, and/or solar -powered productive 
appliances, is crucial to achieve the targets set by Sustainable Development Goal 7, that aims to 
ensure affordable, reliable and modern energy for all. By February 2020 the energy access sector  
had sold more than 180 million off -grid solar units worldwide, providing lighting and other 
energy services to 420 million people.7 The off -grid solar home system sector has rapidly grown 
into a US$1.75 billion annual market that supports 370,000 jobs8 and is projected to reach 388 
million people with basic electricity access by 2030.9  
 
4. The growth of the sector has played a major role in reducing the emission of GHG over the last 
ten years:  
a. 74 million metric tonnes of CO2e emissions have been avoided d ue to off -grid solar 
replacing kerosene lamps (which emit black carbon) with solar lamps or lanterns, or the 
equivalent of 19 coal -fired power plants going offline  for a year. At least 44% of kerosene 
lanterns replaced have been in Sub -Saharan Africa.10 
b. An estimated 270,000 metric tonnes of black carbon are still emitted from kerosene 
lamps worldwide each year. It is close to 240 million metric tonnes of CO2. That equates 
to about 4.5 percent of the United States’ CO2 emissions and 12 percent of India’s.11 
Eliminating these emissions would be equivalent to a five gigaton CO2e reduction over 
the next 20 years. Research shows that households that acquire off -grid solar products 
stop using kerosene.  
c. Off-grid solar and green microgrids are reducing the use of diesel and petrol generators 
which are often highly inefficient in the country contexts in which the off -grid sector 
operates. For example, the collective dependency on and capacity of Nigeria’s small 
 
6  IEA, IRENA, UNSD, World Bank, WHO. 2020. Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Pro gress Report. . 
https://trackingsdg7.esmap.org/data/files/download -documents/tracking_sdg_7_2020 -full_report_ -
_web_0.pdf  
7 Lighting Global. “Off -grid solar Market Trends Report 2020”. March 2020. 
https://www.lightingglobal.org/wp -
conte nt/uploads/2020/03/VIVID%20OCA_2020_Off_Grid_Solar_Market_Trends_Report_Summary_High%20r
es.pdf  
8 GOGLA, A Growth Engine for Jobs. June 2019. https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/ 
gogla_off_grid_solar_a_growth_engine_for_jobs_web_opt.pdf  
9 Ibid.  
10GOGLA. “Global Off -Grid Solar Market Report Semi -Annual Sales and Impact Data”. July -December, 2019. 
https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/global_off_grid_solar_market_report_h22019.pdf  
11 The Brookings Institution. “Black Carbon a nd Kerosene Lighting: Opportunity for Rapid Action on Climate 
Change and Clean Energy for Development”. 2013. 
https://www.gogl a.org/sites/default/files/recource_docs/04_climate_change_clean_energy_development_hu
ltman.pdf


---
*Page 15*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
gasoline generators is eight times more than Nigeria’s entire national grid .12 This is the 
case both in terms of residential and business use of off -grid solar, as well as in solar 
water pumping (SWP). Not only do these generators have a high economic cost due to 
their expensive consumption of diesel, but they  have a high environmental cost because 
of the GHG emissions of these appliances.  
5. The energy access sector is not only reducing CO2 emissions in the atmosphere, but contributing 
to the improvement of health and education, creating jobs and income opportunities, and helping 
consumers save money.  
 
Energy access at risk  
6. Today, much of thi s momentum of GHG emissions mitigation is at risk due to the economic and 
financial impacts of C -19: 
○ Sales growth has slowed and revenues are down, both due to customers’ inability to pay, 
stemming from job losses related to shelter -in-place restrictions c aused by the virus.13 
○ Funding to the sector has pulled back, a result of the increased macroeconomic risk and 
competing public health and economic support priorities for development finance 
institutions.  
7. A drop -off in revenues and an inability to raise new funds forces companies to rely on their cash 
reserves. But in a nascent, growing sector, few companies have long financial runways. According 
to a market survey of 621 energy access companies from 44 cou ntries, conducted in July 2020 
by EnDev, 85% cannot survive more than 5 months if current conditions prevail. From this total, 
27% have had a severe disruption, forcing them to significantly curtail operations. 43% of 
companies cannot survive past 1 -2 mont hs. 44% of companies report that sales have more than 
halved, 53% of companies that offer consumer finance have seen repayment rates drop by more 
than a quarter.14   
 
Figure 2: Analysis of COVID -19 impact by company size (i.e. Annu al Turnover)  
 
 
12 A2EI and Dalberg. “ Putting an End to Nigeria’s Generator Crisis: The Path Forward. ” June 2019.  
13 https://endev.info/images/c/c4/EnDev_Energy_Access_Industry_Barometer_FINAL.pdf  
14 EnDev. “Energising Development: Covid -19 Impacts on Markets and EnDev Respons e Options”. June 2020. 
https://endev.info/images/1/1e/EnDev_COVID -19_implications_and_response_options.pdf


---
*Page 16*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
 
 
Figure 3: Analysis by company size (i.e. Annual Turnover) of Sales volume (March – May 2020) compared to last year  
 
 
 
Figure 4: Analysis of collection rate (for PAYGo/credit and microgrid operators) by company size (i.e. Annual Turnover)  
 
Without sufficient revenue or cash reserves, half of the companies in the EnDev survey have had to lay 
off staff; a quarter of firms have laid o ff more than 30% of their workers, 65% of respondents have seen 
a ‘severe impact on their cashflows’ and working capital, and 51% of companies believe they will face 
severe inventory issues in the next 3 months. A worst -case scenario is becoming clear, whe re illiquidity 
and lay -offs produce a drop in service quality and after -sales support, followed by inventory stock -outs 
and possible insolvencies. All of this could combine to devastate the growth projections of the energy 
access sector, setting the climat e progress it has made back by years. Existing customers may be forced 
to revert to traditional pollutive fuels, while millions more potential customers may be stuck in the dark, 
burning kerosene and firewood, for the foreseeable future.  
A Response  
The En ergy Access Relief Facility (“EARF”) seeks to help the sector safeguard its progress towards GHG 
emissions mitigation, reduce the economic impact of C -19, and rapidly recover from the current crisis by


---
*Page 17*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
providing access to emergency relief funding.  The goa l is to preserve the emissions reductions the sector 
has already gained and position the companies to expand emissions reductions to new customers 
beyond the crisis. In addition to diminishing regression of progress towards GHG emissions mitigation, 
the EA RF is also  intended to  provide much needed liquidity to off -grid energy companies that may 
otherwise have to contemplate reducing their workforces or shutting off the systems of customers who 
are temporarily unable to pay.  
Energy access helps to create new  jobs and increased incomes. Recent research in East Africa shows that 
34% of households report an increase in economic activity because of solar home systems (SHS).15 For 
vulnerable, low -income customers, distributed solar power infrastructure provides cr ucial tools of 
resilience in times of crisis since they offer productive uses of energy and household services, 
information services that they can access through radio, TV, Internet and phone access and cashless 
transactions and social connectivity through  mobile charging. Without the support of EARF  to energy 
access companies , we risk seeing customers slip back into poverty and lose income.  
Benefits around health and well -being will also be lost. Almost all off -grid solar customers report 
improvements in t heir quality of life, with the majority also reporting health and safety benefits. 89% 
and 86% of customers in East and West Africa respectively report improved health since purchasing 
their SHS while 91% and 98% report feeling safer.16 This is particularly true where solar products and 
clean cookstoves have replaced the use of kerosene and biomass, respectively - key drivers of household 
air pollution, which kills 3.8 million per year and disproportionately affects girls and women.  
Indi cative Need for Financing  
As of July 8, 2020, 509 energy access companies, that report serving over 100 million customers,17 have 
requested emergency relief funding  through an indicative poll . That demand totals over ~$146M 
(assuming relief funding is size d to local staff headcount at a (low) average of $4k/year per person18) 
and has likely only increased since July . 
Table 1, seen below, breaks down the indicative funding requests by loan size. The table shows the 
share of requests that are within certain amounts . It demonstrates clearly that the majority of requests  
by number  were made by small companies; 73% of requests were for $200,000 or less. It also shows 
that the majority of requests by value  were for larger companies; the 20% of companies a sking for 
loans greater than $200,000 represent 82% of the overall value requested.  
 
 
 
 
15 GOGLA. “Powering opportunity in East Africa” . September 2019. 
https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/powering_opportunity_in_east_africa.pdf   
16 GOGLA. Op. Cit. Septembe r 2019.  
17 This is an estimated number of customers and does not account for the same person perhaps being a customer 
to multiple companies. For those companies with operations in multiple countries, we have divided the ‘number 
of customers across all opera tions’ by the ‘number of other countries of operation’.  
18 This is based on all in -country staff across all countries of operations. On some particular occasions the 
Acumen staff have used their discretion to divide ‘Approx number of in -country staff (acros s all countries of 
operation)’ by the ‘number of other countries of operation’, when this has occurred it has been highlighted in the 
‘Calculation Notes’ column.


---
*Page 18*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
Table 1: EARF Financing Requests, Disaggregated by Loan Size  
Requests by volume  
Share of requests less than or equal to  $50k  34% 
Share of requests  more than $50k and less 
than or equal to $100k  22% 
Share of requests more than $100k less than 
or equal to $200k  17% 
Share of requests more than $200k  20% 
Requests by value  
Total funding request  for loans ˃ $200k  $119,960,674  
Percentage of total requested for loans ˃ $200k  82.1%  
Number of loans requested ˃ $200k  136 
Average loan size for loans ˃ $200k  $882,064  
  
Total funding request for loans ≤ $200k  $26,139,885  
Percentage of total requested for loans ≤ $200k  17.9%  
Number of loans requested ≤ $200k  373 
Avg loan size  for loans ≤ $200k  $70,080  
 
The above indicative requests were not screened for eligibility nor are they limited to companies 
operating in NOL countries targeted by this funding proposal, and offer a preliminary sense of the scale 
of the need for capital in the sector.  In regards to  the specific scope of this partnership with GCF*:  
● Kenya :  95 companies have expressed interest for funding from the EARF, for a total amount of 
$31,650,280, with company asks ranging from $8,000 to $3,000,000. If successful, capital 
provided by the EARF  could possibly maintain service for over 30M customers and could 
potentially preserve approximately 6,000 jobs in Kenya.  
● Nigeria : 82 companies expressed interest in funding for a total amount of $17,644,234.8, with 
company asks ranging from $4,992 to $3,00 0,000. If successful, capital provided by the EARF  
could possibly maintain service for over 29M customers and could potentially preserve more 
than 4,000 jobs in Nigeria.  
● Uganda: 59 companies expressed interest in funding for a total amount of $9,929,820, with 
company asks ranging from $4,800 to $1.1M. If successful, capital provided by the EARF  could


---
*Page 19*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
possibly maintain service for over 18M customers and could potentially preserve 3,085 jobs in 
Uganda.  
● DRC:  9 companies expressed interest in funding for a to tal amount of $2,160,000, with company 
asks ranging from $20,000 to $1.1M. If successful, capital provided by the EARF  could possibly 
maintain service for over 1 million customers and could potentially preserve approximately 
1,000  jobs in DRC.  
● Sierra Leo ne: 15 companies expressed interest in funding for a total amount of $ 3,793,424, with 
company asks ranging from $12,000 to $1M. If successful, capital provided by the EARF  could 
possibly maintain service for over 800,000  customers and could potentially p reserve 
approximately 1,600 jobs in Sierra Leone.  
● Senegal:  11 companies expressed interest in funding for a total amount of $ 3,336,000, with 
company asks ranging from $20,000  to $1.9M. If successful, capital provided by the EARF  could 
possibly maintain  service for over 1M customers and could potentially preserve approximately 
850 jobs in Senegal.  
● Mozambique: 4 companies expressed interest in funding for a total amount of $4,130,000, 
with company asks ranging from $30,000 to $3M. If successful, capital provided by the EARF  
could possibly maintain service for over 530,000  customers and could potentially preserve 
approximately 1,500  jobs in Mozambique.  
● Rwanda: 18 companies expressed interest in funding for a total amount of $ 3,865,200, with 
company asks ranging from $8,000 to $1M. If successful, capital provided by the EARF  could 
possibly maintain service for over 1.5M customers and could potentially preserve 
approximately 1,650 jobs in Rwanda.  
● Zambia: 15 companies expressed interest in funding for a total amount of $ 3,025,200, with 
company asks ranging from $40,000 to $600,000. If successful, capital provided by the EARF  
could possibly maintain service for ov er 2.4M customers and could potentially preserve 
approximately 1,060  jobs in Zambia.  
*The actual deployment by the EARF may vary, when updated requests are made and the requests are 
vetted for eligibility and documentation; we use this information to make  assumptions indicatively about 
the potential scope and impact  of funding . In addition, these expressions of interest are merely indicative; 
additional companies that did not fill out an expression of interest could still apply funding in the future  
and ot her companies may no longer require or be eligible for funding .    
 
 
The loans requested here are equivalent to the staffing costs of each company for a period of 12 
months, buying them vital time to recoup, recover, and regain their growth momentum. With out this 
capital, many of these companies will not make it through the pandemic. If we lose just 20% of the 
companies due to financial collapse, we face a threat of leaving millions of people without off -grid 
access if these companies working on the front line of energy access and climate change do not survive. 
Country Count of Companies+Staff Per Country Customers per Country Amount Requested % of Total Requested % of NOL Amount Requested
Kenya 95 5,921                   30,105,900                    31,650,280 $             21.66% 39.795%
Nigeria 82 4,030                   29,175,072                    17,644,235 $             12.08% 22.184%
Uganda 59 3,085                   18,368,599                    9,929,820 $               6.80% 12.485%
Mozambique 4 1,525                   533,167                         4,130,000 $               2.83% 5.193%
Rwanda 18 1,666                   1,571,885                      3,865,200 $               2.65% 4.860%
Sierra Leone 15 1,592                   803,649                         3,793,424 $               2.60% 4.770%
Senegal 11 854                      1,047,735                      3,336,000 $               2.28% 4.194%
Zambia 15 1,064                   2,458,673                      3,025,200 $               2.07% 3.804%
Congo DR 9 997                      1,027,480                      2,160,000 $               1.48% 2.716%
NOL Total 308                             20,734                 85,092,159                    79,534,158.80 $        54% 100%
Non NOL Total 272                             18,203                 152,001,389                   66,566,400.00 $        46%
Totals 580                             38,937                 237,093,548                   146,100,558.80 $      100%
+For this analysis, we have counted every local affiliate of multi-national companies as a distinct company, hence the discrepancy with the FP.


---
*Page 20*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
As a result, the target for the overall EARF fund is to raise sufficient funding  to offer immediate short -
term financial support to off -grid energy companies and protect a significant share of the pr ogress 
already made towards fighting climate change. Should demand in NOL countries meet or exceed the 
indicative requests, borrowers meet eligibility requirements, and to the extent it is in the best interests 
of the EARF to fund loans to NOL countries, i f fundraising is successful , it is possible that  US $60 
million  could be allocated to providing loans to companies operating in NOL countries, including GCF’s 
investment of US $30 million.  
Related Projects and Interventions  
Although the EARF will have a crucial role to protect the sustainability of the off -grid energy sector, a 
range of additional financial support mechanisms will still be required to protect the essential services 
that the sector delivers to low -income commu nities over the next weeks, months and years. In particular, 
micro -loan and grant support mechanisms will be needed to help Micro and Small Enterprises (MSMEs) 
for which the relief fund is not the right solution. These smaller and locally -owned companies a lso play 
a crucial role in expanding energy access to underserved regions and countries. In consequence, industry 
associations such as GOGLA, the Clean Cooking Alliance and AMDA, among others, continue to work with 
other sector stakeholders to raise a full y-grant funded facility of US$ 35 million for very small companies 
to access grants.19 The EARF hopes to work collaboratively with this initiative, since they serve 
complementary objectives of supporting companies, though using different financial instrume nts to 
support companies at different stages of maturity. Companies that are selected are expected to be 
screened against a set of eligibility criteria.  
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram)  
Describe the theory of change and provide information on how it serves to shift the development pathway 
towards a low -emission and/or climate resilient direction. Provide the diagram of the theory of change 
(approximately 1 page).  
The theory of change sho uld include any barriers (social, gender, fiscal, regulatory, technological, financial, 
ecological, institutional, etc., as relevant) that need to be addressed. Use a results chain of inputs, activities, 
outputs, outcomes, and impact statements, and identi fy the how and why of causal relations to deliver the 
project’s expected results.  
Theory of Change  
The EARF, with participation from Climate CV, an intermediary to be capitalized by GCF, is intended to 
provide previously viable energy access companies in S ub-Saharan Africa with emergency liquidity to 
help them to weather the crisis caused by the pandemic, stay in business, and be positioned to drive the 
post -COVID -19 recovery. The previously mentioned EnDev survey stated that due to the Covid -19 
impact, 82%  of energy access companies in this region were struggling with limited reserves and 29% 
had already ceased operations, including mid -sized and larger firms. Therefore, it is assumed that if these 
companies receive concessional financial relief in the form  of unsecured loans, grants or other financing 
mechanisms, they will be able to continue selling their off -grid solar energy products to 2.97 M low 
income and rural homes and businesses and 16. 3 million additional people will have access to renewable 
energy . This expansion of clean energies over fossil fuels to access electricity is expected to bring a 
continued reduction in GHG emissions of 1.33 million metric tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) 
during the programme lifetime of 6 years . Furthermore,  financing energy access companies could  reduce 
C-19’s impact on downshifting the momentum towards GHG emissions reduction instead of allowing C -
 
19 https://www.energy accessrelief.org/#response -link


---
*Page 21*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
19 to stall or even worse, reverse momentum. Lastly, as a co -benefit, indicative financing requests 
suggest tha t companies could  retain at least 10,000 qualified jobs in a sector that is crucial for climate 
change adaptation in Sub -Saharan Africa.   
Without the EARF, it is expected that if the current crisis caused by C -19 continues, many energy access 
companies ri sk shutting down due to loss of revenue and ability to serve customers, forcing customers 
to switch back to using diesel, petrol or kerosene to light their homes and power their businesses. This 
could lead to an increase in GHG emissions, damage the long -term potential of the sector to drive 
sustainable growth, and create immediate negative health impacts for current off -grid customers. 
Additionally, thousands of clean energy jobs would be lost due to the financial stress of these companies.  
 
 
 
Barriers addressed  
The EARF aims to address two main barriers: (1) lack of liquidity of off -grid solar companies due to a 
reduction of the purchasing power of their customers in the context of C -19, and (2) lack of investors or 
debt lenders willing to take  risk and offer relief support to the energy access sector under these 
unprecedented circumstances.  
Access to investment capital to stabilize businesses continues to shrink in the midst of C -19. Most 
investors are retreating to focus efforts exclusively o n existing portfolios, without making new 
investments. Debt lenders are hesitant to issue new loans, and those being issued are denominated in 
hard currency and priced at approximately 9 -12% interest. Investors surveyed by GOGLA predicted less


---
*Page 22*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
funding avai lable for new investments, slower operations for existing funds, reduced revenues, 
transaction delays, and reduced risk appetites if the situation does not improve.  
The r elief and recovery loans disbursed by the EARF are meant to be priced at a rate low en ough for 
companies that need them to survive and preserve jobs while not being overburdened by repayments . 
However, the fact that the financing is still returnable capital and comes at a cost ought to provide  a 
disincentive for companies to apply for loans  that they do not need .  
Some have asked if these loans will compete with current energy access debt funds on the market. These 
current facilities have shorter tenors and higher interest rates, which are appropriate under normal 
market conditions. For comp anies that are showing strong resiliency in light of the pandemic, these 
companies can and should continue accessing debt to fuel growth, expansion, inventory, and working 
capital, when appropriate .  EARF funds, on the other hand, are short term liquidity loans that are 
expressly designed not to compete with those facilities. The tenor on EARF loans is expected generally 
to be 4 years or less  to accommodate recovery and the interest rate is intentionally low to help relieve 
repayment pressures given custome r sales and repayments are depressed . The Energy Access Action 
Network has already reached out to debt investors to the sector, many of whom have rescheduled their 
loans to companies during the crisis (see Annex 7). By offering liquidity as a stop gap to energy access 
companies  with demonstrated liquidity needs , other  market priced  facilities are more likely to continue 
to have companies to lend to in the recovery.  
We are not aware of any government relief programs  that  exist in the key operating markets th is fund is 
attempting to support. Therefore, the EARF is aiming to continue supporting the work that this growing 
sector has achieved regarding climate change mitigation, ensuring that GHG emissions continue to be 
reduced despite the pandemic. Moreover, th e EARF aims to preserve local clean jobs that if lost could 
also have a negative long -term impact on the achievements these companies have reached regarding 
climate action. During lockdown scenarios, jobs are threatened to be terminated, and this fund will  
preserve 80% of those jobs for successful applicants.  
Meanwhile, the demand for solar products and services, which may be deemed ‘essential services’ in 
some African markets under new COVID regulations, has increased. Many people have moved from 
urban ar eas back to rural areas where their families are located , driving up demand for basic electricity. 
In Uganda, for example, 15 million children are currently out of school due to the government 
lockdown20, which is also driving demand for electricity as the y are in households. Further, with utilities 
facing uncertain financial futures, off -grid solar has been viewed by customers as a good source of 
redundancy in case the lights go out. As a result, it is crucial that off -grid solar companies continue to 
oper ate and serve these new customers so that they do not resort to other carbon -intensive alternatives.  
The project is high risk and various factors could contribute to its success or failure, and we make no 
assurances that the theory of change may be achieve d.     
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages)  
 
20 UNICEF. “In education, now is the time to ‘build back better’’. May 26, 2020. 
https://www.unicef.org/uganda/press -releases/education -now -time -build -back -better


---
*Page 23*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
Define the project/programme. Describe the proposed set of components, outputs and activities that lead to 
the expected Fund -level impact and outcome results. Components should reflect the project/programme level 
outcomes.  
This should be consistent with the financing by component in section C.2, the results and performance 
indicators provided in section E.5, and the implementation timetable in annex 5.  
Energy A ccess Relief Facility  
The COVID Energy Access Relief Facility (EARF) is a sector -wide response to the global COVID -19 pandemic and 
its resultant economic downturn. The EARF’s goal is to provide liquidity to energy access companies that are 
attempting to en dure and recover from the health and economic crises that have afflicted rich and poor countries 
alike. To achieve that goal, the EARF intends to issue concessional loans, to energy access companies that are 
both:  
❖ Combating climate change, either through e nabling low -income households to mitigate emissions by 
switching to cleaner energy sources, or by helping low -income households adapt to new demands on their 
fuel consumption, agricultural practices, and/or productivity.  
❖ Demonstrating a clear need for liqu idity support caused by the COVID -19 crisis  
 This financing is intended to  provide companies with the necessary liquidity to continue their operations and 
retain their staff, the flexibility needed to continue operations, and the ability to maintain their supply chain and 
inventory so they can grow post -crisis. Over 500 companies have now expressed interest in benefiting from the 
fund, demonstrating significant indicative need.  
Eligible companies are expected to apply through the EARF website and meet the f und’s eligibility criteria. Please 
see Schedule 1 of  the Term Sheet on ‘Key terms of the Loans’ for finalized  eligibility criteria.  
Any company can apply that meets these criteria and is operating in the member countries of the International 
Bank for Recon struction and Development (IBRD) in Africa and Asia. As of July 8, 2020 , the majority of indicative 
requests  (~74%) came from African companies. The focus of EARF will be on Sub -Saharan Africa and Asia, with 
GCF participation limited to 9 countries in Africa  to the extent they  have provided letters of no objection. There 
may be additional regional carve -outs from  other  contributing entities  in the EARF  that have geographic 
restrictions  on the use of proceeds . 
EARF Structure and Support  
The EARF is born from the collaboration of major donors and investors in the energy access sector , which formed 
the COVID Energy Access Action Network  and its Steering Committee  to catalyze action in the face of the 
obvious threat to company operations posed by the pandemic.  The EARF is expected to be a Dutch B.V., owned by 
a Dutch foundation. It will be governed by a Board of Directors, Advisory Board consisting of EARF investors who 
opt to be a member (including Acumen as an observer), the Facility Manager ( SIMA), and an Investment 
Committee to make lending decisions.   
GCF’s investment is expected to be provided through an Intermediary, Climate CV, which will be a Dutch limited 
partnership (commanditaire vennootschap) . GCF will be a Limited Partner (LP) in Climate CV, which will enter 
into  a Master Participation Agreement with the EARF. Climate CV participations will only be on loans to countries 
where NOLs have been obtained. This structure has been created to facilit ate the ringfencing of GCF proceeds for 
providing loans to borrowers operating in countries in which NOLs have been obtained, as the EARF may have a 
larger geographic target. Acumen will be the accredited entity, and will also invest directly into the EARF . SIMA 
will act as the General Partner (GP) in Climate CV. The final structure will be set out in the eventual Term Sheet.  
  
Final investment decisions and the decision to act on overdue payments will be made by an Investment 
Committee (the IC) .


---
*Page 24*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
SIMA, the Facility Manager, is an experienced and reputable fund manager that currently manages one of the 
largest funds in the off -grid sector and has deployed more than USD 95 million into energy access, largely in sub -
Saharan Africa. SIMA will be responsible for the full facility management:  
Fund management  
            Structuring and launch of the fund  
            Regulatory and all other aspects of fund entity  
            Manage liquidity of the fund  
            Repayments to investors  
            Fund liquidation   
Investor relations  
            Investor outreach and fundraising (with support from Advisory Committee)  
            Investor onboarding  
            Investor reporting (semi -annually)             
Investment process  
            Receive applications / sourcing  
            Check against eligibility criteria  
            Screening applications  
            KYC data collection  
            IC decision preparation / Investment proposal  
            Secondary review / portfolio construction  
            Consolidation IC decisions  
            Execute instructions received from IC  
            Draft loan agreements  
            KYC validation  
            Loan disbursement  
            Send pay ment notifications  
            Collect interest and repayments  
Monitoring & risk management  
            Monitor cash flows from investee companies  
            Credit and impact monitoring of investee companies (KPIs, covenants)  
            Escalation to IC  
            Valuation of positions / provisions (quarterly)   
Restructuring & workouts  
            Negotiate restructuring  
  
 
At scale , the EARF is expected to fund a significant number of  companies  in NOL countries . Indicative 
downstream loan terms  for the loans can be found in Schedule 1 (“downstream loan terms”) of the Term Sheet .  
EARF will distribute returned capital and certain profits to noteholders, after EARF expenses, fees and reserves.  
EARF will distribute returned capital and certain profits to Climate CV with respect to its participation in loans to 
borrowers operating in NOL countries, less certain fees and expenses, and Climate CV will then distribute 
returned capital and certain pro fits to its LP (GCF) after fees, expenses and reserves.   
The structure of the EARF and Climate CV and terms of funding to and by such entities is subject all respects to 
the definitive agreements and disclosure for the EARF and Climate CV. The final struc ture and terms will be set 
out in the eventual Term Sheet.  
For a brief background on certain  stakeholders in the EARF:  
❖ Acumen is a pioneer non -profit impact investment fund with almost 20 years’ experience in small and 
medium -sized enterprises that serve l ow-income communities in developing countries across South Asia, 
Sub-Saharan Africa, and Latin America. Acumen invests “Patient Capital” in early -stage companies across


---
*Page 25*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
critical sectors such as agriculture, education, energy, financial inclusion, and affor dable healthcare. Acumen 
has significant experience of creating innovative investment funds in partnership with the GCF i.e. Kawisafi 
Ventures which is an investment fund focused on creating energy access in East Africa and ARAF which is the 
climate resili ence focused agriculture investment fund in East and West Africa. Acumen is the accredited 
entity, and will be responsible for assisting in the monitoring and evaluation phases of the EARF, including in 
administering the GCF investment.  
❖ Social Investment M anagers and Advisors, LLC (SIMA) is a new generation of fund manager with a focus 
on innovative investment structuring in emerging market impact investments. SIMA invests in companies 
that align their business and social goals for improving the lives of lo w-income customers. SIMA’s principals 
have invested over USD. 2.3 billion in impact investments in more than 50 countries and 18 funds, covering 
more than 200 relationships. SIMA has a team of 20 people spanning across US, Kenya, Pakistan and India. 
Curren tly, {SIMA has two active funds in the sector. As part of Fund I, SIMA has disbursed funds  across the 
off-grid solar  value chain including manufacturers, distributors, financiers and vertically integrated 
companies. SIMA’s investments have helped provide direct employment to 36,500 full time and commission -
based employees (43% of which are women), and sold 12.65 mm pico and larger solar home systems. SIMA 
also has a track record of field building which includes structuring  tripartite financing for locally -owned off -
grid solar distributors where manufacturers also put “skin in the game”, pioneering Islamic financing in the 
sector, and creating the off -grid solar sector’s first Code of Conduct which has now developed into the 
industry standard. SIMA is the E ARF Facility Manager and will manage the operations of the fund, investor 
relations,  the investment process and monitoring, including workouts, and manage the fund administration 
(in partnership with a dedicated Fund Admin provider).  
 
SIMA, the Facility M anager, was chosen through a clear and transparent process by the Steering Committee  of the 
investor coalition .  
 
EARF Components, Activities, Target Deliverables, Outputs, and Outcomes  at Scale  
Component #1: Disburse concessional loans to energy access companies who are helping to mitigate 
climate change and have a demonstrated need for liquidity support.  
Impact 1  – 1.33 million metric tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) are reduced or avoided 
through safeguarded sales of renewable energy and emission -reducing products over the lifetime of the 
programme.  
Impact 2  - 11,700 local green jobs (of which at least 3,150 are held by women) are maintained and 
continue to enable climate mitigation and energy access activities in rural markets.  
Impact 3  – 16.3 million beneficiaries spanning households, businesses and vital n ational and community 
infrastructure benefit from clean energy access and the myriad co -benefits it brings.  
Impact 4  - 24.5 MWs of low -emission energy capacity installed, generated and/or rehabilitated as a 
result of GCF support  
⮚ Output 1.1 Energy companie s have sufficient liquidity to retain staff and maintain growth, providing 
access to clean energy technology to new households  
▪ Outcomes  
● Outcome 1.1.1  – 60% of companies receiving EARF funds report that they have reached pre -
crisis sales levels as a result of EARF funding  
● Outcome 1.1.2  – 18% increase in cumulative # of households reached across EARF portfolio, 
compared to baseline  
● Outcome 1.1.3  – 16,340,2435 individuals accessing clean energy through sales or service from a 
EARF beneficiary company  
▪ Activities


---
*Page 26*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
● Activity 1.1.1 Establishment of the EARF . Acumen and other senior investors, as well as EE, to 
fund and secure a first close of EARF  
♦ Sub-activities  
⮚ Landscaping  
⮚ Fundraising and closing  
⮚ Reporting  
♦ Deliverable(s)  
⮚ Analyzed and segmented data on need for concessional financing, disaggregated by 
country and company type.  
⮚ Indicative term sheet  with EARF investors .  
⮚ EARF achieves first closing . 
● Activity 1.1.2 Establishment, Management and Termination of Climate CV. A separate financing 
vehicle for GCF, Climate CV, is set up, managed and terminated by SIMA  
♦ Sub-activities  
⮚ Climate CV establishment  
⮚ Climate CV management  
⮚ Climate CV termination  
⮚ Reporting  
♦ Deliverables  
⮚ Climate CV is formed, GCF subscription completed and participation agreement with 
EARF finalized  
⮚ Legal documents related to Climate CV establishment  
⮚ Annual reports  
⮚ Performance reports  
⮚ Evaluation reports  
● Activity 1.1.3 Management of the sub -participation . Applicant eligibility is checked and verified  
by SIMA  before submitting to EARF’s Investment Committee , loans are disbursed, borrowers are 
monitored, interest and principal is collected , companies are engaged for evaluation and 
influence.   
♦ Sub-Activities  
⮚ Screening  
⮚ Approval and Disbursement  
⮚ Collections  
⮚ Monitoring of the loans and impacts  
⮚ Reporting  
⮚ Influence  
♦ Deliverables  
⮚ Applications processed for eligibility  
⮚ Applications processed for submission to IC.  
⮚ Annual reports.  
⮚ Semi -annual reports.  
⮚ Midpoint and end of project evaluation  
⮚ Interest income and capital returned to investors  
⮚ Delinquencies and/or defaults resolved expeditiously and as advantageously as 
possible.  
⮚ Fully -disbursed fund.  
⮚ Portfolio of companies who have received concessional finance.  
⮚ 100% of companies receive information on public health needs, flexible work policies, 
and customer support options


---
*Page 27*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
⮚ Mid -line and end -line reports on actions taken by companies to su pport staff, 
customers, and/or communities  
 
Component #2: Monitor the financial and operational status of companies that have received 
concessional finance, quantifying the impact that EARF funds have had on staffing levels, sales, and 
climate change mitig ation. Facilitate knowledge exchange between companies to encourage the adoption 
of best practices or catalyze sector -wide responses to systemic business issues. * 
Impact 5  - A cumulative 500 sector experts (including company, investor, and donor staff) rec eive EARF -
specific insights into best practices, coping mechanisms, and guidance for future crises.  
Impact 6 – Demonstration of coordinated sector -wide effort to swiftly respond to crisis, proving ability 
to collaborate across governments, organizations, a nd capital providers to solve global problems 
together (i.e. useful proof point for climate change action in the future).  
❖ Output 2.1  Lessons learned throughout the crisis and the relief process, from both the EARF partners and 
funded companies, are disseminated to the benefit of the wider energy access sector.  
⮚ Outcomes  
▪ Outcome 2.1.1  –500 sector experts influenced by insights and knowledge outputs related to EARF  
▪ Outcome 2.1.2  – 80% of recipient companies have gained market or business insights from an EARF -
led convening  
▪ Outcome 2.1.3  – 40 energy access companies which are NOT receiving EARF funding who gain 
material insight into b usiness continuity practices or other improved operational strategies  
⮚ Activities  
▪ There are no activities directly related to the GCF’s investment as part of this output.  
❖ Output 2.2  Energy access sector demonstrates clear ability to organize and collaborate in order to overcome 
sector -wide threats such as the COVID -19 pandemic  
⮚ Outcomes  
▪ Outcome 2.2.1  – 120  organizations represented in EARF -related strategy sessions and/or working 
groups  
⮚ Activities  
▪ There are no activities directly related to the GCF’s investment as part of this output.  
 
Following the initial disbursements, the EARF intends to reserve an adequate liquidity level.  
Referring to the feasibility study, describe why this set of interventions was selected instead of alternative 
solutions and how the project/programme  can help unlock the needed support in a sustainable manner. Also 
identify trade -offs of the selected interventions, if applicable.  
Acumen and other interested parties explored a number of alternative solutions, particularly grant financing and 
commerciall y-priced debt. However it was determined that neither approach could hope to attract sufficient 
amounts of capital to meet demand without imposing unsustainable levels of debt service upon early -stage 
energy companies.  
For Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) prop osals and projects/programmes with financial intermediation (loans 
or on -granting), describe the selection criteria of the sub -project and types.  
* Component 2 may be integrated into Component 1 .


---
*Page 28*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approxim ately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
Provide a description of the project/programme  implementation structure, outlining legal, contractual, 
institutional and financial arrangements from and between the GCF, the Accredited Entity (AE) and/or the 
Executing Entity(ies) (EE) or any third parties (if applicable) and beneficiaries.  
 
- Provide i nformation on governance arrangements (supervisory boards, consultative groups among 
others) set to oversee and guide project implementation. Provide a composition of the decision -
making body and oversight function, particularly for Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals.  
- Provide information on the financial flows and implementation arrangements (legal and contractual) 
between the AE and the EE, between the EE or any third party and beneficiaries.  For EEs that will 
administer GCF funds, indicate if a Capa city Assessment has been carried out. Where applicable, 
summarize the results of the assessment.  
- Describe the experience and track record of the AE and EEs with respect to the activities (sector and 
country/region) that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
Provide a diagram(s) or organogram(s) that maps such arrangements including the governance structure, 
legal arrangements, and the flow and reflow of funds between entities.  
 
 
The following section contains indicative descriptions of the EARF and Climate CV, including their legal 
structures, corporate governance, activities, and contractual relationships. The descriptions in this section 
are subject to and qualified in their ent irety by the final Term Sheet and prospectus of EARF, Master 
Participation Agreement between EARF and Climate CV, and governing documents of EARF and Climate CV.  
  
EARF Structure  
- The EARF is intended to mobilize  capital  to achieve maximum liquidity suppor t while maintaining a 
focus on capital preservation.  
- Although the total facility may reach  its target or higher, the relevant size for this proposal is expected to 
be US$60 million , inclusive of the US$30 million in funding from GCF , which is intended for investment 
and project management costs . 
- Approximately US$30 million  of funding in the EARF facility is intended  to be allocated towards  
loans to companies operating in NOL countries, which the GCF facility is meant to participate in  
equally . Hence the overall size of the programme  for the NOL countries  is intended to be  
approximately  US$60 million , with an estimated mitigation impact at that scale of 1.33m tCO 2e 
avoided . 
- The funding totals in this section  are indicative and reflect funding still under discussion .  As 
such, the cofinanced amount is subject to change.  
- The EARF facility  will be formed as a Dutch private limited company, or BV. Its sole shareholder will be a 
Dutch foundation to ensure the fund meets its social objectives.   
 
 
GCF Structure:  
- GCF will subscribe for limited partnership interests in a Dutch limited partnershi p 
(commanditaire  vennootschap) , referred to herein as Climate CV.  Climate CV will enter into a 
master participation agreement with EARF to participate in loans to eligible borrowers operating 
in countries where Acumen has obtained a NOL. Participated loans will be held in name of EARF as 
lender.  
- There is a possibility that EARF will commit and disburse loans to companies in NOL countries, before 
GCF’s investment closes. In such cases, EARF may sell a participation to Climate CV (i.e., the intermediary 
entity) over such pre -existing loans. In case that GCF Proceeds will be used to retroactively finance pre -
existing loans, such  loans will be evaluated to ensure their compliance with all the GCF requirements (i.e. 
eligibility criteria, key com mercial terms, as well as applicable ESS and AML/CFT requirements). SIMA 
will confirm and represent that the loans are compliant with the above requirements.  
 
Aspirational US$ 100 million  Scenario:


---
*Page 29*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
The EARF has a broader geographic restriction than the countries in which we have obtained NOLs.  As such, 
while the  EARF partners have aspirations to bring total project funding up to a target US$100 million  , for 
purposes of this proposal, indicative cofinancing  is limited to funding that has the same geographic use of 
proceeds restrictions as the GCF funding , i.e., up to $30M . With a commitment from GCF, the EARF is hopeful that 
it may be able to unlock additional investment .  
 
 
Climate CV Legal Structure and Go vernance  
The Climate CV, a Dutch -based entity  (commanditaire vennootschap ), will be set up to ringfence  GCF’s capital  for 
NOL countries . SIMA will be the General Partner (commanditaire vennoot ) who  will manage and operate the 
entity, and GCF will be the Limited Partner  (stille vennoot ). SIMA as GP will have fiduciary obligations to the 
Climate CV. Decision -making parameters and purpose will be enshrined in the operating/partnership agreement 
of Clim ate CV, which will be a binding document. Only the General partner is liable towards third parties (please 
note that the Limited partner cannot represent the CV, otherwise it might become liable to third parties). EARF 
will be the lender of record for the loans in which Climate CV participates. Climate CV will flow money to EARF  to 
invest in qualifying loans , and EARF will flow repayments and certain interest  back to Climate CV, under the 
terms of a Master Participation Agreement, all in USD. Climate CV will also be meant to comply with the eventual 
Funded Activity Agreement.  Climate CV and EARF are participating in the same loans  with  a similar rate 
structure, meaning their investments are intended to earn similar returns net of fees , be pari passu  in terms  of 
seniority and share any profits and losses proportionally.   
 
How Acumen will Restrict changes in the Investment Strategy of EARF  
The Investment strategy will be enshrined in the prospectus, which binds EARF with respect to the Noteholders 
holding instruments issued by EARF.  The master Participation Agreement between Climate CV and EARF will 
reflect provisions relevant to the partic ipation (eg, investment strategy, eligibility criteria,  limitation of 
investments to  NOL countr ies) and other requirements of GCF in relation to the participation in the loans; these 
requirements will not be able to be changed without the consent of GCF (t o be reflected in the CV agreement) or 
Acumen (to be reflected in the subsidiary agreement ), and/or through Acumen’s seat in the Advisory Board of the 
EARF.  
   
 
 The Master Participation Agreement will reference and bind EARF/SIMA to the investment strateg y, eligibility 
criteria, loan terms, processes, NOL country loan requirements, and other key terms of the participation, and is 
intended to work somewhat automatically, and SIMA will be bound not to deviate. It is intended that the terms of 
the loans provi ded by the EARF are (except for the NOL requirement) aligned with the terms and conditions to 
participate in EARF loans pursuant to the Master Participation Agreement. Further, Acumen is expected to  be a 
third party beneficiar y under the participation agre ement with rights to enforce its provisions  through Climate 
CV as the participant and party to the participation agreement .  Acumen will receive notice and accounting of 
activity under the participation, and will also obtain IC memoranda to confirm eligibi lity criteria is met through 
its observer seat on the IC.   
 
Acumen will enter into a subsidiary agreement with SIMA  as Facility Manager of the EARF , which will pass 
through the rights and requirements of GCF and will reference and bind to the investment s trategy, and contain 
removal rights for the manager and similar rights as those attached to the Notes (to the extent relevant for GCF).  
Enforcement of the rights contained in the subsidiary agreement will occur via a combination of Acumen bringing 
certain  decisions to GCF, and/or the decision requiring the approval of the advisory board (and GCF will be 
offered a seat on and if so sitting be required as a needed vote for an action).  
 
For purposes of clarification, Acumen will not be the manager of EARF or  Climate CV nor make decisions per se in 
lieu of the manager’s judgement other than enforcing the robust contractual arrangements  described above.  
 
This description is subject to and qualified in its entirety by the final prospectus, Subsidiary Agreement, 
Master Participation Agreement, and other relevant documentation.  
 
Managing Potential Conflicts of Interest  
A potential conflict of interest could arise if there is a dispute between EARF and Climate CV under the 
participation agreement, as SIMA  would have an interest in both sides.  However, this is highly unlikely to


---
*Page 30*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
manifest, as Climate CV is set up to accommodate a ringfence for GCF, rather than because different governance 
or objectives are desired.  Another potential conflict of interest wo uld be if EARF desires to lend to borrowers in 
which other funds under its management are invested; this would be a disclosable conflict at the IC.   
 
If either type of potential conflict of interest should arise, it would be reviewed and decided by the ad visory 
board, on which GCF would be offered a seat and Acumen would have an observer seat.     
 
 
EARF Legal Structure and Governance  
The EARF will be a Dutch private limited liability company (besloten vennootschap met beperkte 
aansprakelijkheid) incorporated under the laws of the Netherlands. The EARF is held by the Stichting Impact 
Investment Foundation . The EARF is governed by a Board of Directors made up of one SIMA representative and 
one Dutch Resident who is also an expert in the off -grid solar sector. The Advisory Board is made up of all key 
investors of the EARF (including an Observer from Acumen, the AE) and have instruction rights to the Board of 
Directors.  
 
Governing Bodies  
Advisory Board  
The Advisory Board shall have instruction rights in regard to the Board of Directors.  
 
The initial members of the Advisory Board are expected to consist of investors that have each made a certain 
Commitment to the Facility.  
 
Advisory Board Meeting: Each Advisory Board seat grants the right to one vote at every general meeting 
of Advisory Board. Meetings of Advisory Board of the Facility may be held at such places and times 
specified in their respective convening notices.  
 
 
Board of Directors  
The EARF will be overseen by its Board of Di rectors (the Board).  
 
The Board has responsibility for overseeing the management of the Facility in accordance with the Private 
Placement Memorandum and the Articles, laws and other relevant legal requirements. The Board is responsible 
for overseeing  all investment management, portfolio management, administration and marketing functions 
related to the EARF are conducted appropriately . The Board will inter alia implement the investment objective 
and policy of the EARF, s ubject to the risk diversification ru les and investment restrictions set out in the Private 
Placement Memorandum.  
  
The Board of Directors is also responsible for selecting the KYC, Administrative and Payment Agent, and other 
such agents as are appropriate.  
 
Members of the Board of Directors shall be indemnified by the EARF except in the event of fraudulent acts, willful 
misconduct, or gross negligence with respect to the business of the EARF . The Board of Directors is expected to 
consist of one representative  of SIMA and one Dutch resident . 
 
The Board of Directors of the EARF shall approve the Investment Committee after consideration of the 
recommendation of the Manager.  
 
 
The Board shall have the controlling vote to the extent that the Investment Committee reaches a tied decision in 
respect of any matter within the remit of the Investment Committee.  
 
Conflicts of Interest: Any Conflict of Interest identified will be escalated to the Advisory Board.  
 
Investment Committee: The EARF  will have an Inves tment Committee (the IC) consisting of representative(s) of 
the EARF  Manager, representative(s) of energy access market experts, and/or representative(s) of Investors. The


---
*Page 31*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
EARF  Manager representative will chair the IC. The Investment Committee is expected to include  expert members 
and meet at least every 4 weeks.  
 
 
Operational Processes:  
The following process flow diagrams are indicative of the potential EARF procedure, but subject to change by the 
eventual  facility manager.  
 
Process flow diagram #1 – Scree ning Process  
 
 
 
 
Process flow diagram #2 – Underwriting Process  
 
See Section  G.3 for further detail on underwriting.  
 
Process flow diagram #3 – Legal Closing


---
*Page 32*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
 
 
 
Process flow diagram #4 – Loan Disbursement


---
*Page 33*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
 
In the case that the EARF closes on loans before the GCF/Climate CV funding comes in,  any loan intended for 
Climate CV participation must comply  with the eligibility and other requirements  of the Master Participation 
Agreement.  
 
Process flow diagram #5 – Monitoring & Reporting  
 
 
 
Post Disbursement Monitoring (further detail)  
 
The collections for the EARF will be made through the following procedure:  
● For all the borrowers, at the time of initiation of the loan, repayment schedules will define the dates and 
amounts of payment that must be repaid by the borrowers.  
● On the due date, the EARF  Manager will check the payments received from borrowers. Reminder e mail is 
sent to the borrowers from whom the payment has not been received.  
● The collections are continuously monitored until all payments have been received.   
● Post Disbursement Monitoring of Covenants, Repayments and Financial covenants by Business, Risk 
Manager and SIMA management.  
● Provisioning / Impairment approval by Investment Committee.  
 
Restructuring of Loan (if needed)  
 
Each loan will be reviewed on a regular basis and if a loan is not performing as per the standards of underwriting 
criteria and ther e are signs of weak loans.


---
*Page 34*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
 
 
 
 
In addition, SIMA has submitted its Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) for the EARF as Annex 
6 for review.  
 
Experience and Track Record  
 
- AE (Acumen)  
Acumen is a pioneer non -profit impact investment fund with almost 15 years’ experience in small and medium -
sized enterprises that serve low -income communities in developing countries across South Asia, Sub -Saharan 
Africa, and Latin America. Acumen invests “Patient Capital” in early -stage companies across critical sectors such 
as agriculture, education, energy, financial inclusion, and affordable healthcare. Acumen has significant 
experience of creating innovative investment funds in partnership with the GCF  i.e. Kawisafi Ventures which is an 
investment fund focused on creating energy access in East Africa and ARAF which is the climate resilience 
focused agriculture investment fund in East and West Africa.  
Executing Entities  
 
SIMA  
SIMA principals are some o f the longest serving fund managers who were first in attracting private sector 
institutional investors to microfinance sector. Our team has a combined more than 100 years of finance, leasing 
and related experience. SIMA’s involvement in off -grid solar sec tor dates back to 2011 when the sector was much 
younger . Ever since then, SIMA’s managers have participated in this sector in various capacities including 
managing a solar distribution business in Uganda.  
 
SIMA has also developed expertise in restructurin g and workouts. In its current portfolio, it has successfully 
restructured loans of two off -grid solar distributors which have emerged back on track.  
 
 
Energy Access Relief Fund B.V. (EARF):  
The Loan Facility, EARF, will be set up as a Dutch private limited liability company (besloten vennootschap met 
beperkte aansprakelijkheid) incorporated under the laws of the Netherlands. The EARF is a concessional debt


---
*Page 35*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
fund that is intended to provide energy access companies with vital liquidity during th is crisis, in the form of low -
interest, unsecured subordinated loans.   
 
Climate CV 
The Intermediary that will participate in the EARF loans , Climate CV, will be set up as a Dutch l imited partnership  
(commanditaire vennootschap) incorporated under the laws  of the Netherlands . SIMA will be the General Partner 
and GCF will be a Limited Partner. The Climate CV will be set up solely for the purposes of investing in 
participations of  the EARF loans  to companies that operate in countries that have submitted lette rs of no 
objection. The EARF will be the lender of record for the loans.    
 
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Explain why the project/programme  requires GCF funding, i.e. Why is the project/programme not currently 
being financed by public and/or private sector? Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? 
Are there any other domestic or international sources of financing?  
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall 
financing package. i.e. What is the coherence between activities financed by grants and those financed by 
reimbursable funds? How were co -finan cing amounts and prices determined? How does the concessionality 
of the GCF financing compare to that of the co -financing? If applicable, provide a short market read on the 
prevailing of the pricing and/or financial markets for similar projects/programmes.  
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial instrument(s) is the minimum required to make the 
investment viable. Additionally, how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept 
of minimum concessionality? Who  benefits from concessionality?  
In your answer, please consider the risk sharing structure between the public and private sectors, the barriers 
to investment and the indebtedness of the recipient. Please reference relevant annexes, such as the 
feasibility  study, economic analysis or financial analysis when appropriate.  
Why the EARF needs GCF  
GCF’s involvement in the project is critical.  This crisis has struck at a delicate time for the energy access sector, and  
threatens to undermine progress that GCF and  others have worked so hard to build.  
Leading companies in this sector have recently begun to attract debt financing on fully commercial or close -to-
commercial terms. However, the pandemic has caused local banks to halt any new lending, while significantl y 
reducing the levels of international financing available. Debt investors have been forthright: the crisis has caused a 
reduction in lendable capital, a slowdown in their ability to process loans, and a reduction in their risk appetite 
(see Annex). Few ne w loans are being issued to energy access companies, and those that are being issued are 
anecdotally priced at or above 12% interest.  
At the same time the pandemic and resultant lockdowns have severely impacted low -income households’ ability to 
acquire en ergy assets or service existing solar and cookstove loans. In Uganda, for example, a June 2020 survey of 
households that had purchased a PAYGo SHS on credit showed that 95% of households’ financial situation had 
worsened since the start of the pandemic, wi th 59% saying it had gotten ‘much worse’. This has a direct impact on 
repayment levels:, just 29% of respondents were making repayments for their products as they normally would, 
and only 21% were confident in their ability to make repayments as normal nex t month.  
Without support from the EARF, generally and GCF specifically, a simultaneous reduction in customer repayments 
and financing flows could be devastating for energy access companies, the majority of whom are not yet financially 
self-sufficient. Man y promising companies may not be able to survive a liquidity crisis. Those that do emerge would 
face an uncertain, uphill road to recovery, unable to reach pre -crisis sales volumes for a year or more. Even with a 
rebound in consumer demand, companies may not be able to retain their sales staff or purchase sufficient


---
*Page 36*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
inventory, due to a lack of working capital. And investors’ risk appetite  could be severely curtailed by the collapse 
of multiple companies.  
With the private sector currently unable or unwilling  to finance the sector, and a vulnerable customer base 
struggling to maintain repayment, GCF’s support of the EARF is vital to mitigate the effects of the ongoing crisis, 
but just as important to catalyze the coming recovery. This combination of ‘relief no w’ and ‘recovery later’ will help 
companies to not only withstand the crisis, but to regain their momentum quickly upon its cessation.  
Why concessional debt?  
The EARF will deploy concessional loans. These low -interest, longer -tenor loans, combined with sig nificant 
subordination in the fund structure, would ensure that:  
A. Companies will not be overburdened by debt service requirements during their recovery;  
B. Investors are able to preserve their capital while achieving significant impact, which means;  
C. The EARF c an raise the needed quantum of funding  
At this time, sector debt for these target companies needs to be concessionary as there is a need to avoid burdening 
companies that on average may already be overleveraged.  It is an issue of pricing and timing.  Provid ing commercial 
funding in this scenario would require a full commercial analysis and due diligence that might not provided on the 
needed timeline and  may force firms to take drastic cost cutting measures fast. That said, the full sum of money 
need not be grants. Such capital would be in very short supply and it would leave no incentives for companies to 
not take the maximum amount they could get  regard less of need . Thus, the proposed terms strike a good balance 
between additional burden on companies and cost to capital providers. Unsecured junior debt seems best suited 
to provide additional capital fast with an impact first focus - job security - withou t putting undue financial stress 
on the beneficiary which is important in light of high leverage in the sector.  
GCF’s potential participation in EARF loans through Climate CV will be appropriate to its mission and catalytic for 
the closing of the fund.  Its participation will dramatically increase the funding available to companies in need.   
GCF’s potential investment is expected to provide encouragement to other potential de bt lenders for loans made 
in geographies supported by this proposal.  The NOL process demonstrates local buy -in for the investment strategy 
of EARF.  
In a pre -COVID world, there would be legitimate questions raised over the possibility of concessional debt crowding 
out commercial debt investors. However, given the nature of the crisis and the demonstrated pullback from those 
same investors, the EARF is one of the vanishingly few sources of potential funding for energy access companies. 
And the commercially p riced debt on offer remains greater than the energy access relief fund at +6 -20%, and in 
some cases even higher, which is not appropriate for relief and recovery funding.  
What GCF brings to the EARF  
As a well -known, multilateral, climate -focused investor i n the facility, GCF would bring immediate focus to the 
important climate progress, and future progress, that is at stake in this sector. In addition to the direct contribution 
to the fund, we expect that GCF’s investment will yield the following benefits:  
● Mobilize inter -governmental support for the implementation of the facility’s activities and raise awareness 
on the importance of the off -grid and energy access sector regarding avoidance of GHG emissions. There 
is a critical linkage between climate change and energy poverty that can be strengthened through this 
landmark investment.  
● The programme will assure other Project stakeholders when it comes to taking risks in this programme, 
thus encouraging the participation of other IFIs. This means GCF’s capital will be highly catalytic and have 
a strong signaling effect to capital markets.  
● GCF, as one of, if not the only, climate investor in this project, will be providing climate eligibility criteria 
in the investment, which is a valuable input for this energy relief facility. GCF has already provided valuable 
input regarding the specific climate requirement that they will use when they screen the requests from 
SMEs. GCF’s influence and support is highly welcomed, as many other DFIs and Foundations seek to inves t 
on the premise of supporting 100% renewably powered energy sources.


---
*Page 37*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Explain how the project/programme  sustainability (financial, institutional, social, gender equality, 
environmental) will be ensured in the long run after project closure, including how the project’s results and 
benefits will be sustained.  
 
Include information pertaining to the longer -term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations and 
maintenance of investments (e.g. key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements). In case of private 
sector, please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy through IPOs, trade sales, etc . 
 
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as a 
consequence of the project/programme implementation for scaling up and continuing best practices.   
 
Sustainability  
The Programme’s sustainabil ity is embedded in its design:  
 
(a) At the corporate level , the Programme is intended to protect progress made towards achieving 
Sustainable Development Goal 7 of Affordable and Clean Energy by providing liquidity to Energy Access 
Companies whose operations have been affected by the COVID -19 pandemic.   
 
(b) At the sectoral level , the Programme is intended to safeguard the progress of the entire off -grid solar and 
microgrid sector, which is seen as the most effective way to provide energy access to 117 million of HH by 
2030.21 It will also safeguard the potential of the sector to support sustainabl e energy for agriculture and 
national infrastructure such as health clinics and schools.  
 
Within the region , As well as the work of off -grid companies themselves, several organisations , including GOGLA 
– the association for the off -grid solar sector, AMDA  - the African Minigrid Developer Association - and National 
Renewable Energy Associations in East Africa, West Africa and South Asia have contributed to the growth of the 
off-grid sect or and have been engaged with the efforts of those leading the EARF. They have built vital networks 
and links with national and regional decision -makers, as well as international actors. These associations and their 
networks provide a mechanism for sharing  learnings and best practices on how off -grid solar products and 
services can be used to drive post -C-19 recovery and sustainable development.  
 
Replicability  
If the current pandemic continues, this kind of facility likely interests private and public inves tors. This programme 
is the first initiative of its kind, and its success is crucial to such other initiatives to follow.   
The world faces a growing number of crisis emerging beyond this health crisis: climate change, drought, insect 
invasions (i.e. locus ts), natural disasters, terrorism, refugees, and myriad more. EARF is the first -ever relief  and 
recovery  fund dedicated towards responding to a global crisis quickly and effectively, while also directly supporting 
a Sustainable Development Goal. If success ful, this fund structure could be replicated across sectors and is highly 
applicable to provide returnable capital aimed at supporting sustaining an entire sector in times of crisis.  
 
Acumen, along with other stakeholders, are emphasizing the transparency of EARF, its limitations, and what it 
realistically can achieve with its funding. It is the intention for the fund structuring process to be open sourced, 
meaning investors are able to replicate the relief structuring (eligibility criteria, fund management , requirements, 
monitoring, tenor, terms) to provide effective relief funding for other sectors in times of crisis.   
 
Knowledge Sharing  
 
21 IEA. “World Energy Outlook 2019”. 2019. https://www.iea.org/reports/world -energy -outlook -2019


---
*Page 38*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 75 
 
 
 B  
The EARF intends to share lessons learned throughout the crisis and the relief process, from both the EARF 
partners and  funded companies, which will be disseminated to the benefit of the wider energy access sector. In 
doing so,  companies across the energy access sector can save time and money by not repeating common 
missteps and learn from successes to drive innovation an d growth.  
 
Gender Equality  
The EARF is also committed to furthering gender equality in the energy access space. The EARF will bring to the 
surface the important of gender equality by:  
- Prioritizing eligible (flagged for IC) women owned/led (51% or more own ership/leadership) companies 
for funding  
- Requiring a company’s demonstrated commitment and approach to retaining female full -time and 
contracted employees during the immediate crisis, and increasing the number in the long term, in RFP 
guidelines and scorin g (weighted in the eligibility/investment criteria at IC)  
- Requiring selected companies to retain current percentage of female full -time and contracted employees 
during loan period  
- Providing companies with a template for a flexible work policy that will sup port the retention of 
employees who may have additional care responsibilities during the pandemic  
These activities are described in more detail in the Gender Action Plan in Annex 8.


---
*Page 39*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 75 
   
 
 
C  
 
 
C. FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding (i 
+ ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii)  Total amount  Currency  
30  million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior 
loans      
(ii) Subordi
nated 
loans      
(iii) Equity  30,000,000  4-6 years  
 
  Nominal hurdle rate  
(iv) Guaran
tees Enter amount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbu
rsable 
grants  Enter amount     
(vi) Grants  Enter amount      
(vii) Results
-based 
payme
nts Enter amount     
(b) Co -financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
0-30 million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financ
ial 
instru
ment  Amount  Currency  Tenor 
& 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior Investors  Note
s Up to 30.00  million USD ($)  Multiple 
years  Nominal interest 
target   
       
       
Amount  Currency


---
*Page 40*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 75 
   
 
 
C  
(c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  30 – 60 million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page)  Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type of 
guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).  
Please also explain other contributions such as in -kind contributions including tax exemptions 
and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.  
 
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and 
disaggregate by source of financing. More than one co -financing institution can fund a single component or output. 
Provide the summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
Options  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrumen
t Name of 
Institutions  
1.1 Loans to 
energy access 
companies  Companies 
funded in the 
energy 
access 
sector   Total GCF 
financing 
minus certain 
costs and 
reserves  Equity in 
Climate CV, 
disbursed as 
participations 
in 
subordinated 
loans to 
borrowers  Up to 
$30,000,000  Junior 
loans to 
borrowers  Click here to 
enter text.  
1.2 Established 
Climate CV SPV 
participation 
agreement 
legal costs, 
set up and 
termination  
costs , and 
applicable  
contingency 
costs  related 
to SPV  SPV Setup 
and 
Terminatio
n Legally 
structure 
SPV 
documents  
Contingenc
y  Certain costs  Equity in 
Climate CV    Click here to 
enter text.  
        
2.1 Knowledge 
Exchange22 10 
knowledge 
products  $0      
 
22 Component 2 may be integrated into Component 1 .


---
*Page 41*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 75 
   
 
 
C  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  Enter 
amount  $30,000,000  $0 to $30,000,000  
 
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other 
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.  
See above  
 
In case of a multi -country/region programme, specify indi cative requested GCF funding amount for each 
country in annex 17, if available.  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☐     No ☒ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☐     No ☒ 
If the project/programme  is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please 
provide a brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these 
activities, to the extent possible.


---
*Page 42*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
 
D. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme  against the investment criteria as set out in 
the GCF’s Initial Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and 
result areas. As applicable, describe the envisaged project/programme impact for mitigation and/or 
adaptation. P rovide the impact for mitigation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to low -
emission sustainable development pathways. Provide the impact for adaptation by elaborating on how the 
project/programme contributes to increased climate -resilient sustainable development. Calculations should 
be provided as an annex. This should be consistent with section E.2 reporting GCF’s core indicators.  
 
The COVID -19 pandemic has highlighted the deep inequalities around the world in terms of access to 
moder n, affordable and sustainable energy. Electricity has been a vital underpinning of the response to the 
public health emergency in many countries – but hundreds of millions of people worldwide still lack basic 
access to it, with the majority of them in Sub -Saharan Africa. Even before today’s unprecedented crisis, the 
world was not on track to meet key sustainable energy goals. Now, they are likely to become even harder to 
achieve. This means we must redouble our efforts to bring affordable, reliable and clea ner energy to all.  
 
 Access to reliable energy is a lifeline, especially in the context of the COVID -19 crisis. It is essential not only 
for preventing and addressing the pandemic but also for accelerating the recovery and building back better 
by securing a more sustainable and resilient future for all. It is necessary to act now, especially in Sub -
Saharan Africa, where under the status quo, 530 million people –more than two times the population of 
Nigeria –will still be without electricity in 2030.  
  
The EARF is meant to help actuate the paradigm shift described in GCF’s governing documents, putting 
developing countries on a pathway towards low -emission and climate -resilient economic development. GCF’s 
contribution will help to catalyze public investment i nto this facility, which serves to make an impact on 
three levels: customers, companies, and public health systems.  
  
For customers , there is a real risk that with dropping diesel costs  and limited  customer access to solar -
powered, clean energy products , customers will  revert to traditional toxic diesel and kerosene usage - setting 
the climate progress made by off -grid solar back by years. The EARF intends to establish a baseline number 
of beneficiaries (applicants must submit total # of customers served) a t the start of the fund. After disbursing 
the emergency loans, SIMA will then track changes over time in the number of customers served, which can 
then be used to calculate the change in the # of tons of CO2e and avoidance of diesel and kerosene (especiall y 
from continued operations and reliance on solar microgrids) since the beginning of the crisis. It is anticipated 
that if a steady sector growth state is maintained through EARF efforts powered by GCF, 1.33 million metric 
tons of CO2e can be avoided throu gh this programme (see Annex 2 2 for detailed calculations). The ultimate 
goal is to preserve the emissions reductions the sector has already gained and position the companies to then 
further grow and expand emissions reductions to new customers beyond the crisis.  The below chart includes 
estimates at scale.


---
*Page 43*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
Table 2: Impact Calculations  
 
  
For companies , the ability to remain solvent, maintain service, and retain staffing levels during a time of 
falling revenues and tightened credit markets is critical. The EARF is working to ensure companies have 
liquidity to continue operations, preserve their human capital, keep supply lines open, and survive past the 
pandemic. As companies access relief funding, it is recognized t hat additional working capital will be 
required if lower revenues are sustained in the medium term (1 year) due to lockdown measures. Companies 
can ideally leverage commercially available capital once sales start to increase in core markets. It is 
importan t to note that the companies in question are not just high -profile, vertically integrated companies, 
but an entire ecosystem of manufacturers, distributors, software providers, and service companies. A 
significant reduction in repayment and sales could cau se newer and more specialized companies to fold, 
setting back progress on climate mitigation even farther.


---
*Page 44*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
For public  health systems , off-grid renewable energy not only powers off -grid clinics and hospitals, allowing 
people to access the healthcare they need now, but can also be an investment into the clean, sustainable 
energy infrastructure of the future for these countries. However, without this, the global community’s efforts 
to contain COVID -19 may be hampered as the deadly explosion of cases continue s across many parts of the 
world with little or no access to energy. As a result, lack of access to energy has the potential to reduce the 
efficacy of public health systems in vulnerable areas, magnify the human catastrophe, and significantly slow 
the econ omic recovery in those areas.  
 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project or 
programme investment. Describe the following, if applicable:  
● Potential for scaling up and replication  
● Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
● Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
● Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
● Overall contribution to climate -resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate 
change adaptation strategies and plans  
 
With climate change on the rise, this global pandemic is surely not the last disaster the world will face together. As 
natural disasters increase, drought becomes more prevalent, and global health systems expose their fragility, the 
need for more well -designed, thoughtful relief and recovery funds will be important. Through the EARF, insights 
about how to structure such funds quickly, easily, and intelligently for other sectors serving low -income customers 
can be gained for scale up and replication.  
Paradi gm shift potential: While the COVID -19 crisis is straining the global economy and challenging governments, 
businesses and individuals, it also provides a strong opportunity to rebuild in a more sustainable and equitable 
way, creating room for creativity an d innovation. The off -grid solar sector is poised to respond, bringing with it 
innovative business models, strong leaders / partnerships and a dedicated workforce that spans the globe. 
Organizations in the sector have also formed valuable partnerships, for  example with governments, community 
leaders and with other pioneering sectors, including those providing communications and ICT infrastructure. This 
is a unique opportunity, and an unprecedented group of entrepreneurs are ready to meet it, having spent th e last 
decade developing the experience, teams, and structures to scale in a moment such as this. One thing holding them 
back is liquidity.  
Investing into the SMEs during the crisis of COVID19, poises them to drive post crisis recovery. The products and 
services that they create can provide fast, affordable and clean access to electricity. This is vital for powering homes, 
businesses and infrastructure such as rural health clinics. The off -grid sector has also pioneered several new 
innovations and technolog ies in recent years, including pay -as-you-go payments to unlock solar home units, real -
time energy monitoring and sensor -led technologies to support smallholder irrigation.  
The post COVID -19 world will not look like the one before. The CEO of British Petro leum has already speculated 
that the pre -crisis period could represent the high -water mark for fossil fuel consumption. The right companies, 
with the right leaders, can use this recovery to transform the way that modern energy is delivered to the people 
who need it most. But those companies need resources.  
Potential for knowledge and learning: With the retained staff, the invested SMEs will be able to explore business 
models that are new and innovative as part of their expansion. As a result, innovative tec hnologies, such as solar 
water pumps, solar refrigeration solutions, and solar drying techniques, could be developed under the modern 
indigenous context. Further, as companies seek to expand their reach in their geographies, companies will have the


---
*Page 45*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
resourc es available to continue expanding and understanding customers’ needs in more hard -to-reach markets. 
This would be a potential knowledge and learning contribution to the countries. Lastly, it is envisioned that 
countries accessing the funds will be able to  better understand how relief and recovery funding is aiding the long -
term sustainability of these companies’ operations. Since many countries have never rolled out relief facilities 
during or following a crisis, this fund can help inform national governme nts how to best structure available capital 
to support domestic enterprises in relief and recovery in the future from other crises that arise.  
Acumen is committed to sharing lessons from the origination, structuring, investment process, deployment, and 
monitoring of loans as well as customer outcomes with the sector and beyond through reports, articles, and blogs 
– leveraging Acumen’s various platforms that reach over 500,000 people annually.  
 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment: The pa ndemic threatens decades of groundwork that 
has been laid for energy access markets to thrive. The enabling environments that have been created, including 
VAT and duty exemptions, local workforce development, and manufacturing incentives, are at risk if th e sector 
dries up. Therefore, the EARF intends to further promote private sector delivery of energy access by further 
justifying and fortifying the enabling environment activities that have been built over the last decades.  
 
Contribution to regulatory fra mework and policies:  The facility will contribute to the regulatory framework 
and policies as several national governments, including Lagos State in Nigeria23 and Senegal24, include off -grid solar 
in their energy access planning and view it as an essential  service. The off -grid sector works to support the 
ambitions of national energy ministries in electrifying populations that are currently being left behind, in driving 
sustainable development and in contribution to national emissions reduction targets. The  programme introduces 
investment into approximately 60 SMEs at scale that will struggle in the pandemic. The Fund can help inform 
national policy makers on how to best structure other off -grid solar incentives to work in tandem with the Relief 
Fund. It is also envisioned that lessons from the Relief Fund can help inform future policies and programmes aimed 
at providing relief to SMEs in future global health and environmental crises .  
Overall contribution to climate -resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate 
change adaptation strategies and plans: Countries cannot afford to lose the progress made on universal access 
to modern energy . Countries that have created supportive policies for energy access companies to thrive risk losing  
the climate -resiliency they have developed through supporting off -grid energy companies if these companies fold. 
Most governments recognize that a collaborative public -private partnership is needed to deliver nation -wide 
electrification and energy access.  Private sector companies often fill the gaps where the unit economics for rural, 
remote customers do not make sense for grid extension. Therefore, the EARF aims to ensure key private sector 
companies are able to continue delivering service to customers in  line with national climate change adaptation 
strategies and plans.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme  in relation to the Sustainable 
Development Goals and provide an estimation of the impact potential in terms of:  
● Environmental co -benefits  
● Social co -benefits including health impacts  
● Economic co -benefits  
 
23 Lagos State; Essential Service Notification: 
https://www.gogla.org/sites /default/files/resource_docs/exemption_for_power_energy_solution_providers_
-_30032020.pdf  
24 Senegal; Essential Service Notification: https://www.gogla.org/sites/def ault/files/resource_docs/200401 -
d0639.pdf


---
*Page 46*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
● Gender -sensitive development impact  
 
Sustainable development potential:  The Programme is aligned with SDG 7 Affordable and clean energy for all, 
Sustainable Agriculture (linked to SDG2), SDG3 Good Health, SDG4 Quality Education, SDG 8 Employment and 
Economic Growth, SDG 13 Climate Action, and  SDG 17 Global Partnership for Sustainable Development. Access to 
affordable, reliable, and sustainable energy is crucial to achieving many of the Sustainable Development Goals 
from poverty eradication via advancements in health, education, water supply an d industrialization to mitigating 
climate change. Modern society depends on reliable and affordable energy services to function smoothly and to 
develop equitably. A well -established energy system supports all sectors from medicine and education to 
agricult ure, infrastructure, communications, and high technology. Intensive development patterns have 
historically relied on inexpensive and energy -dense fossil fuels, which also happen to be the primary source of 
greenhouse gas emissions contributing to climate c hange.  
 
Resiliency building:  Solar home systems can act as a catalyst for more climate -resilient and sustainable 
economies, getting us ever closer to the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals. Specifically, solar provides clean, 
vital energy to some of the wo rld's poorest communities; to the very communities who will be worst affected by 
climate change. This is already happening in many parts of the world, where solar is powering health -centers; 
pumping clean water; lighting schools; supporting agriculture and  boosting local economies. Solar allows people 
the means of generating a sustainable, climate -resistant income; farmers can grow crops out of season or during 
droughts with solar irrigation. Quite literally, solar is powering opportunity.  
However, if produ ctive use companies which are just starting to gain traction fold and cannot sustain staff, we 
will see not only short -term ramifications in access to appliances but also long -term resiliency losses as 
customers revert to old techniques that further contri bute to soil and water degradation.  
 
Health benefits:  Without new forms of energy access increasing in the market, customers will fall back on old 
habits of using dirty, pollutive, and damaging kerosene. The survey results come as new research suggests tha t 
people exposed to air pollution are more likely to die from COVID -19 than people living in areas with cleaner air. 
These findings reinforce the importance of access to clean cooking as an alternative to open cooking fires and 
traditional stoves, which ar e significant sources of household air pollution. Access to off -grid solar can bring 
significant improvements to health and safety. Kerosene lamps emit smoke that contains large amounts of health -
damaging fine particulate matter (PM2.5). Typical PM2.5 leve ls in households using kerosene lamps have been 
found to be five times higher than the level deemed safe by the World Health Organization. Yet after replacing 
kerosene with solar lights, one study found that PM2.5 concentrations in rooms fell by as much as  80%, leading to 
a 70% reduction in the average exposure of school children.  Unsurprisingly, 89% of households, report health 
improvements after buying a solar home system, many of which previously relied on kerosene. However, this will 
not be possible if  customers cannot gain access from agents who previously sold them a household product. 91% 
of households feel safer, too, after purchasing a product. For some customers, safer means a reduction in injuries 
from kerosene burns or falling, for others, it me ans warding off thieves, attackers or wild animals at night. 
However, customers will not have access to these products that provide safety and will leave customers feeling 
more endangered as well as run the risk of increasing reliance on kerosene.  
 
Gender -sensitive development impact: Lack of clean energy access has particularly negative impacts for 
women who are often those working in a household with polluting kerosene, whose time is lost purchasing or 
collecting traditional fuel sources, or who are respo nsible for hand -irrigation of crops. Moreover, this program 
will include a gender inclusive angle to support well -performing female sales agents during a period of low sales, 
recognizing that it’s the most vulnerable people (women and children) who will be  most adversely affected by 
this. During the monitoring phase, we are exploring how we can request that the gender balance of staff is 
maintained or improved in favor of women. Currently, it is projected that the job creation potential by 2022 is 1.3  
milli on jobs, of which women will make up 350,000. Approximately 27% of total FTE jobs in the offgrid solar 
sector are filled by women, and this percentage is expected to rise as the market evolves.25 This will be built into 
 
25 GOGLA, A Growth Engine for Jobs. June 2019. 
https://www.gogla.org/sites/default /files/resource_docs/gogla_off_grid_solar_a_growth_engine_for_jobs_we
b_opt.pdf


---
*Page 47*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
the loan covenants. All reported met rics on jobs (maintained or created) will be disaggregated by gender. 
Further, the fund plans to adopt policies relating to gender lens investing, and will it disaggregate KPIs by gender. 
The covenant in loans state that the percentages of female in -countr y staff/total staff may not decline by more 
than 10% points relative to baseline (end of calendar quarter preceding application date).  
 
Employment Impact: Before COVID, off -grid was serving 420 million off -grid customers with the potential to 
serve 823 mil lion by 2030. With 370,000 jobs generated from the sector, energy access serves as a large 
employer in low and middle -income countries with Building resilient distributed power infrastructures in 
developing world. This human capital infrastructure will be required to deliver future energy access services. If 
the sector does not act to secure jobs, by 2022, the off -grid solar sector could lose up to 1.3 million FTE jobs by 
2022 across South Asia and East Africa alone.26 Of these jobs, the majority lost will be in rural areas, which would 
have supported job creation and diversification among often economically disadvantaged and vulnerable 
communities. There is also a strong representation of women among workers in the off -grid solar sector, which is 
expected to now decline. Wages in the industry are in line with, or higher than, average national wages and many 
companies are also supporting the expansion of skills and capacity of their staff through training and 
development  programs. However, we run the risk of losing these.  The off -grid solar sector will no longer be able 
to generate a wealth of new employment opportunities across the value chain, ranging from entry -level to highly 
skilled positions. Before Covid -19, there  was hope that larger off grid solar systems would invest in a wider range 
of complex consumer goods, further expanding job opportunities.  
 
Economic co -benefits:  Off-grid solar is creating opportunity across the globe, creating new jobs and growing 
income.  Recent research in East Africa found that 34% of households report an increase in economic activity 
because of their solar home systems. 28% of households using solar home systems report an increase in income, 
on average $46 per month – equivalent to 14% of the national monthly income per household (based on gross 
national income). In more than one -third of households, customers use their systems for business or income 
generation; 81% see this resulting in increased revenues. If we do not continue to advan ce this, we will see 
customers slip back into poverty and lose income.   
 
Education and small enterprises:  Improved access to light and power unlocks previously unproductive hours. 
Data shows that solar home systems enable 21% of users to spend more time w orking and earning. In another 
21% of households, customers reported using their solar home system to start a new enterprise, the most 
common being a phone charging business. It is all -but-guaranteed to see small companies fold tied to lack of 
access to ba sic products that enabled new enterprises to get off the ground. Beyond enterprise, the additional 
hours of light created by solar products lead to more time for children to study. 86% of households with children 
report that the younger generation now has more time to do their homework. The current generation of students 
not only run the risk of missing critical school time but will now not have access to light to read in the evenings 
and advance home learning and education.  
Environmental co -benefits: Envir onmental co -benefits will be determined for each of the projects funded under 
the Program but will tentatively include reduction of air and water pollution, and improved resource -use. It is 
known that 74 million metric tonnes of CO2e emissions have been av oided due to the technology of off -grid solar, 
which equates to taking 19 coal -fired power plants offline for a year.27 The companies expected to be supported 
by the EARF are actively serving to replace kerosene, diesel, and other carbon -based fuels for cu stomers. By 
enabling these companies to continue serving customers, the adoption of renewable energy in these communities 
could be retained, rather than reverting to fossil -based fuels.   
 
 
 
26 GOGLA, 2019. “Energizing Job Creation” 
https://www.gogla.or g/sites/default/files/resource_docs/gogla_pb_energizing -job-
creation_def.pdfhttps://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/gogla_pb_energizing -job-
creation_def.pdf  
27 GOGLA (2020). “Global Off -Grid Solar Market Report Semi -Annual Sales and Impact D ata”. July -December, 
2019. 
https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/global_off_grid_solar_market_report_h22019.pdf


---
*Page 48*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and 
groups, over all income level, etc.). Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation 
only)  
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population  
• Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payments gap that prevents 
government from addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital 
market)  
• Need for s trengthening institutions and implementation capacity  
 
Looking at the needs of the EARF beneficiaries, there are three groups to consider: energy access companies, their 
current customers, and their future customers.  
 
Energy access companies  
 
Please see An nex 2 introduction for full details.  
 
Current renewable energy customers  
In partnership with GOGLA, the research firm 60 Decibels has been surveying 1,500+ PAYGo  solar customers 
every month, starting in May of 2020. Their results show a customer base that has been hard hit by the health 
crisis and lockdowns and are struggling to meet their payment obligations.28 
 
● 5 out of 6 respondents reported that their financial situation is worse now than pre -COVID. 95% of 
Ugandans said they were worse off now than pre -crisis, and 84% of Nigerians.  
● For many, the crisis is worsening. 58% said their incomes had reduced from May to June. More than 
three quarters of respond ents from Uganda and Nigeria reported that their financial situation had 
deteriorated during that time. 48% Ugandans said it has gotten ‘much worse’.  
● 12% of Nigerians and 49% of Ugandans have had to stop or reduce loan repayments because of the crisis  
● 32% of customers requested that companies offer some sort of payment relief, or allow them to use their 
energy assets without payment during the crisis  
 
Some energy companies are trying to provide the relief sought by customers.29 However, the lack of certaint y 
around their own funding sources makes that difficult. Additional financing through the EARF could create space 
for additional levels of customer relief.  
 
Future renewable energy customers  
 
For the energy access sector, this crisis is in many ways about  the customers who have not been reached with 
renewable energy solutions. 790 million people still lack access to electricity; 2.8 billion do not have clean 
cooking solutions. In Africa alone, IEA estimates that providing universal access to electricity would require an 
additional 370 million people to gain access to decentralized (i.e. SHS and microgrid) solutions before 2030, on 
top of the 20 million already connected by 2019.30 
 
 
28 Consume Insights Dashboard, 60 Decibels.  https://app.60decibels.com/covid -19#explore  
29 For example, d.light and Shell Foundation announced an initiative to provide 100,000 customers with  
reduced payments for the month of July: https://www.capitalfm.co.ke/business/2020/07/d -light -
announces -customer -covid -19-relief -donation -from -shell/  
30 IEA (2019) https://webstore.iea.org/download/direct/2892?fileName=Africa_Energy_Outlook_2019.pdf


---
*Page 49*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
Those numbers, already daunting, will become unreachable if the energy secto r is thrown backward by this crisis. 
The follow -on effects of that failure, the renewable path not taken, are immense: household air pollution alone 
causes 3.8 million deaths annually.31 Rural farms and businesses will remain asset -light and unproductive32. 
Health care facilities will have to operate in the dark. And the goal of a universally connected, renewable world 
slips farther and farther away.  
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded 
project/programme. Describe the following:  
● Existing national climate strategy  
● Existing GCF country programme  
● Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs  
● Capacity of Accred ited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver  
● Role of National Designated Authority  
● Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous 
peoples, women and other vulnerable groups  
 
According to UNEP (2017)33, the energy sector is considered a focus area in 45% of the INDC in all total Non -Anne x 
1 countries. Based on the data from UNEP, the energy sector is the most important sector not only in Asia and Sub -
Saharan Africa but in all regions as seen in Figure 1  below.  
 
 
Figure 1 - (I)NDC sector coverage by region34.  
The prioritization of the En ergy sector in most (I)NDCs is likely to reflect both its relevance as a large emission 
source and the availability of various cost -effective mitigation measures. All developing countries include 
mitigation measures within the Energy sector in their (I)NDC s. In this sector, all countries propose measures in 
 
31 WHO (2018)  
32 https://efficiencyforaccess.org/publications/2019 -state -of-the-off-grid -appliance -market -report  
33     Schletz, M. C., Konrad, S., Staun, F., & Desgain, D. DR. (2017). Taking stock of the (I)NDCs of developing countries: regiona l 
(I)NDC coverage of mitigat ion sectors and measures. United Nations Environment Programme.  
34 INDC sector coverage based on NDC Explorer et al. 2016(Pauw) - Schletz, M. C., Konrad, S., Staun, F., & Desgain, D. DR. 
(2017). Taking stock of the (I)NDCs of developing countries: regional ( I)NDC coverage of mitigation sectors and measures. United 
Nations Environment Programme


---
*Page 50*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
the Power generation sub -sector. In Sub -Saharan Africa and Asia power generation is the most prioritized sectors 
when including mitigation measures as seen in the figure 2  below.  
Figure 2 - Percentage of  developing countries from Asia and Pacific, Sub -Saharan Africa, LAC and Middle 
East and North Africa, including mitigation measures in the defined sub -sectors.  
 
 
 
In line with the sub -sectors of developing countries, all LDCs mention mitigation measures for the Energy sector, 
with most mitigation measures being in the Power generation and Residential sub -sector as seen in figure 3  
below.  
 
Figure 3 - Percentage of LDCs including mitigation measures in the defined subsectors (based on NDC 
Explorer (Pauw et al. 2016)).


---
*Page 51*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
 
 
 
Among the mitigation measures mentioned in LDC (I)NDCs, those aimed at promoting types of renewable energy 
in the power generation su b-sector are the most common, mainly through the promotion of on -grid wind, hydro 
or solar technologies and off -grid solar technology. In addition, approximately one -third of African LDCs mention 
mitigation measures related to ‘Grid extension and Rehabilit ation of energy producing network and plant 
stations’ in the power generation sub -sector.  
EARF alignment with NOL Countries’ Climate and Electrification Strategies  
The EARF aims to safeguard the progress made by energy access companies towards universal a ccess to clean 
energy and cooking technology. This goal is directly in line with the national climate and energy strategies of the 
NOL countries that will be reached by the EARF. Please see Annex 2 for a country -by-country breakdown.  
Role of NDAs and Civil  Society  
The EARF is committed to obtaining letters of no objection (NOLs) from the relevant National Development 
Authorities in each of the countries that will be supported through GCF’s contribution. In addition, the AE and EE 
intend to share annual repo rts on the progress of the EARF with NDAs and keep them apprised of the current 
state of EARF efforts.  
In addition, the EARF is working to establish close contact with the global and national associations of off -grid 
solar, microgrid, and clean cooking op erators. These organizations are working diligently to support the EARF’s 
efforts by empowering local renewable energy associations and advising NDAs on enabling policy regimes. Once 
the fund is active, the facility manager along with Acumen and an anchor investor, aims to promote the fund 
internationally and domestically through industry associations, with an acute focus on industry associations in 
countries where NOLs have been obtained to ensure local companies in those markets are aware of the fund’s 
application process.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)


---
*Page 52*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 75 
   
 
 
D  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s 
objectives, including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum 
concessionality to ensure the project is viable without crow ding out private and other public investments. 
Refer to section B.5 on the justification of GCF funding requested as necessary.  
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the 
total financing an d mitigation/ adaptation impact the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this 
compares to an appropriate benchmark.  
 
Please specify the expected economic rate of return based on a comparison of the scenarios with and 
without the project/programme.  
 
Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support to illustrate the need 
for GCF funding to illustrate overall cost effectiveness.  
 
The EARF is expected to be funded by capital from investors. Gen erally, the EARF’s goal is to substantially 
preserve investor capital, not to produce significant returns.  The project is high risk and there are no assurances 
that investors will not experience total loss of capital.  The EARF anticipates providing low -interest loans to 
energy access companies with the goal of providing sufficient and appropriate liquidity to firms that are suffering 
financial effects due to the COVID -19 pandemic. The low annual interest rate on loans to investees is meant to 
avoid overbur dening companies with unsustainable debt service, while still dissuading companies that do not 
require additional financing. However, the potential for higher demand for grants and/or equity, as well as the 
potential risk of default by company borrowers, m eans there can be no assurances on returns. Lack of returns 
and even a financial loss of invested capital that enables the sector’s preservation would be deemed a successful 
outcome.  
 
In terms of efficiency of impact, the EARF has set a fundraising target for the overall facility, inclusive of the 
potential GCF investment. The current targeted raise  is meant to  be sufficient to sustain the operations and 
impact of a significant number of  energy access companies. For the approximately US$60 million  allocated  to NOL 
countries (i.e. the GCF investment and EARF co -financing) , we anticipate a net reduction in GHG emissions 
attributable to the programme  of at least 1.3 3 million tCO2e, with an implied cost per ton of CO2e avoided of 
$45.10 .  Assuming the indicative  interest from countries for which we are seeking NOLs reflects actual 
investment, at scale, the US$60 million  may preserve many  approximately 60 energy access companies in those  
NOL  countries .  
 
Without GCF’s participation, the EARF may be able proceed with a n initial raise, but it will be unable to meet 
more than a fraction of the demonstrated demand for liquidity. Because of C -19, these companies are struggling 
to operate their businesses and ma intain employment. If GCF is not able to contribute funding, there is a high risk 
that many companies will not maintain operations. The resulting lack of access would mean that current 
customers are therefore at risk of switching back from solar to kerosen e or diesel, and the huge potential of the 
sector to drive sustainable development and reduce emissions is curtailed. The sector’s nearly 370,000 clean 
energy jobs will also be put at significant risk.  
 
Please explain how best available technologies and pr actices have been considered and applied. If 
applicable, specify the innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
The Programme introduces an emergency concessional financing mechanism to keep energy companies from  
facing dwindling liquidity and laying off staff, and shutting off customers access to energy in addition to addressing 
the possibility of using diesel and kerosene as an alternative to solar due to COVID19.


---
*Page 53*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 75 
   
 
 
D


---
*Page 54*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
 
 
E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Frameworks  under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect  of any co -financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
 
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☒ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
 
E.2. Core indicator targets  
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information 
provided in section A.  
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be 
reduced or avoided (mitigation and 
cross -cutting only)  Annual  0.222 million tCO 2 eq 
Lifetime  1.33 million tCO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross -
cutting only)   
(a) Total project 
financing  {30,000,000 to 6 0,000,000   USD }.   
(b) Requested GCF 
amount  30,000,000 USD  
(c) Expected lifetime 
emission reductions   1,330,258  t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost 
per t CO 2eq (d = a / 
c) 22.55 to 45. 10   USD  / t CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF 
cost per t CO 2eq 
removed (e = b / c)  22.55   USD  / t CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of finance 
to be leveraged by the proposed 
project/programme as a result of 
the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and  
(f) Total finance 
leveraged  0 to 30,000 ,000   USD


---
*Page 55*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
private sources (mitigation and 
cross -cutting only)  (g) Public source co -
financed  0 to 30,000,000 USD     
(h) Private source 
finance leveraged  _____   Choose an item.  
(i) Total Leverage ratio 
(i = f / b)  0 to 1   
(j) Public source co -
financing ratio (j = g / b)  0 to 1  
(k) Private source 
leverage ratio (k = h / b)  _____  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  Not applicable to mitigation 
projects  
Indirect  Not applicable to mitigation 
projects  
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide 
the data per country in annex 17.  
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  Not applicable to mitigation 
projects  
Indirect  Not applicable to mitigation 
projects  
For a multi -country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in 
annex 17.


---
*Page 56*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme . Select key result areas and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be 
selected per expected impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in 
section A.4  above. Add rows as needed.  
Expected 
Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
 Mid-term  Final   
M1.0 
Reduced 
emissions 
through 
increased low -
emission 
energy access 
and power 
generation  M1.1 Tonnes  
of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent (t 
CO2eq) 
reduced or 
avoided - 
gender -
sensitive 
energy access 
power 
generation)  Digital 
platform for 
tracking sales 
and impact; 
supplemented 
with company 
survey by 
independent 
party  0 tCO2e  147,806 
tCO2e  885,791 
tCO2e  Methodol ogy: 
The project 
applies  the 
Global  Off-grid 
Lighting 
Association’s 
Standardised  
Impact Metrics 
to count carbon 
mitigation that is 
caused by off -
grid solar 
devices, which 
are sold by 
employees/age
nts that are 
retained thanks 
to EARF 
funding . The 
emission factor 
for kerosene 
lamps is 
assumed to be 
0.15tCO2/yr/lam
p based on the 
results of 
Lighting Africa.  
Programme 
Lifetime: 6 
years  
Annual 
Reduction: 
221,710 tCO2e  
Lifetime 
Reduction: 
1,330,258 
tCO2e


---
*Page 57*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
 
Social, 
environmental, 
economic co -
benefit 
index/indicator 
at impact level  
 Co-benefit 1.1 
Number of jobs 
maintained by 
concessional 
finance at 
companies 
manufacturing, 
distributing, 
and/or financing 
renewable 
energy 
products  Company 
survey by 
independent  
party  0 green 
jobs 3,900 green 
jobs 
Male: 2,850  
Female: 1,050  11,700 green 
jobs 
Male: 8,550  
Female: 3,150  Methodology: 
This approach 
uses an 
estimate of 
initial raise  
disbursed to 
energy access 
companies, 
80% of which is 
estimated to be 
used to fund 
local 
employment, 
costing $4,000 
per local 
employee. 
Gender figures 
are based on a 
GOGLA 
estimate that 
27% of sector 
employees are 
women.  
Programme 
Lifetime: 6 
years  
Annua l green 
jobs maintained: 
3,900  
Lifetime green 
jobs maintained: 
11,700  
 
E.4. Fund -level outcomes  
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be 
selected per expected outcome. Add rows as needed.  
Expected 
Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term ) Final 
M6.0 
Increased 
number of 
small, 
medium and 
large low -
emission M6.2 Number 
of 
households 
and 
individuals 
(males and 
females) with Digital 
platform for 
tracking sales 
and impact; 
supplemente
d with 
company 0 
household
s with 0 
individual
s 
Male: 0  
Female: 0  996,280 
households 
with 
5,479,539 
individuals  
Male: 
2,739,770  2,970,953 
households 
with 
16,340,243 
individuals  
Male: 
8,170,122  Methodology: 
The approach 
used counts 
each 
household that 
purchases an 
off-grid solar


---
*Page 58*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
power 
suppliers  
 improved 
access to 
low-emission 
energy 
sources  survey by 
independent 
party   Female: 
2,739,770  
  
  Female, 
8,170,122  device from an 
employee 
retained using 
EARF funding, 
discounting for 
product failure 
or 
nonpayment. 
The average 
household size 
in Sub -Saharan 
Africa is 6.9 
peop le; we 
have used 5.5 
as a 
conservative 
estimate.  
Programme 
Lifetime: 6 
years (one -
year grace 
period, three 
years of sales, 
and three 
years product 
lifetime)  
Annual 
Households 
Reached: 
495,159 
(average over 
6 years)  
 
Lifetime 
Households 
Reached:  
2,970,953   
 
 
M6.3 MWs of 
low-emission 
energy 
capacity 
installed, 
generated 
and/or 
rehabilitated 
as a result of 
GCF support  
 Digital 
platform for 
tracking sales 
and impact; 
supplemente
d with 
company 
survey by 
independent 
party  0 9.37 MW 
installed  24.47 MW 
installed  Methodology: 
The approach 
used multiplies 
expected sales 
of off -grid solar 
products by 
their weighted 
average watt -
peak (1.5 watts 
per lantern and 
20 watts per


---
*Page 59*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
SHS), 
discounting for 
product failure 
and 
nonpayment.  
Programme 
Lifetime: 6 
years (one -
year grace 
period, three 
years of sales, 
and three 
years product 
lifetime)  
 
Annual 
Capacity 
Installed: 4.078 
MW  
Lifetime 
Capacity 
Installed: 24.47  
MW


---
*Page 60*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add 
rows as needed.  
Expected 
Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term Final 
 
Component #1:  Disburse concessional loans to energy access companies who are helping to mitigate climate change 
and have a demonstrated need for liquidity support.  
 
Output 1.1 
Energy 
companies 
have 
sufficient 
liquidity to 
retain staff 
and 
maintain 
growth, 
providing 
access to 
clean 
energy 
technology 
to new 
households  Outcome 
1.1.1 % of 
companies 
receiving 
EARF funds 
report that 
they have 
reached pre -
crisis sales 
levels as a 
result of 
EARF 
funding  Digital platform 
for tracking 
sales and 
impact; 
supplemented 
with company 
survey by 
independent 
party  
 0% of 
companies  30% of 
companies  60% of 
compani
es Methodology: 
Using baseline 
estimates (without 
Covid -19) of 6% 
annual growth,35 
and projecting that 
companies will 
experience a 25 -
50% reduction in 
turnover for 202036 
before resuming 
regular growth 
rates in 2021 and 
beyond.  
Outcome 
1.1.2 % 
increase in 
cumulative # 
of 
households 
reached 
across EARF 
portfolio  Digital platform 
for tracking 
sales and 
impact; 
supplemented 
with company 
survey by 
independent 
party  0% growth  6% growth 
from baseline  18% 
growth 
from 
baseline  Methodology: The 
number of units 
sold (2.9 million) is 
the equivalent of 
18% of the 16 
million sales in  
2018 and 2019, 
which is taken as a 
proxy for the 
overall sector size. 
This is used as an 
indicative target, 
averaged across 3 
years of sales.  
 
35 GOGLA, 2020, p. 200. https://www.lightingglobal.org/wp -
content/uploads/2020/05/VIVID_OCA_2020_Off_Grid_Solar_Market_Trends_Report_Full_High -
compressed.pdf  
36 EnDev, 20 20. https://sun -connect -ea.org/wp -
content/uploads/2020/08/EnDev_Energy_Access_Industry_Barometer_Summary_FINAL.pdf


---
*Page 61*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
Outcome 
1.1.3 
Number of 
individuals 
accessing 
clean energy 
through 
sales or 
service from 
a EARF 
beneficiary 
company  Digital platform 
for tracking 
sales and 
impact; 
supplemented 
with company 
survey by 
independent 
party  0 
individuals  
Male: 0  
Female: 0  5,479,539 
individuals  
Male: 2,739,770  
Female: 
2,739,770  
  
  16,340,2
43 
individu
als 
Male: 
8,170,12
2 
Fem ale, 
8,170,12
2 Methodology: This 
approach takes the 
indicator presented 
in M6.2 
(households 
reached) and 
multiplies each 
household by 5.5 to 
arrive at the 
number of 
beneficiaries 
reached.  
 
Programme 
Lifetime: 6 years 
(one year grace 
period, three years 
of sales, and three 
years product 
lifetime)  
Annual individuals 
accessing clean 
energy: 2,723,374  
 
Lifetime 
Individuals 
accessing clean 
energy: 16,340,243  
Output 1.2 
Companies 
adopt 
flexible 
work 
policies and 
public 
health 
initiatives 
that enable 
staff, 
customers, 
and 
communitie
s to recover 
from the 
COVID -19 
crisis  Outcome 
1.2.1 % of 
companies in 
EARF 
portfolio that 
adopt a 
flexible work 
policy  EARF recipient 
survey 
conducted by 
independent 
party   0% of 
companies
  50% of 
companies  100% of 
compani
es Methodology: The 
approach used is to 
require firms to 
submit an 
employee retention 
plan, then offer 
them resources, 
guidance, and 
encouragement to 
adopt flex work 
policies  
Outcome 
1.2.2 % of 
companies 
receiving 
EARF funds 
communicat
e public 
health 
information 
regarding 
COVID -19 to 
their 
customer 
base  Company survey 
by independent 
party  50% of 
companies  80% of 
companies  80% of 
compani
es Methodology: 
Anecdotal evidence 
indicates that a 
subset of 
companies are 
already 
communicating 
health data. More 
thorough 
dissemination of 
best practices can 
reach the majority 
of remaining 
companies.


---
*Page 62*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
Outcome 
1.2.3 
Essential 
service 
centers, such 
as health 
facilities, 
schools, and 
public 
service hubs, 
powered by 
companies 
receiving 
EARF 
funding  Digital platform 
for tracking 
sales and 
impact; 
Company survey 
by independent 
party  
 0 essential 
service 
centers  10 essential 
service centers  20 
essential 
serv ice 
centers  Methodology: 
Microgrid and SHS 
operators will be 
able to grow their 
operations, which 
will include 
powering critical 
facilities. While 
rare, the service 
provided to these is 
vital to off -grid 
communities.  
 
Component #2: Monitor the financial and operational status of companies that have received concessional 
finance, quantifying the impact that EARF funds have had on staffing levels, sales, and climate change 
mitigation. Facilitate knowledge exchange between companies to encourage th e adoption of best practices 
or catalyze sector -wide responses to systemic business issues. Demonstrate ability of energy access sector to 
collaborate on sector -wide response to systemic threats.37 
Output 2.1: 
Lessons 
learned 
throughout 
the crisis 
and the 
relief 
process, 
from both 
the EARF 
partners 
and funded 
companies, 
are 
disseminate
d to the 
benefit of 
the wider 
energy 
access 
sector.  Outcome 
2.1.1 
Number of 
sector 
experts 
influenced 
by insights 
and 
knowledge 
outputs 
related to 
EARF  Analysis of 
attenda nce data 
of EARF 
webinars and 
workshops, 
readership data 
on EARF 
blogs/publicatio
ns, and surveys 
offered to 
attendees and 
readers  0 sector 
experts 
influenced  150 sector 
experts 
influenced  500 
sector 
experts 
influenc
ed Methodology: It is 
assumed that the 
EARF will convene 
regular bi -annual 
knowledge 
exchanges between 
recipient 
companies and 
other interested 
parties, annual 
open workshops, as 
well as publishing 
annual blogs 
and/or reports. 
Each of these is 
estimated to 
influence ~75 new 
experts on average 
(with diminishing 
returns as the 
programme 
reaches its end). 
The overall number 
will be determined 
through a 
combination of 
data sources, but 
the % ‘influenced’ 
will be principally 
determined by 
 
37 Component 2 is intended to  be merged with Component 1 in the revised logical framework,  to be delivered 
as a condition precedent to the exe cution of the Funded Activity Agreement.


---
*Page 63*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
survey results, then 
applied to overall 
attendance  
Outcome 
2.1.2 % of 
recipient 
companies 
that have 
gained 
market or 
business 
insights from 
an EARF -led 
convening  Survey 
conducted by 
independent 
party  0% of 
companies  40% of 
companies  80% of 
compani
es Methodology: The 
majority of  
companies are 
expected to 
participate in a 
sector convening 
by the end of the 
project timeframe.  
Outcome 
2.1.3 # of 
energy 
access 
companies 
NOT 
receiving 
EARF 
funding who 
gain material 
insight into 
business 
continuity 
practices or 
other 
improved 
operational 
strategies  Analysis of 
readership and 
viewership data; 
independent 
survey 
conducted of 
event attendees  0 
companies  15 companies  40 
compani
es Methodology: It is 
assumed that the 
universe of energy 
access companies 
that will not 
receive funding i s 
as large or larger 
than the number of 
companies that 
will, and that these 
can be reached 
through written 
and presented 
knowledge 
products.  
Output 2.2: 
Energy 
access 
sector 
demonstrat
es clear 
ability to 
organize 
and 
collaborate 
in order to 
overcome 
sector -wide 
threats 
such as the 
COVID -19 
pandemic  Outcome 
2.2.1 # of 
organization
s 
represented 
in EARF -
related 
strategy 
sessions, 
knowledge 
sessions, 
and/or 
working 
groups  Analysis of 
working group 
minutes/notes, 
as well as 
survey of 
attendees  0 
organizatio
ns 60 
organizations  120 
organiza
tions  Methodology: The 
participation of 
numerous and 
diverse 
organizations who 
have a stake in 
energy access will 
demonstrate the 
convening ability of 
the EARF and the 
larger sector. 
Interviews with 
participants will 
help to identify 
whether they were 
influenced and how 
sessions could be 
improved. 60 
organizations 
considered  as a 
realistic mid -line 
target, from which


---
*Page 64*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
we hope to grow 
the universe of 
participants  
 
E.6. Activities38  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should 
be reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
 
Activity 1.1.1 
Establishment of 
the EARF  Acumen and other 
senior investors, as 
well as EE, to fund 
and secure a first 
close of EARF  • Landscaping  
• Fundraising and closing  
• Reporting  ❏ Analyzed and 
segmented data on 
need for concessional 
financing, 
disaggregated by 
country and company 
type.  
❏ Indicative term sheet  
with EARF investors .  
❏ EARF achieves first 
closing with of investor 
capital confirmed.  
Activity 1.1.2 
Establishment , 
Management and 
Termination  of 
Climate CV A separate financing 
vehicle for GCF, 
Climate CV, is set up, 
managed and 
terminated by SIMA  • Climate CV 
establishment  
• Climate CV 
management  
• Climate CV termination  
• Reporting  
 ❏ Climate CV is formed, 
GCF subscription 
completed and 
participation 
agreement with EARF 
finalized   
❏ Legal documents 
related to Climate CV 
establishment  
❏ Annual reports  
❏ Performance reports  
❏ Evaluation reports  
Activity 1.1.3 
Management of the  
sub -participation  Applicant eligibility 
is checked and 
verified  by SIMA  
before submitting to 
EARF’s Investment 
Committee , loans 
are disbursed, 
borrowers are 
monitored, interest 
and principal is  
• Screening  
• Approval and 
Disbursement  
• Collections  
• Monitoring of the loans 
and impacts  
• Reporting  
• Influence  ❏ Applications processed 
for eligibility.  
❏ Applications processed 
for submission to IC.  
❏ Annual reports.  
❏ Semi -annual reports . 
❏ Midpoint and end of 
project evaluation  
 
38 The Activities in the log ical frame work  provided here in the Funding Proposal are intended to  be integrated 
into Component 1 prior to signing the FAA, in consultation with the GCF Secretariat


---
*Page 65*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
collected, companies 
are engaged for 
evaluation and 
influence . ❏ Interest income and 
capital returned to 
investors   
❏ Delinquencies and/or 
defaults resolved 
expeditiously and as 
advantageously as 
possible.  
❏ Fully -disbursed fund.  
❏ Portfolio of  companies 
who have  received 
concessional finance.  
❏ 100% of compa nies 
receive information on 
public health needs, 
flexible work policies, 
and customer support 
options  
❏ Mid -line and end -line 
reports on actions 
taken by companies to 
support staff, 
customers, and/or 
communities  
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please give a summary of the 
project/programme specific arrangements for monitoring and evaluation. Please provide t he types of interim 
and final evaluations. Describe Accredited Entity (AE) project reporting relationships, including to the 
NDA/Focal Point and between AE and Executing Entity (EE) as relevant, identifying reporting obligations from 
the EE to the AE. This  should relate to the frequency of reporting on project indicators, implementation 
challenges and financial status.  
 
SIMA, the Facility  Manager/EE, will be responsible for the overall underwriting, monitoring and covenant 
compliance, reporting and evaluati on of the EARF.  An on -line portal is planned to be used to facilitate 
periodic monitoring data collection, with SIMA ensuring data is complete.   
 
The main components of reporting by SIMA to investors and specifically the AE will include:  
 
SIMA will report to the investors on a semi -annual basis on the following indicators:  
• Fund -level capital deployment status  
• Timeline to deploy the remaining capital and the relevant pipeline companies  
• Country -wise geographic exposure of the fund    
• Impact reporting on a fund -level basis comprising of core -indicators mentioned above.  
• Borrower -wise financial, operational and other updates. (this section will be supported by 
the credit,  financial,  operati onal performance, and covenant compliance data collected 
monitoring by SIMA.  Contents of this section will mainly emphasize around revenue and 
operational growth, portfolio asset quality, key balance sheet and cashflow indicators, 
key changes in management , board or strategy, market and country related factors and 
other qualitative information.


---
*Page 66*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 75 
   
 
 
E  
• Reporting on any special credit cases related to restructuring of underlying loans.  
• Reporting on material E&S issues.  
 
Evaluation  
 
SIMA shall undertake a mid -term and final impact evaluation, based on impact indicators (see Annexes, 6, 8, 
and 11 for full details.)    
 
Lessons learned and best practices are expected to  be disseminated through webinars and publication of data 
and information from mid -term and final i mpact evaluations.


---
*Page 67*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 75 
   
 
 
F  
 
 
 
F. RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Please describe financial, technical,  operational, macroeconomic/political, money 
laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), sanctions, prohibited practices, and other risks that might 
prevent the project /programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk 
mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as wel l as fraudulent, 
coerciv e, collusive, and obstructive practices  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1: Governance & Management  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description  
Companies that receive EARF loans may have inefficient management or governance structure which may result 
in ineffective decision making and the funds allowed to them may not be utilized properly. This risk could 
materialize due to separation of key -executives or change in group share -holding structures. The materializatio n 
of this risk could result in ineffective decision making at company’s level and the company might not achieve 
desired outcome from the availed funds which will ultimately impact on their repayments.  Projected EARF 
impact, including GHG emissions, househo lds accessing renewable energy, and retained employment, may fail to 
materialize. This failure could result from a number of factors, including, but not limited to, ongoing effects of the 
COVID -19 pandemic, customers’ inability to pay, and/or mismanagement  of companies receiving EARF loans.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The facility manager ha s a well - designed credit due diligence process which involves detailed review of 
ownership, governance, management and board structure/effectiveness along -with interviews  of senior 
management. In case any weakness is identified, at the assessment level the borrowers are advised to resolve 
these issues appropriately along -with this strong covenants are also incorporated to improve the governance 
structure. Furthermore, any major change in ownership structure is also restricted in the legal documentation. 
The screening process described in Sections B.3, B.4, and G.2 is meant to ensure that EARF loans are directed to 
companies with a viable, impactful business model. These mea sures, combined with the monitoring and oversight 
described in Section E, should mitigate the risk of attenuated impact.


---
*Page 68*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 75 
   
 
 
F  
Selected Risk Factor 2: Finance Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  High Medium  
Description  
Companies that receive EARF loans may fail to partially or fully repay their obligations, either on -time or at all. 
This risk could materialize because of lower -than -expected customer repayments, fraud, misaligned accounting 
practices, the occurrence of na tural disaster, or myriad other possibilities. The  EARF is high risk and  
materialization of this risk could result in a reduced or non -existent distribution to fund investors at the 
completion of the proposed timeline.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
SIMA intends to conduct a thorough due diligence in order to evaluate the financial capacity and reputation of 
eligible companies. Close and constant monitoring of the portfolio, as well as quarterly reports to investors, are 
meant to proactively identify repayment ris ks and work with companies to help them repay loans.  
Selected Risk Factor 3: Technology/Infrastructure & MIS  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and Operational  Low High 
Description  
Companies that receive EARF loans may have weak technology/infrastructure or weak MIS systems which may 
result in incorrect information circulation within the organization and may affect their decisions. This risk could 
materialize due to usage of outdated  technology/infrastructure and pirated information systems. The 
materialization of this risk could result in circulation of incorrect information within the organization and their 
entire operational system may be at risk which will ultimately impact on the  repayment capacity of the company. 
The EARF may incur difficulties at the international, national, or local level in disbursing to eligible companies. 
Those companies, in turn, may face legal or regulatory impediments to repaying their pecuniary obligatio ns to the 
EARF. Further difficulties may arise in distributing the EARF’s returned capital and income to investors on a 
timely or complete basis. All of this may result in companies and/or investors not receiving their funds on time, in 
whole, or at all.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The facility manager has a  well designed credit due diligence process which involves cross checking various 
sources of data, particularly if a company works with a 3rd party software (PAYGO software in some cases). In 
case any weak ness in quality of data is identified, at the assessment level the borrowers are advised to resolve


---
*Page 69*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 75 
   
 
 
F  
these issues appropriately along -with this strong covenants are also incorporated to improve their MIS system. 
Furthermore, borrowers are also offered guide lines and advisory services to overcome these issues. As described 
in Section G.3, the chosen EE will have robust financial controls in place, and experience placing capital in the 
countries targeted by the EARF. Moreover, EARF investors such as GCF have p rocedures and diligence 
requirements in place to monitor the EARF and request periodic updates on its operations. Please see Annexes 
for additional detail on the EARF’s ESG assessment procedures and environmental/social risk mitigation strategy.  
 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit & Operational Risk  Low Medium  
Description  
Companies that receive EARF loans may have weak risk management / internal control system due to which they 
may be exposed to various process risks such as delays in production, decision and/or frauds as well. This risk 
could materialize due to non -availab ility of documented process flows, manuals or weak financial systems. The 
materialization of this risk could result in delays in their operational processes or even frauds as well which will 
ultimately impact their repayment capacity.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The facility manager has  designed  a credit due diligence process which involves review of borrower’s risk 
management & internal process flows. In case any weakness is identified at the assessment level, the borrowers 
are guided to correct the w eakness of processes.  Furthermore, covenants are also incorporated in loan documents 
to improve their internal processes and risk management.  In addition to this facility manager has  internal 
processes which can highlight and detect any fraudulent activi ty initiated and forwarded to fund -manager for 
payment processing.  
Selected Risk Factor 5:  Country / Sovereign Risk / Forex Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit & Market Risk  Low Medium  
Description  
Companies that receive EARF loans may behave been located in countries wherein, the country’s economic or 
political position is risky. Further, there may be regulatory requirements in a country which may create problems 
in repatriation of loan repayments. This risk could materialize due to country’s weak economic position or due to 
strict regulatory requirements in the country. The materialization of this risk could result in repatriation risk in 
loan repayments or may also lead to increase in market risk i f the loan is not fully hedged and the movements of 
currencies are not favourable.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The facility manager while assessing the credit ha s due diligence procedure s to mitigate this risk and while 
assessing the loan request country / sovereign risk is also analyzed.   
Selected Risk Factor 6:  KYC & Anti -Terrorism  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit & Operational  Medium  High 
Description  
There is a possibility that companies that receive EARF may have been owned/managed by persons which may 
have KYC issues or may have link with terrorism activities. The materialization of this risk can have serious 
consequences such as blockage of fund from investors , regulatory or criminal proceedings against the 
funds/investors, sanctions and may also cause monetary losses.  
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 70*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 75 
   
 
 
F  
The facility manager has  due diligence and anti -terrorism policies in place and while assessing the credit 
requests thorough due diligence procedures are implemented to mitigate these risks wherein, the borrower’s 
management & ownership is assessed with KYC & Anti -Terrorism check s (see section G.1). After the approvals 
the borrower’s key -persons are also checked with anti -terrorism databases in -house as well as at the 
disbursement stages by third party fund servicers. In case of identification of any KYC / Anti -Terrorism issues th e 
funds are stopped from being disbursed.  
Selected Risk Factor 7: Impact Risk (Fund Level)  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description  
Projected EARF impact, including GHG emissions, households accessing renewable energy, and retained 
employment, may fail to materialize. This failure could result from a number of factors, including, but not limited 
to, ongoing effects of the COVID -19 pand emic, customers’ inability to pay, and/or mismanagement of companies 
receiving EARF loans.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The screening process described in Sections B.3, B.4, and G.2 is meant to ensure that EARF loans are directed to 
companies with a viable, impactful business model. These measures, combined with the monitoring and oversight 
described in Section E, may mitigate the risk of attenuated impact.  
Selected Risk Factor 8: Liquidity Risk (Funds Level)  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Market Risk  Low Medium  
Description  
There may be a possibility that the facility manager do es not have adequate level of cash to timely disburse the 
loan to a prospective company or the fund is not able to meet the timelines for disbursement of all pipeline 
companies. Furthermore, since there is no prepayment penalty involved the funds might recei ve early repayments 
and  those early repayments may not be placed timely. The materialization of this risk may lead towards cash -
burning and may also lead to low -earning yield for the fund.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The facility manager has on hand a minimu m amount of cash to ensure sufficient liquidity to cover expenses while 
minimizing the drag on Fund’s efficiency. It also has a budgeting process, which involves regular monitoring of 
projected cash flows to plan for Loan maturities in order to minimize th e amount of time during which cash 
remains idle. The facility manager may have multiple disbursements targeted over the course of period will plan 
its pipeline of borrower companies accordingly.  
 
Thus, the only excess liquidity should only be in the rare case of a pre -payment. The facility manager is expected 
to discourage unnecessary pre -payment while negotiation with the borrowers however, at the same time  it should 
not face any issues in redeplo ying funds as off -grid solar companies also need bridge Loans for the purpose of 
inventory management.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 9: Execution Risk (Funds Level)  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and Operational  Low High 
Description


---
*Page 71*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 75 
   
 
 
F  
The EARF may incur difficulties at the international, national, or local level in disbursing to eligible companies. 
Those companies, in turn, may face legal or regulatory impediments to repaying their pecuniary obligations to 
the EARF. Further difficulties  may arise in distributing the EARF’s returned capital and income to investors on a 
timely or complete basis. All of this may result in companies and/or investors not receiving their funds on time, 
in whole, or at all.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
As describe d in Section G.3, the chosen EE will have financial controls in place, and experience placing capital in 
the countries targeted by the EARF. Moreover, EARF investors such as participants like GCF have procedures and 
diligence requirements in place to monit or the EARF and request periodic updates on its operations. Please see 
Annexes for additional detail on the EARF’s ESG assessment procedures and environmental/social risk mitigation 
strategy.


---
*Page 72*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 75 
   
 
 
H  
 
G. GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening 
and the rationale for assigning such category . Present also the enviro nmental and social assessment and 
management instruments developed for the proposal (for example, ESIA, ESMP, ESMF, ESMS, 
environmental and social audits, etc.). Provide a summary of the main outcomes of these instrument s. 
Present the key environmental and  social risks and impacts and the measures on how the 
project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. preparation, 
implementation and operation), in accordance with GCF’s ESS standards . If the proposed project or 
programme involves investments through financial intermediations,  describe the due diligence and 
management plans by the Executing Entities (EEs) and the oversight and supervision  arrangements.  
Describe the capacity of the EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for compliance 
monitoring, supervision and reporting. Include a description of the project/programme -level grievance redress 
mechanism, a summary of the extent of multi -stakeholder consultations undertaken for the 
project/programme, the plan of the Accredited Entity (AE) and EEs to continue to engage the stakeholders 
throughout project implementation, and the manner and timing of disclosure of the applicable safe guards 
reports following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy  and Environmental and Socia l 
Policy.  
 
This proposal involves an EE acting as a financial intermediary, intending to carry out “Activities with minimal or 
no adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts.” Therefore, the appropriate ESS Category is I3 . 
 
 
Scope of the E&S Assessment  
In addition to meeting eligibility criteria in Section B.4 and KYC AML/CFT checks, SIMA will undertake an E&S 
Assessment.  
E&S Assessment  SIMA, Deal Sourcing Partner will collaborate with SIMA and ensure that the E&S process is 
consistently followed. The following table summarizes the allocation of responsibilities:  
 E&S  
Categorization  Reputational 
Issues and XL  Applicable 
E&S Laws  Addition al 
E&S DD  Investment 
Proposal  
Deal Sourcing Partner  Define  Check  Check  Check  Prepare  
SIMA  Review  Review  Review  Review  Review  
E&S Consultant   Review  Review  Review  Review  
Investment Committee      Approve  
 
E&S Categorization:  Investees will be ESS Category I3 and engaged in energy access - primarily solar home 
systems ( <1kw), to lesser extent biodigesters, clean cooking or micro -grids. These various applicants will be 
assessed according to following E&S factors: impact on key  biodiversity areas; human rights; labour; health & 
safety; potentially irreversible impacts; land use; extent of environmental/social issue. The context of inherent 
sector risks, scale, continued operations and locations will also be considered.   
The EARF intends not to finance a company or project categorized as Category A (high -risk) or Cateogry B 
(medium -risk) , and will use an enhanced E&S assessment for any potential investee that demonstrates a possibility 
of being medium risk, (anticipated to be very limited number, if any).


---
*Page 73*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 75 
   
 
 
H  
Reputational Issues and Exclusion list : SIMA investigates information available in public and private domains for 
any adverse environmental/social issues, or compliance with applicable laws associated with the applicant.  Th e 
DSP to use tools and platforms defined by SIMA. Standard key words include ‘Scandal’, ‘labour’, ‘fraud’, ‘corruption’, 
‘bribery’, ‘money laundering’, ‘illegal’, etc. Any issues identified will a include note in Investment Proposal.  
SIMA has adopted EDFI’s Exclusion List  for this Fund, and applicants will be screened to determine whether it is in 
line with this exclusion list. The Fund will not fina nce any activity, production, use of, trade in, distribution of or 
involving specific listed activities.  
Applicable E&S Laws : Applicants will be required to demonstrate that they are currently complying with host 
country E&S/OHS laws through a valid compa ny registration certificate and representations in the loan agreement.  
Additional E&S DD:  Other available E&S Assessments from SIMA, the DSP, other investors and/or any 3rd parties 
will be requested.  If an ESAP was defined within the past 24 months, SIMA will request a status update.  
The DSP will ask applicant to complete a Self -Assessment Questionnaire (developed by SIMA) in order to 
evidence that a set of minimum E&S safeguards are in place. This questionnaire will be checked by the DSP and 
reviewed by SIMA before deal is submitted to Investment Committee. If needed, an ESAP will be defined.  
Reviewing and Challenging the E&S Appraisal  
The E&S analysis will form part of the overall Investment Proposal reviewed by the IC and considered when 
making a final decision on the investment.  SIMA will involve external E&S consultant experts in this process in 
cases of suspected medium -risk, complex or sensitive investments  (investments determined to be medium -risk 
will not be funded) . 
E&S clauses will be included i n loan agreements to ensure the investee company complies with the Fund’s 
exclusion list, applicable E&S laws and regulation.  If an ESAP has been defined, it will be used to determine 
covenants in the legal loan agreement to ensure the investee company wo rks to address the identified issues 
within a set time frame over the investment period.  
 
Compliance Monitoring   
Borrowers will be required to report bi-annually and represent ongoing compliance with any E&S covenants, the 
exclusion list and any ESAP.    
 
Grievance redress mechanism , see Annex 6.  
Multi -stakeholder consultations  see Annex 7.  
 
Environmental and Social Risk Assessments  
 
The EE will provide necessary proof of E&S assessments, as well as documentation to explain their risk 
mitigation strategy.  
 
The EARF will require all borrowers to comply with the Harmonized European Development Finance 
Institution (EDFI) Exclusion List.39 
 
Due Diligence  
 
Potential EARF loan recipients will be screened to ensure that they meet the decided eligibility criteria 
described in Schedule 1 of the Term Sheet on ‘Key terms of the Loans’ , as well as KYC and AML/CFT 
criteria (see sect ion G.3 and Annex 6 for additional detail).  
 
For an indicative example, firms that have cleared the eligibility criteria may be required to fill out the 
following information:  
 
39 https://www.edfi.eu/wp/wp -content/uploads/2017/09/EDFI -Exclusion -List_ -September -2011.pdf


---
*Page 74*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 75 
   
 
 
H  
 
KYC List 1 Information  
Shareholder structure/capitalisation table  
Corporate structure  
Articles of association of Borrower and Obligor(s)  
1 year audited financial statements  
Short bio of key senior management and board members  
Names and date of birth of management / board members / shareholders for Worldcheck 
confirmation  
 
As a further control, the facility manager will manage the flow of approved applications to mitigate risk 
of over -concentration and ensure diversity of busin ess models and geographies, as well as final 
screening to ensure that all firms and applications meet the EARF’s mandate.  
 
Companies that have qualified for investment and been approved for disbursement may also be 
required to submit:  
● Passport copies of b oard members and passport of person who will sign the loan agreement  
● Certificate of registration (not older than 12 months)  
● License under which they operate  
● Power of signatory of the person who will sign the loan agreements  
 
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including 
the development of an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, 
prior and informed consent, pursuant to the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy .  
 
Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on 
the environmental and social risk category as annex 6.  
 
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Provide a summa ry of the gender assessment and project/programme -level gender action plan that is aligned 
with the objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy . Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing 
the process used to develop both documents. Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and 
why) and key recommendations (how to address the  vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment. 
Indicate if stakeholder consultations have taken place and describe the key inputs integrated into the action


---
*Page 75*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 75 
   
 
 
H  
plan, including: how addressing the vulnerability will ensure equal participation and benefit s from funds 
investment; key gender -related results to be expected from the project/programme with targets; 
implementation arrangements that the AE has put in place to ensure activities are implemented and expected 
outcomes will be achieved, monitored and evaluated.  
 
Provide the full gender assessment and project -level gender action plan as annex 8.  
 
With specific regard to women, many off -grid energy  investments positively impact women in such areas as 
health, safety, and livelihood. Solar lanterns can replace the use of kerosene, thus making lighting in the 
household higher quality and reducing the fumes that women and children are exposed to.  
The f und plans to adopt policies relating to gender lens investing, and it will disaggregate KPIs by gender. The 
loan covenants state that the percentages of female in -country staff/total staff may not decline by more than 10 
percentage  points relative to base line (end of calendar quarter preceding application date).  
Separately, Acumen has formalized its Gender Policy40, which outlines specific gender issues related to Acumen’s 
governance and human resource aspects of Acumen the institution. While SIMA is manag ing the EARF, we are 
strongly encouraging gender indicators that the EARF will report on with respects to the gender impact of its 
portfolio companies.  
Regarding gender impact, many of the goods and services provided by the companies the Fund expects to i nvest 
in will have a direct impact on women, such as solar lanterns and clean cookstoves. These technologies can 
reduce indoor air pollution, which kills 3.8 million people annually41 and puts women and children “at 
particularly high risk from exposure”.42   
Energy access companies  also hire women employees, providing income and empowerment. The off -grid solar 
workforce is currently composed of 27% women,43 a ratio that needs to improve, hence the covenants attached to 
women’s employment. Acumen will seek to understand the impact that the relief funds have on women through 
company -provided data and 3rd party research and data collection.  Historically, Acumen has conducted its own 
research on the impact on women of certain of its portfolio companies and has  also partnered with organizations 
like the International Center for Research on Women to research and better understand gender impact.  Acumen 
expects to provide similar research for investments made by the Fund and will share that with the GCF.  
Acumen is  committing the following in its own work outside of the EARF, per our gender policy: “This policy is 
Acumen’s first attempt at taking an intentional approach to gender sensitivity in our programs and operations. 
We intend to take a staged approach - first , measuring what we feasibly can measure in our programs and 
operations; second, reviewing the data collected at meaningful intervals and determining what we’ve learned; 
and third, based on those lessons, determining any advisable changes to our approach.”  
 
Please see Annex 8 for more information.  
 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
40 https://acumen.org/wp -content/uploads/2016/02/gender -policy -final -11-30-2015.pdf  
41 WHO (2018), https://www.who.int/news -room/fa ct-sheets/detail/household -air-pollution -and-health  
42 WHO (2016), https://www.who.int/airpollution/publications/burning -opportunities/en/  
43 
https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/gogla_off_grid_solar_a_growth_engine_fo
r_jobs_web_opt.pdf


---
*Page 76*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 73 OF 75 
   
 
 
H  
Describe the project/programme’s  financial management including the financial monitoring systems, financial 
accounting, auditing, and disbursement structure and methods. Refer to section B.4 on implementation 
arrangements as necessary.  
Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention, e.g. procurement implementation arrangements 
and the role of the AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken 
and how that will be managed by the AE or the implementing agency. Provide a detailed procu rement plan as 
annex 10.   
 
Acumen and the EARF will adhere to all the relevant policies of Acumen that the GCF reviewed in the 
accreditation of Acumen. During the implementation, Acumen will provide oversight and quality assurance in 
accordance with its p olicies and procedures and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master 
Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with GCF.  
 
In addition , SIMA currently implements a robust procedure of confidential internal financial controls and pol icies 
in the operation of its funds and will utilize these controls and policies with EARF.  
 
 
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of 
disclosure for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, 
project and programme funding proposals wi ll be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the 
submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the 
IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception sh ould not be applied 
broadly to an entire document if the document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed 
without prejudice or harm.  
 
Indicate below whether or not  the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
 
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, 
may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence . 
X With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. 
Accordingly, the accredited entity is provi ding to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes:  
€ full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, 
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and  
€ redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing 
confident ial information.  
 
ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes


---
*Page 77*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 74 OF 75 
   
 
 
H  
☒ ANNEX 1 NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ ANNEX 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ ANNEX 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ ANNEX 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ ANNEX 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)  
☒ ANNEX 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS discl osure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ OTHERS (PLEASE SPECIFY – E.G.  RESETTLEMENT ACTION PLAN, RESETTLEMENT POLICY 
FRAMEWORK , INDIGENOUS PEOPLE’S PLAN, LAND ACQUISITION PLAN, ETC.) 
☒ ANNEX 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ ANNEX 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ ANNEX 9 LEGAL DUE DILIGENCE (REGULATION , TAXATION AND INSURANCE )  
☒ ANNEX 10 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ ANNEX 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☐ ANNEX 12 AE fee request (template provided)  
☐ ANNEX 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ ANNEX 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ ANNEX 15 EVIDENCE OF INTERNAL APPROVAL (template provided)    
☐ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or eva luation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity


---
*Page 78*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 75 OF 75 
   
 
 
H  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  Climate change mitigation methodology  
 
☒ Annex 23  Mitigation calculations  
 
☒ Annex 24  EARF Eligibility Criteria  
 
☒ Annex 2 5 Facility manager overview  
☒ Annex 26  DRAFT Term sheet for energy access companies receiving EARF loans  
   
.


---
*Page 79*
---

76


---
*Page 80*
---

77


---
*Page 81*
---

78


---
*Page 82*
---

79


---
*Page 83*
---

80


---
*Page 84*
---

81


---
*Page 85*
---

82


---
*Page 86*
---

83


---
*Page 87*
---

84


---
*Page 88*
---

85


---
*Page 89*
---

86


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 08 
Page 87 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of  
FP148  
Proposal name:  Participation in Energy Access Relief Facility (“EARF”)  
Accredited entity:  Acumen Fund, Inc.  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                  Scale: N.A.  
1. The sub -Saharan Africa region experiences more frequent and intense climate extremes 
than other regions in the world. This is predicted to continue. The Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change reported in 2014 that temperature increases in sub- Saharan Af rica would be 
higher than the global mean temperature increase during the next century, impacting health, 
agriculture,  and food security.  
2. The region also faces tremendous development challenges. In sub- Saharan Africa, 548 
million people, or 53 per cent of  the total population, lack access to electricity and rely on the 
expensive alternatives kerosene and diesel generators for lighting. It is also reported that 900 
million people, or 85 per cent of the population, lack access to clean cooking fuels and 
tech nologies, which leads to rapid deforestation–  due to the massive use of biomass - and 
indoor air pollution1. 
3. The energy access sector has shown remarkable growth worldwide. The sector is 
composed of companies that manufacture, distribute, finance and/or i nstall solar home systems, 
microgrids, clean cookstoves and/or solar -powered productive appliances. The off -grid solar 
energy industry has grown into a USD 1.75 billion sector with revenues growing at an annual rate of 30 per cent from 2016 to 2019. By Feb ruary 2020 the sector had sold more than 180 
million off -grid solar units worldwide, providing lighting and other energy services to 420 
million people.
2 The off -grid solar home system sector has grown rapidly into a USD 1.75 billion 
annual market that supports 370,000 jobs.3 The sector is expected to provide 388 million 
people with basic electricity access by 2030.4 
4. The contribution of the energy access  sector to climate change mitigation is significant, 
especially in sub -Saharan Africa, where the majority of mitigation impacts have been delivered. 
Off-grid solar energy and microgrids powered with renewable resources reduce the use of 
diesel and petrol g enerators, which are often inefficient and expensive. It is estimated that 74 
million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO 2eq) emissions have been avoided owing to 
the off -grid solar energy technology.5 This reduction is estimated to be the equivalen t of taking 
 
1 https://www.seforall.org/publications/recover -better- africa  
2 Lighting Global. 2020. Off -Grid Solar Market Trends Report 2020 . Available at https://www.lightingglobal.org/wp -
content/uploads/2020/03/VIVID%20OCA_2020_Off_Grid_Solar_Market_Trends_Report_Summary_High%20res.pdf  
3 GOGLA. 2019. Off-Grid Solar. A Growth Engine for Jobs . Available at 
https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/ 
gogla_off_grid_solar_a_growth_engine_for_jobs_web_opt.pdf . 
4 As footnote 2 above.  
5 https://www.gogla.org/resources/global -off-grid -solar -market -report -h2-2019 -sales- and- impact -data .


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 08 
Page 88 
 
 
19 coal -fired power plants offline for a year. It is also reported that at least 44 per cent of all the 
kerosene lanterns that have been replaced were in sub- Saharan Africa.6 
5. However, energy access companies operating in sub- Saharan Africa are  now facing 
unprecedented challenges caused by the coronavirus 2019 disease (COVID- 19) pandemic. They 
have experienced a dramatic reduction in sales and revenues owing to customers’ inability to 
pay stemming from income and job losses as a result of economic slowdown and “shelter -in-
place” restrictions. New funding and credit lines for the companies to maintain and expand operations have been reduced. As a result, the companies’ operations have to rely on their own 
cash reserves, which were constrained even before the COVID- 19 pandemic.  Most of the energy 
access companies in sub -Saharan Africa are categorized as small or medium -sized.  
6. Long -term and sustainable development of clean energy access in sub- Saharan Africa is 
at risk. A recent survey conducted by Endev7 found that 82 per cent of energy access companies 
are struggling with limited reserves. Half of the surveyed companies are contemplating lay- offs 
of their workforce, and over half of solar energy companies view inventory management as a 
severe probl em. This is leading to service deterioration, which would cause even more 
customers to stop paying. Inventory stock outs would hamper the sustainable operation of the 
companies. Unless the energy access companies are able to maintain and expand operations,  the 
consumers will be forced to switch back to the fossil fuel energy option.  
7. The proposed programme, titled Energy Access Relief Facility (EARF), is to establish a 
debt fund to provide energy access companies with vital liquidity funding in the form of low-
interest and unsecured subordinated loans. The EARF loans will enable the companies to remain solvent, maintain staff and supply lines, and be positioned to drive the post -COVID -19 
recovery. The programme preserves the emission reductions that the sect or had already 
achieved before the pandemic. It supports the companies in achieving further growth and extending the means to reduce emissions to new customers beyond the COVID- 19 crisis.  
8. The targeted countries of EARF are the Democratic Republic of the Co ngo, Kenya, 
Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Uganda and Zambia.  
9. Acumen Fund, Inc is the accredited entity (AE). Social Investment Managers and 
Advisors, LLC (SIMA), as executing entity (EE), will manage EARF. In addition, the legal enti ties 
Energy Access Relief Fund  B.V. and Climate CV will be set up to book loans for energy access 
companies and ring -fence GCF funding for the programme. They are also regarded as EEs.  
10. The total fund size is to be financed by a GCF funding contribution of USD 30.0 million, 
and with the balance to be invested by other investors, including Acumen.  
11. The programme consists of two funding sources. The first source is a GCF equity 
contribution of USD 30.0 million. Since EARF may provide funding in the future to countries 
other than those targeted, GCF investment will be channelled  through an intermediary, Climate 
CV, to EARF so that the GCF fund can be segregated from other funds. No risk mitigation is 
contemplated for this source. Accordingly, GCF will assume EARF  investment risk in energy 
access companies in full.  
 
6 GOGLA. 2019. Global Off -Grid Solar Market Report Semi -Annual Sales and Impact Data .. Available at 
https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/global_off_grid_so lar_market_report_h22019.pdf  
7 Energising Development (EnDev)  is an energy access partnership currently financed by six donor countries: the 
Netherlands, Germany, Norway, United Kingdom, Switzerland and Sweden. EnDev promotes sustainable access to 
modern energy services that meet the needs of the poor -  long lasting, affordable, and appreciated by users. EnDev 
works in 25 countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America. Since 2005, EnDev has taken a leading role at promoting 
access to Sustainable Energy for All . https://endev.info/images/1/1e/EnDev_COVID -
19_implications_and_response_options.pdf


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 08 
Page 89 
 
 
12. The second source is structured to mobilize funding from other investors, including 
bilateral institutions and Acumen.  
13. The expected tenor of EARF will be four years with an option for two one -year 
extensions.  
14. The programme is expected to lend to about 90 small and medium- sized off -grid energy 
access companies in the targeted nine countries. The loans will be unsecured, subordinated and 
concessionally priced. It is estimated that 85 per cent of the total amount is directed to support 
companies carrying off -grid energy access services. Other companies that EARF expects to 
support are those in microgrids, clean cooking and productive use.  
15. The AE estimates that if a steady sector growth is maintained with the  liquidity funding 
support of the programme, 1.33 MtCO 2eq emissions can be reduced. The estimation is based on 
the expected sales amount to be safeguarded as a result of EARF emergency relief to the energy 
access companies so that customers do not switch b ack to less sustainable energy alternatives 
such as kerosene and diesel. The number of beneficiaries is expected to exceed 16 million.  
16. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) notes the significant demand for EARF 
liquidity funding support expressed by more than 300 energy access companies in the targeted 
nine countries in the survey. The estimated emission reduction of 1.33 MtCO 2eq is considered 
reasonable given that the period of estimation is short owing to the nature of emergency relief funding. T he EARF mitigation impact could be significant in view of the future emission 
reductions to be delivered by the energy access companies that have overcome financial challenges thanks to the programme.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential                  Scale:   N.A.  
1.2.1.  Potential for knowledge -sharing and learning  
17. EARF has potential for scaling up given its vital and timely intervention to preserve 
investments and impacts achieved in the sector for climate change mitigation.  
18. It will present effective funding modalities to provide liquidity support, which is critical 
for off- grid energy access companies to weather negative impacts caused by the pandemic. 
However, the replicability of EARF could be constrained, as it is primarily dependent on the availability of large amount s of concessional funding from investors like GCF.  
1.2.2.  Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
19. The programme further justifies and helps to preserve the enabling environment 
established over the last decades by promoting private sector delivery  of solar energy access in 
the targeted countries. The enabling environment that has been developed for the energy access market is being challenged by the COVID- 19 pandemic. The programme contributes to 
sustaining the enabling environment by supporting of f-grid energy access companies in 
continuing and expanding operations.  
20. The programme will support the regulatory framework and policies necessary for the 
continuous and sustainable development of the off -grid energy access sector during and after 
the COVID -19 pandemic. The sector supports the provision of electricity to populations that are 
currently being left behind in driving sustainable development and in contributing to national emission reduction targets. The programme demonstrates an effective model and shared 
experience with governments for future policies and programmes to secure and maintain the sector development.


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 08 
Page 90 
 
 
21. The AE will organize sessions to disseminate lessons learned from the origination, 
structuring, investment process, deployment and monitoring of loans as well as customer 
outcomes. It also operates various knowledge dissemination platforms that would reach over 
500,000 people annually.  
22. The TAP notes the programme’s paradigm shift potential in sustaining the off -grid 
energy access sector, which could prevent impairment of the progress made in the last decades 
in emission reductions in the targeted countries .  
1.3 Sustainable development potential              Scale: N.A . 
1.3.1.  Environmental co -benefits  
23. Environmental co- benefits of the programme include reduction of air and water 
pollution and improved use of resources as a result of energy access companies continuing to 
operate while the COVID -19 pandemic remains and thereafter. The programme aims to ensure 
access to affordable, reliable, and sustainable energy by providing the liquidity support that is critical to enabling off -grid energy access companies to survive and maintain operation in sub-
Saharan Africa. With the electricity supplied by the companies supported by EARF, the ad option 
of renewable energy in these communities could be retained, rather than reverting to fossil -
based fuels.  
1.3.2.  Economic co -benefits  
24. The off -grid solar sector generates jobs and increases the incomes of its customers by 
improving access to light and power , thus unlocking previously unproductive hours. Solar home 
systems enable 21 per cent of users to spend more time working and earning. Recent research 
by GOGLA8 found that in more than one third of the households surveyed in East Africa, solar 
home systems are used for business or income generation. With 370,000 jobs generated from the sector, energy access serves as a large employer in low - and middle -income countries.  
25. It is estimated that the off -grid solar sector could lose up to 1.3 million full- time 
equivalent jobs by 2022 across South Asia and East Africa alone unless the sector overcomes the 
operational and financial crisis caused by COVID -19. The majority of such job losses will be in 
rural areas, which would have supported job creation and diversi fication among often 
economically disadvantaged and vulnerable communities.  
1.3.3.  Gender -sensitive development impacts  
26. The programme supports off -grid energy access companies in continuing to operate 
throughout the COVID -19 pandemic, and in expanding thereafter . The availability of clean 
energy access is beneficial to women, who suffer indoor pollution caused by use of kerosene, 
lose time for purchasing or collecting traditional fuel sources, or who are responsible for hand-
irrigation of crops.  
27.  The programme pl ans to promote and improve the gender balance of staff in favour of 
women in the off -grid energy access companies to be supported. The loan covenants include 
that the percentages of female in- country staff against total staff may not decline by more than 
10 per cent points relative to the baseline.  
 
8 GOGLA, July 2018. Powering Opportunity The Economic Impact of Off -Grid Solar, 
https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/gogla_powering_opportunity_report.pdf


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 08 
Page 91 
 
 
1.4 Needs of the recipient          Scale: N.A.    
28. The off -grid energy access sector has been playing a pivotal role in promoting 
sustainable renewable energy supply,  thus contributing to climate change mitigation in the 
targeted nine countries. In the last half of 2019, the total sales of off- grid solar equipment and 
services in the targeted countries represented 37 per cent of all global sales.  
29. The off -grid energy ac cess companies have been in dire need of liquidity as a result of a 
decline in sales since the start of the COVID- 19 crisis. A recent survey 9 indicated that 81 per 
cent of companies had experienced a sales decline, of which 44 per cent lost more than half  their 
sales. Of the companies that rely on regular service payments or loan repayments (such as pay-
as-you-go solar companies), 62 per cent had seen a drop of over 25 per cent in collection rates 
compared with the same period in 2019. Even of the relative ly large companies with more than 
USD 5 million in annual revenue, only 22 per  cent reported that they could sustain their 
business for six months on their current trajectory. Over 300 companies have expressed 
interest in the EARF financial support.  
1.4.1.    Abse nce of alternative sources of financing  
30. Funding to the sector has pulled back as a result of the increased macroeconomic risk 
and competing public health and economic support priorities for development finance 
institutions. Local commercial banks face liqu idity crises and credit crunch and are unable to 
offer liquidity sufficient for off -grid energy access companies, which are mostly small to 
medium- sized, to maintain operations. The sector lacks investors or debt providers who are 
willing to take risks and offer relief support under these unprecedented circumstances. The AE 
has received expressions of interest from more than 300 off -grid energy access companies for 
emergency relief totalling  USD 80 million. Those companies are currently serving 85 million 
people with 20,000 staff in the targeted countries.  
31. The GCF equity investment of USD 30 million will be on lend to companies in the nine 
targeted countries, where liquidity relief is scarce for off -grid energy access companies. The 
EARF emergency relief loa ns will be priced concessionally, depending on company size. The 
interest rate is determined at lower than commercial rates to avoid over -indebting companies 
while ensuring that only companies that actually need the money apply.  
32. The TAP concludes that the needs of the recipient with regard to the programme are 
notable. The programme provides the liquidity support critically needed by off -grid energy 
access companies in sub -Saharan Africa to continue operations throughout the COVID- 19 
pandemic. The availabil ity of concessional funding to the sector is limited while demand for 
such funding is intense and likely to increase. Sources of financing other than GCF are absent, especially if the magnitude of demand is taken into consideration.  
1.5 Country ownership                Scale: N.A.  
1.5.1.  Existence of a national climate strategy  
33. All of the targeted nine countries have committed to promoting climate change 
mitigation in their respective nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and intended NDCs . 
Among the mitigation me asures mentioned in the NDCs, those aimed at promoting renewable 
energy in power generation are the most common, mainly through the promotion of on -grid 
 
9 https://endev.info/images/1/1e/EnDev_COVID -19_implications_and_response_options.p df


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 08 
Page 92 
 
 
wind, hydropower or solar technologies and off -grid solar technology. The programme aims to 
safeguard t he progress achieved in the targeted countries towards universal access to clean 
energy, microgrids and clean cooking technology.  
1.5.2.  Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver  
34. Acumen Fund, Inc  is a non- profit impact investment fund with 15 years’ experience in 
small and medium- sized enterprises that serve low -income communities in developing 
countries across South Asia, sub -Saharan Africa and Latin America. Acumen invests “patient 
capital” in e arly -stage companies across sectors such as agriculture, education, energy, financial 
inclusion and affordable healthcare.  
35. Acumen has developed two investment funds in partnership with GCF, namely Kawisafi 
Ventures (FP005) and Acumen Resilient Agriculture  Fund (FP078). Kawisafi Ventures is an 
investment fund focused on creating energy access in East Africa. Acumen Resilient Agriculture 
Fund is a climate resilience focused agriculture investment fund in East and West Africa.  
36. SIMA was established in 2015 wit h a mission to improve the lives of its clients at the 
bottom of the pyramid by providing capital and advisory services to create and scale up 
profitable business with financial, social,  and environmental impacts. Its first fund, SIMA Off -
Grid Solar and Financial Access Senior Debt Fund I, is a USD 90 million fund targeting the off -
grid solar sector. It provides senior debt to companies that finance, manufacture and/or 
distribute solar home systems in sub -Saharan Africa, and South Asia. The second fund, SIM A 
Angaza Distributor Finance Fund, is a pilot debt fund of USD 3 million launched in June 2020 in 
partnership with Angaza to support off -grid solar distributors in sub -Saharan Africa. Its 
portfolio includes loans to three off -grid solar distributors.  
37. SIMA was selected to manage EARF through a transparent process by potential 
investors in EARF, which include bilateral and private sector financial institutions and Acumen. 
Some of them are the investors in SIMA’s first fund.  
38. No-objection letters are issued by the respective national designated authority of the 
nine countries and attached to the funding proposal.  
39. The TAP confirms country ownership of the programme. The programme aims to 
support the off -grid energy access sector, which was developed and fostered  in the targeted 
countries as a part of the government commitments to climate change mitigation. Both Acumen 
and SIMA have exposure to the sector and regions and so are assessed as capable of 
implementing the programme as proposed.  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness               Scale: N.A.  
1.6.1.  Cost -effectiveness and efficiency regarding financial and non -financial aspects  
40. The AE expects that a GHG emission reduction of 1.33 MtCO 2eq can be maintained as a 
result of the EARF emergency relief to support the operation o f off -grid energy access 
companies in the targeted countries. Cost per tonne CO 2eq avoided of the programme is 
therefore estimated to be USD 45.1. With respect to GCF funding, it is USD 22.6 per tonne CO 2eq. 
1.6.2.  Amount of co -financing  
41. The co- financing ratio o f the programme is estimated to be 1.0 against GCF equity 
investment of USD 30 million. The AE notes positive indications received from other financers to contribute the balance of USD 30.0 million.


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B.27 /02/Add. 08 
Page 93 
 
 
1.6.3.  Programme/project financial viability and other financial  indicators  
42. The programme is of high risk, offering liquidity relief funding at a concessional rate to 
off-grid energy access companies that are  facing financial distress as a result of the COVID -19 
pandemic. The loan pricing is structured concessionally to avoid overburdening companies with 
unsustainable debt service. A mechanism to capture upside return on equity conversion in case 
the companies survive the crisis does not exist. Accordingly, the financial return for EARF would 
be limited.  
43. The TAP views the efficiency and effectiveness of the programme as notable. A co-
financing ratio of 1.0 cannot be regarded as low if the EARF high -risk profile and the present 
economic and market conditions are taken into consideration. The cost of greenhouse gas emissi on reduction is acceptable although high owing to the nature of liquidity support and the 
emission reduction estimation period being only for six years.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
44. The TAP recommends that the Board approve the proposed programme as presented.  
45. The programme is considered relevant and timely in further promoting climate change 
mitigation in sub- Saharan Africa in the midst of the COVID -19 pandemic. By providing access to 
emergency relief funding, the programme helps off -grid energy access companies to reduce the 
negative impact of the pandemic and safeguard the sector’s remarkable progress towards 
greenhouse gas emission mitigation. The recent research and survey confirmed the acute need for emerge ncy relief funding for the sector in the targeted nine countries. Both Acumen and 
SIMA are considered suitable to advance the programme as proposed.


---
*Page 97*
---

GC
F/B.27/ 02/Add. 08 
Page 94  
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel 
assessment findings  (FP148)  
Proposal  name : Participation in Energy Access Relief Facility (“EARF”)  
Accredited entity: Acumen Fund, Inc.  
Impact potential 
Acumen notes the iTAP ’s positive review that the overal l impact potential i s vast given the  percenta ge of 
people lacking access to electricity in Sub -Saharan Africa who are reliant on dirty fuels for basic access , 
and confirms that it accurately reflects the Energy Access Relief Fund, including: curren t status  of the 
energy access private sector aff ected by COVI D-19, structure of the proposed EARF, and projected  impact. 
Acumen would like to note that e xpected  allocation by company type is  subject to applications received 
and eligibility of these compani es. 
Paradigm shift po tential 
Acumen notes the iTAP ’s positive revie w tha t the Pro gramme ’s paradigm  shift potential and is in  support 
of preser ving i nvestments and impacts achieved to date by the energy access sector in contributi ng 
towards climate change  mitigation. Further, Acumen notes the potential for the EARF to crea te an 
enabling environment  for energy access to thrive during and following the glo bal pandemi c.  
Sustainable development potential  
Acumen notes  the iTAP ’s positive review of the Progra mme ’s potential to have environmenta l, economic  
(job and  income g eneration) , and gender -sensitive co -benefits.  
Needs of the recipient  
Acumen notes  the iTAP ’s notable review and thorough reporting of the needs of the off -grid energy access 
sector given t he dire liquidity needs and decline of sales  since  the start of the COVID- 19 crisis. Acumen 
acknowledges the absence of alternat ive sources of funding available to companies operating energy 
access business models and the importance of lending at concessional  interest rates in order to not 
jeopardize the financial health of companies recovering from th e harsh re alities of the globa l pandemic.  
Country ownership  
Acumen notes iTAP ’s com ment ary of the nine  countries that have shown suppor t for the EARF throu gh 
no-objecti on let ter submissions and their individual commitm ents tow ards climate chang e mi tigation.  
Efficiency and  effectiv eness  
Acumen notes the iTAP ’s positive assessment of the P rogramme ’s efficiency  and effectiveness  and notes 
the intended tC O2e  reduction potential of and co -financing  alongside  the EA RF. Acumen would  like to 
clarify th at we understand  co-financing to refer to funding with the same geograp hic rest rictions as the 
GCF funding . Given that the  EARF has a broader geographic s trategy t han GCF funding, total  EARF 
investment would  not be expected to constitute  co-financing.  As such, we would like to inquire if i t is 
more accurate  to report that co-financing  is exp ected to be 1:1.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory  Pan el: 
A
cumen notes the overall positive remarks from the iTAP on the timeliness and relevancy of this 
Programme to reduce negative impact o f the pandemic and safeguard the sector remarkable progress 
towards GHG emissions mitigation.  
Acumen also notes w ith thanks the positive recommendation  from iTAP to the GCF Board , in particular  
that the Board  support  and approve  the Programm e as proposed.


---
*Page 98*
---

Page 95 
 
Annex 8: Gender Assessment  
Energy Access Relief Facility  
The energy access sector1 has an important impact on women in multiple  roles as customers, 
entrepreneurs, and agents of change : 
• Customers: Women are the primary consumers of energy in households, and as such are the 
most exposed to the harmful effects of energy poverty: household air pollution, time spent 
gathering fuel, and  overall drudgery.2   
• Entrepreneurs: The off -grid energy sector provides opportunities for income generation for 
women through entrepreneurship within the energy value chain . 
• Agents of change: Many companies employ women as last- mile sales agents for example.  
Energy access companies are increasingly focused on serving women, and female employees have been shown to sell certain products more effectively to women customers.
3 Benefits of women’s 
energy entrepreneurship have been noted at the individual, hous ehold and community level, 
including income generation and access to networks at the individual level, increased decision-making and shifting power dynamics at the household level, and leadership skills and opportunities 
and shifting gender norms at the co mmunity level.  
In addition to opportunities within the energy sector value chain for women, access to productive 
uses of energy access provides income generating opportunities for women. For example, once electricity became accessible via the installation  of a solar powered mini -grid in one rural Ghanaian 
community, the number of women entrepreneurs increased by 29 percent and the incomes of women entrepreneurs increased by 11 times compared to pre -electricity earnings.
4 This is even 
low compared to an International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) report which found a correlation between women’s access to energy and a 59 percent increase in earnings.
5   
Increasingly, women are also skilled workers, and decision makers, in the energy sector, where comp anies with a more gender -balanced leadership team have demonstrated stronger 
performance.
6  Despite this, the proportion of women working in the off -grid solar sector is low at 
 
1 Energy access is traditionally considered to be a household good, and so high -quality data on gender -
disaggregated access and use of modern energy products is frequently, and unfortunately,  lacking.  
2 Oxfam, 2017.  
3 IRENA, 2019.  
4 https://medium.com/power -africa/solar -mini -grids -boost -womens -entrepreneurship -8479e4c1f8f8  
5 https://www.icrw.org/news/icrw- finds -that -solar -sister -empowers -women -increases -their -income -and-
makes -communities -
safer/#:~:text=ICR W%20found%20that%20the%20Solar,home%20and%20in%20their%20communities.  
6 See for example 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1860/PA_Case_Study.2019.04.09.508.pdf


---
*Page 99*
---

Page 96 
 
27%, although it is projected to improve.7  Key barriers identified in the African context to women’s 
increased employment in the sector are cultural and social norms, a lack of gender -specific training, 
and a lack of technical skills.8  
COVID -19 and Gender Equality in Energy Access  
Covid -19 is the biggest setback to gender equality in a decade. The burden of unpaid care has 
increased globally, and women are at a greate r risk of gender -based violence as a result of lock -
down conditions.9 Women’s jobs are 1.8 times more vulnerable to this crisis than men’s jobs and 
even aside from labor -market dynamics women are having to drop out of the workforce because of 
increased un paid care responsibilities in the home.10 New or continued energy access and 
employment opportunities from energy companies with gender inclusive workplace policies are 
key factors to mitigate the disproportionate negative impact of covid -19 on women.  
The EARF, together with participation of the Climate LLP, will be focused on funding companies 
that are committed to serving women customers, employing female staff at a rate equal to or higher 
than men, recruiting and promoting women for leadership positions,  empowering female staffers 
and paying them commensurately with their male counterparts, and creating a workplace that is 
adaptable to the needs of its members and free from harassment.  
Loan Covenants  
In order to operationalize these goals, EARF loans (pa rticipated in by Climate LLP) will contain the 
following covenants : 
- Companies must maintain or improve the current percentage of female full -time and 
contracted employees during the EARF loan period (unless percentage drops due to dismissal 
warranted for d isciplinary or performance -related reasons) (requires documentation and 
retrenchment plan and allows for cure period)  
- Companies must adopt and communicate (or demonstrate that they have already done so) a 
Gender Empowerment Policy, including information on  flexible work arrangements, employee 
rights, and mechanisms available for safely expressing and addressing workplace harassment.  
Non- compliance with these covenants would, after repeated warnings, result in a breach of contract 
and trigger various escalat ion mechanisms, including required prepayment and/or financial 
penalties.  
 
7https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/gogla_off_grid_solar_a_growth_engine_for_jobs_w
eb_opt.pdf  
8 IRENA, 2019. Page 60.  
9 https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/07/gender -equality -women -employment -covid19/  
10 https://www.mckinsey.com/featured -insights/future -of-work/covid- 19-and-gender -equality -countering -
the-regressive- effects#


---
*Page 100*
---

Page 97 
 
Applying a Gender Lens to EARF Investing  
In addition  to these covenants , the Acumen and SIMA teams have prepared a series of country- level 
gender assessments, seen below. The 9 NOL countries show considerable disparities in both the 
equality of their legal regimes and gendered outcomes on multiple development indicators. This  
disparity is documented in the table below.  
 
One possible approach to addressing these disparities would be to apply a heightened scrutiny to 
the business plans and gender employment mix of companies that operate in relatively more 
unequal countries (for example in the bottom third of the NOL country group). However,  at present 
we do not advocate this approach.  These rankings reflect formal gender equality, whereas i t is our 
experience that gender stereotypes and prescribed gender roles often still discr iminate against 
women, even in countries where strong legal frameworks are present. Likewise,  traditional norms 
and cultural practices (not considered in these indices) are still significant barriers to gender 
equality, including with respect to employment  in the off -grid energy sector. In other words, 
regardless of status of formal equality, the challenges that are being addressed by the EARF, namely 
with respect to women's employment in the sector in the context of Covid -19, are quite similar  
across count ries.  It is these that the EARF aims to address, using the gender action plan described 
beelow.  
Operationalizing a Gender Action Plan  
In order to turn these commitments into reality, Acumen  has drafted the Gender Action Plan ( GAP, 
see below), which places  the Gender goals, outputs, and outcomes into a results framework, as well 
as providing an indicative budget. If fully- funded, Acumen and SIMA  will be able to engage a gender 
officer to oversee monitoring and evaluation of the gender action plan, including  monitoring 
whether firms are abiding by gender -related loan covenants, and providing them advice and 
resources on how to best achieve their stated goals.  
The gender officer is intended to be  a senior financial and commercial advisor with deep experience 
in the energy access sector . Final determination of the gender officer will be made upon approval of 
the budget (see Gender Action Plan for budget details).  The gender officer is expected to sit on the 
Investment Committee . They are also intended to work w ith Acumen gender specialist(s) to  carry 
out any additional outreach to companies  as described in the GAP.


---
*Page 101*
---

Page 98 
 
Gender Investing Framework  
Acumen is in the process of incorporating gender lens investing into our model, which will help to 
influence our and SIMA’s approach to the EARF. We have identified three areas where we can apply 
a gender -lens: investing in more women- led businesses, influencing the corporate cultures and 
operations of the companies we invest in, and increasing data and awareness about w omen 
customers’ experiences.  Where we feel we have the most leverage is influencing corporate culture and gathering customer feedback by gender. As an investor, we believe we can use our capital, 
influence, and governance to help shape corporate culture. We can do this by vetting a company’s 
practices around gender equity before making an investment and influencing the corporate culture 
of the organizations via our repeated engagements with borrowers or our presence on Boards. Additionally, we will continu e to work with the Lean Data team to present all collected customer 
feedback on a disaggregated -basis by gender, so companies can better understand and identify 
where women, for example, may be experiencing more challenges with a product or service.  
Framew ork. One gender investing framework that can guide the EARF’s assessment and approvals, 
as well as its ongoing influence with companies, is the 2X Challenge Criteria. This is a set of criteria 
and guiding principles that does not just count women but value s them. It creates a set of 5 clear 
criteria, with an investment being ‘2X -aligned’ if it fulfills at least one of the following:
11  
 
These criteria are valuable, although the 2X framework clearly establishes that companies which 
may meet the letter of th ese criteria but overall create negative impacts for women should not be 
considered 2X -aligned. Acumen and SIMA propose to track the % of companies that are 2X -aligned 
 
11 2X Challenge Financing for Women, 2020


---
*Page 102*
---

Page 99 
 
at various stages of the EARF, provide periodic counsel and support to those that are not, and 
report on the results to GCF.  
Customers : Through Lean Data, we can help companies better understand their customers on a 
gender disaggregated basis. All Lean Data metrics can be disaggregated by gender to understand if 
there are disparities between men and women experience (impact) with a produ ct or service. For 
example, do women disproportionally experience a challenge with their product or service? If so, 
why? If you review  the new Lean Data Gender r eport ,12 on p. 12 you will see that how else we can 
start to build gender into the way we measure and improve customer impact: qualitative responses disaggregated by gender and gender -specific question sets.  
Country -level Assessments  
Nigeria Gender Assess ment  
Key Statistics on Gender Equality  
 
Nigeria was ranked 100 out of 120 in the 2019 Social Institutions and Gender Index with a score of 
.460 and 128 out of 153 in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index with a score of 0.635. All indices are 
on a 0 -1 scale. Fo r the SIGI, 0 points to complete equality and 1 to complete inequality. For the 
Global Gender Gap Index, the opposite holds true.  
 
Maternal mortality rate (2017)  917 (2017)  World Bank  
Infant mortality rate  75.7 (2018)  World Bank  
Adult literacy rate  52.7% female, 71.3% male 
(2018)  World Bank  
Employment to Population 
Ratio, age 15+  43.6% female, 53.6% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Unemployment Rate  (% of 
respective labor force)  8.9% female, 7.4% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
 
12 https://acumen.org/wp -cont ent/uploads/Understanding -Gender -Impact -Part -One.pdf


---
*Page 103*
---

Page 100  
 
Life Expectancy  55.2 years (female), 53.5 years 
(male) (2018)  World Bank  
 
 
Political Participation   
In Nigeria, women have the same rights to vote and stand for election as men, and the Constitution 
guarantees equal participation in political life.13 Despite this, women remain poorly represented at 
the national level: 7.3% of senators (8 out of 109) are women, and just 3.6% of members of the House or Representatives (13 out of 358) are female.
14 7 out of 43 ministers in the national cabinet 
are wome n.15 Overall, Uwa et al. (2018) argue that Nigerian women have been perpetually 
marginalized in the political sphere due to a combination of social, cultural, and economic forces.16 
In 2019, 77% of the population believed that men make better political lea ders.17 
 
Division of Labour and Participation in the Economy  
According to the World Bank, 44.9% of the labor force is female.  
Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa, and the 24th largest economy in the world by GDP. It 
has a middle -income, mixed economy, with high export earnings from oil and gas, but also a large, 
subsistence agricultural sector. 48% of adult women are employed (57th out of the 98 middle -
income countries reporting data in 2019), and women make up 44.9% of the  overall labor force.18 
They are most likely to work in low -income, informal occupations. 24% of employed women work 
in agriculture, compared to 44% of all men. One in six women work in public administration, 
community, social, or other services jobs. Only 0.3% of women hold management positions. 
Nigeria’s statutes generally grant women full legal rights before the law, however parallel 
customary and religious legal regimes do not always recognize the rights of women to own or 
inherit land and other assets.19 
 
 
13 Inter- Parliamentary Union (IPU), Geneva, 2020  
14 Ibid  
15 VOA, 2019.  
16 Uwa et al., 2018.  
17 OECD, 2019.  
18 World Development Indicators, 2020.  
19 OECD, 2019.


---
*Page 104*
---

Page 101  
 
Accessibility of Project Services and Technology  
Women are fully able and encouraged to purchase and use energy services from companies 
financed by the EARF. In fact, some companies have targeted marketing strategies for women 
customers such as selling directly to women’s village savings groups.  
Even operating in markets where women do not always have control over purchasing decisions, 
approximately a third of the customer base of energy access companies is female, although there is 
significant v ariation between companies selling clean cookstoves (where women are 52% of 
customers), solar lanterns (38%), solar home systems (32%) and microgrids (25%).20  
Because the energy products or services are generally for the household the customer data does n ot 
necessarily correspond with who is benefitting from the products. In other words, even where customer data indicates that most customers are men, we know that women are benefitting from 
the energy access in the home. This also illustrates the importance  of Acumen’s lean data approach 
to gain such insights beyond who is simply the purchaser.  
Women also make up 32% of the energy access workforce, compared to 22% of the workforce in oil and gas.
21 
Needs and Priorities of Men and Women in EARF  
For the EARF p rogramme, there are two contexts in which it is critical to examine the different 
needs/priorities of men and women: as employees/agents of energy access companies, and as 
customers of those same companies.  
Employment  
 
Although the energy access sector do es a better job of employing women than does the oil and gas 
sector, women are still currently a minority in the workforce. Moreover, they  are more likely to 
hold administrative positions (where 45% of all employees are women) than STEM- related jobs 
(just  28% of which are held by women).22 A 2019 survey from IRENA identified cultural norms, a 
lack of gender -sensitive policies or training opportunities, and an inequity in ownership of assets as 
the main barriers to women’s advancement in the energy access s ector.23 However, multiple studies 
have demonstrated that women are equally, if not better, able to communicate the benefits of 
 
20 Acumen  
21 IRENA, 2019.   
22 Ibid., p. 35.  
23 Ibid., p. 59.


---
*Page 105*
---

Page 102  
 
energy access, and make sales at comparable or higher rates than men when given similar 
opportunities.24,25  
 
This is a difficul t time for many women in the workforce of energy access companies. We know that 
the COVID -19 crisis is disproportionately affecting female workers, as they must meet the added 
burdens of daytime childcare and even additional household members while still f ulfilling the 
requirements of their jobs.26 This struggle was summarized by a UN policy brief on the gendered 
effects of the pandemic: “Compounded economic impacts are felt especially by women and girls 
who are generally earning less, saving less, and hold ing insecure jobs or living close to poverty.”27 
Women, minorities, and other vulnerable workers face a dangerous and familiar outcome, of being the last hired in an economic upswing and the first fired in a crisis.
28 
 
The EARF is meant to mitigate this risk through the use of covenants that will require energy access 
firms to use 80% of the funds they receive to pay employee salaries and/or commissions. 
Furthermore, priority will be given to eligible firms that are owned and led by women. Lastly, 
companies receiving EARF funding will be expected to maintain or improve the gender balance of 
their staff and agent network while the loan is being repaid. In order to achieve this, companies will 
be expected to provide retention and recruitment plans for w omen employees and agents, and will 
be given guidance on how to adopt flexible work policies. Companies will verify their adherence to 
these covenants through regular data reporting, which can be verified by the Fund Manager and 
independent third parties, as necessary.  
 
Customers  
 
Women are the primary users of energy in a household, and are among the prime beneficiaries of 
access to modern energy services. Numerous studies have highlighted the benefits of modern 
energy for women: solar lanterns provide lig ht for studying, reduce security risks, and displace 
dirty, harmful kerosene lanterns.29 In one study, women using kerosene lanterns were nine times as 
 
24 Clean Cooking Alliance, 2015.  
25 Value for Women, 2018.  
26 World Economic Forum, 2020.  
27 UN, 2020.  
28 Bloomberg, 2020.  
29 Energia, 2019.


---
*Page 106*
---

Page 103  
 
likely to contract tuberculosis.30 Clean, efficient cookstoves bring down the time that women and 
girls must spend gathering fuel, while also reducing household air pollution, a major public health 
risk that kills over 4 million people annually and disproportionately affects women and girls.31 
Particularly during a pandemic that can cause lethal respiratory infections, the benefits of modern 
energy and cooking are needed more than ever.  
 
Energy also plays a major role in increasing productivity and effectiveness of the work that men 
and women do.32 In East Africa alone, solar home system companies have helpe d to create the 
equivalent of over one million additional jobs, of which 52% have gone to women, bringing them an 
additional $552 per year.33 The EARF is meant to enable these benefits to continue, by funding 
companies to maintain their operations and cust omer service, while expanding sales to new 
customers. Without the EARF, millions of households and tens of millions of beneficiaries will not 
be able to access clean, modern, renewable energy.  
 
Vulnerabilities and Mitigation Strategies  
 
EARF’s focus is on protecting the gains made so far by the energy access sector, maintaining service 
to existing renewable energy adopters, and safeguarding the future sales and impact that will be 
made by companies during the recovery from COVID- 19. Our response strategies are aimed at 
protecting the liquidity of viable energy access companies, and ensuring that there ability to serve 
current customers and reach new ones is not affected.  
 
EARF intends to focus on two main areas to ensure that women’s role as agents and beneficiaries of 
energy access is not only maintained, but increased:  
 
- Protecting female staff and agents. The EARF will specifically ask companies to provide 
plans for retaining vulnerable staff, including women, and maintaining or increasing the 
share of  women in their employ. Companies will then be expected to adhere to those plans 
while using concessional finance. An indirect benefit of this approach is that female agents 
and call center operatives have been shown to be particularly effective at marketi ng the 
benefits of energy products to other women. This contributes to the second key area.  
 
30 Bates et al., 2013.   
31 WHO, n.d.  
32 SEAR, 2017.  
33 GOGLA, 2020.


---
*Page 107*
---

Page 104  
 
- Ensuring ongoing access to renewable energy products. By maintaining liquidity, supply 
lines, and staffing, the EARF helps to preserve ongoing access to critical pr oducts. Families 
who are confined to rural households will be able to purchase high -quality solar products or 
cookstoves, while existing adopters will still be able to reach a customer service or 
maintenance representative to fix any product issues.  
 
Incor porating Local Knowledge and Skills  
 
Acumen has developed and published a Gender Sensitivity Policy that guides its investments and 
implementation in all programmes. For the EARF, we see a clear opportunity to empower 
companies that have been forward -think ing and progressive in their promotion of women to senior 
leadership positions and their reliance on women on the frontlines of energy access distribution, sales, finance, and service. We will encourage greater participation of women at the board level, 
ensure equal opportunity on the investing team, and do the same at the investee level. We will also 
comply with the Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC, respectively. And we acknowledge the acute dangers posed by the current crisis to women around the world, as 
highlighted in the UN Secretary General’s recent policy brief on the issue.  
 
Acumen has repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to gender equality and sensitivity, and we 
intend to continue to do so. In 2015 Acumen published a report, along with the International Center 
for Research on Women: Women and Social Enterprises: How Gender  Integration Can Boost 
Entrepreneurial Solutions to Poverty.
34 In 2018, Acumen partnered with Unilever to package its 
years of impact assessment insights into a series of toolkits,  A Lean Data How- To Guide: 
Understanding Gender Impact.35 And in 2020, research between 60 Decibels and GOGLA helped to 
fully communicate the depths of the struggle that off -grid energy customers were experiencing 
during the pandemic. Through this work, Acumen has developed new and better ways of listening 
to customers, and continues to believe wholeheartedly in its core tenets of putting vulnerable 
customers at the center of our work and empowering the companies which demonstrate an ability 
to serve them.  
 
Challenging Gender Stereotypes  
 
 
34 Acumen, 2015.  
35 Acum en, 2019a, Acumen 2019b .


---
*Page 108*
---

Page 105  
 
EARF will aim to protect the jobs of vulner able female employees and agents at energy access 
companies. Women’s employment at all levels of the company workforce, particularly in a 
traditionally male dominated sector, challenges gender stereotypes and increases positive gender 
relations. It can cau se a shift in power dynamics and relationships in the household and 
community.36   
EARF will also encourage greater marketing towards women as energy customers and 
entrepreneurs, women participation at the board level, and ensure equal opportunity at the investing team and investee level.  
We will comply with Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC respectively.  
  
 
36 https://www.energia.org/cm2/wp -content/uploads/2020/02/RA7 -Womens -Energy -Entrepreneurship -
Evidence -Report -Final.pdf  pg 18.


---
*Page 109*
---

Page 106  
 
Uganda Gender Assessment  
Key Statistics on Gender Equality  
 
Uganda was ranked 98 out of 120 in the 2019 Social Institutions and Ge nder Index with a score of 
.451 and 65 out of 153 in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index with a score of 0.717. Uganda also 
ranked 127 out of 162 countries on the Gender Inequality Index, with a score of .531. All indices are 
on a 0 -1 scale. For the SIGI and Gender Inequality indices, 0 points to complete equality and 1 to 
complete inequality. For the Global Gender Gap Index, the opposite holds true.  
 
Maternal mortality rate (2017)  375 (2017)  World Bank  
Infant mortality rate  33.8 (2018)  World Bank  
Adult literacy rate  70.8% female, 82.7% male 
(2018)  World Bank  
Employment to Population 
Ratio, age 15+  65.6% female, 72.9% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Unemployment Rate  (% of 
respective labor force)  2.3% female, 1.4% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Life Expectancy  65.2 years (female), 60.7 years 
(male) (2018)  World Bank  
 
 
Political Participation   
In Uganda, women have the same rights to vote and stand for election as men37, and the 
Constitution guarantees women’s participation in political li fe by reserving one seat for women in 
each of the country’s 39 electoral districts. Women parliamentarians are elected through separate 
women’s elections in addition to the constituency MPs who are elected through a first past the post 
system.38 34.9% (160 out of 459) members of Uganda’s unicameral legislature are women, 93% of 
 
37 OECD, 2014.  
38 Economic Policy Research Center, UKAID & UN Women, 2019


---
*Page 110*
---

Page 107  
 
them were elected through reserved seats.39 The low participation of women in constituency 
positions and politics in general stems from several social, cultural and financial barrier s. More 
than 50% of men perceived that the low participation of women in politics stems from lack of 
support from party leaders and that women are not tough enough for politics.  
 
Division of Labour and Participation in the Economy  
According to the World Ba nk, 49.3% of the labor force is female.  Uganda is one of the poorest 
countries in the world, with a GDP of under $30bn dollars, and one in five of its citizens still living in 
extreme poverty. It is a low income country with an economy driven by commodity exports of 
coffee, oil, base metals, fish and a large, subsistence agricultural sector. Every year, about 700,000 
young people reach working age in Uganda but only 75,000 jobs are created per year. 68% of adult 
women are employed (30th out of the 118 low a nd middle -income countries reporting data in 
2019), and women make up 49.3% of the overall labor force.40 They are most likely to work in low -
income, informal occupations. Women account for 75% of agricultural workers and nearly 42% of women in the workfor ce are unpaid family workers.
41  
 
Accessibility of Project Services and Technology  
Women are fully able and encouraged to purchase and use energy services from companies 
financed by the EARF. In fact, some companies have targeted marketing strategies for women 
customers such as selling directly to women’s village savings groups.   
Even operating in markets where women do not always have control over purchasing decisions, 
approximately a third of the customer base of energy access companies is female, although there is 
significant variation between companies selling clean cookstoves (where women are 52% of 
customers), solar lanterns (38%), solar home systems (32%) and microgrids (25%).42  
Because the energy products or services are generally for the household the customer data does not necessarily correspond with who is benefitting fr om the products. In other words, even where 
customer data indicates that most customers are men, we know that women are benefitting from 
the energy access in the home. This also illustrates the importance of Acumen’s lean data approach 
to gain such insight s beyond who is simply the purchaser.  
Women also make up 32% of the energy access workforce, compared to 22% of the workforce in oil 
and gas.
43 
 
39 Inter- Parliamentary Union (IPU), Geneva, 2020  
40 World Development Indicators, 2020.  
41 OECD, 2014.  
42 Acumen  
43 IRENA, 2019.


---
*Page 111*
---

Page 108  
 
 
Needs and Priorities of Men and Women in EARF  
 
For the EARF programme, there are two contexts in which it is cr itical to examine the different 
needs/priorities of men and women: as employees/agents of energy access companies, and as 
customers of those same companies.  
 
Employment  
 
Although the energy access sector does a better job of employing women than does the oil and gas 
sector, women are still currently a minority in the workforce. Moreover, they  are more likely to 
hold administrative positions (where 45% of all employees are women) than STEM- related jobs 
(just 28% of which are held by women).44 A 2019 survey  from IRENA identified cultural norms, a 
lack of gender -sensitive policies or training opportunities, and an inequity in ownership of assets as 
the main barriers to women’s advancement in the energy access sector.45 However, multiple studies 
have demonstra ted that women are equally, if not better, able to communicate the benefits of 
energy access, and make sales at comparable or higher rates than men when given similar opportunities.
46,47  
 
This is a difficult time for many women in the workforce of energy access companies. We know that 
the COVID -19 crisis is disproportionately affecting female workers, as they must meet the added 
burdens of daytime childcare and even additional household members while still fulfilling the 
requirements of their jobs.48 This struggle was summarized by a UN policy brief on the gendered 
effects of the pandemic: “Compounded economic impacts are felt especially by women and girls 
who are generally earning less, saving less, and holding insecure jobs or living close to poverty.”49 
Women, minorities, and other vulnerable workers face a dangerous and familiar outcome, of being the last hired in an economic upswing and the first fired in a crisis.
50 
 
44 Ibid., p. 35.  
45 Ibid., p. 59.  
46 Clean Cooking Alliance, 2015.  
47 Value for Women, 2018.  
48 World Economic Forum, 2020.  
49 UN, 2020.  
50 Bloomberg, 2020.


---
*Page 112*
---

Page 109  
 
 
The EARF is meant to mitigate this risk through the use of covenants that will require  energy access 
firms to use 80% of the funds they receive to pay employee salaries and/or commissions. 
Furthermore, priority will be given to eligible firms that are owned and led by women. Lastly, 
companies receiving EARF funding will be expected to maint ain or improve the gender balance of 
their staff and agent network while the loan is being repaid. In order to achieve this, companies will 
be expected to provide retention and recruitment plans for women employees and agents, and will 
be given guidance on how to adopt flexible work policies. Companies will verify their adherence to 
these covenants through regular data reporting, which can be verified by the Fund Manager and 
independent third parties, as necessary.  
 
Customers  
Women are the primary users of energy in a household, and are among the prime beneficiaries of 
access to modern energy services. Numerous studies have highlighted the benefits of modern 
energy for women: solar lanterns provide light for studying, reduce security risks, and displace 
dirty, harmful kerosene lanterns.51 In one study, women using kerosene lanterns were nine times as 
likely to contract tuberculosis.52 Clean, efficient cookstoves bring down the time that women and 
girls must spend gathering fuel, while also reducing household air pollution, a major public health 
risk that kills over 4 million people annually and disproportionately affects women and girl s.53 
Particularly during a pandemic that can cause lethal respiratory infections, the benefits of modern 
energy and cooking are needed more than ever.  
 
Energy also plays a major role in increasing productivity and effectiveness of the work that men 
and wo men do.54 In East Africa alone, solar home system companies have helped to create the 
equivalent of over one million additional jobs, of which 52% have gone to women, bringing them an additional $552 per year.
55 The EARF is meant to enable these benefits t o continue, by funding 
companies to maintain their operations and customer service, while expanding sales to new customers. Without the EARF, millions of households and tens of millions of beneficiaries will not 
be able to access clean, modern, renewable e nergy.  
 
 
51 Energia, 2019.  
52 Bates et al., 2013.   
53 WHO, n.d.  
54 SEAR, 2017.  
55 GOGLA, 2020.


---
*Page 113*
---

Page 110  
 
Vulnerabilities and Mitigation Strategies  
 
EARF’s focus is on protecting the gains made so far by the energy access sector, maintaining service 
to existing renewable energy adopters, and safeguarding the future sales and impact that will be 
made by companies during the recovery from COVID- 19. Our r esponse strategies are aimed at 
protecting the liquidity of viable energy access companies, and ensuring that there ability to serve current customers and reach new ones is not affected.  
 
EARF intends to focus on two main areas to ensure that women’s role  as agents and beneficiaries of 
energy access is not only maintained, but increased:  
 
- Protecting female staff and agents. The EARF will specifically ask companies to provide 
plans for retaining vulnerable staff, including women, and maintaining or increasi ng the 
share of women in their employ. Companies will then be expected to adhere to those plans 
while using concessional finance. An indirect benefit of this approach is that female agents 
and call center operatives have been shown to be particularly effec tive at marketing the 
benefits of energy products to other women. This contributes to the second key area.  
- Ensuring ongoing access to renewable energy products. By maintaining liquidity, supply 
lines, and staffing, the EARF helps to preserve ongoing access  to critical products. Families 
who are confined to rural households will be able to purchase high -quality solar products or 
cookstoves, while existing adopters will still be able to reach a customer service or 
maintenance representative to fix any product  issues.  
 
Incorporating Local Knowledge and Skills  
 
Acumen has developed and published a Gender Sensitivity Policy that guides its investments and 
implementation in all programmes. For the EARF, we see a clear opportunity to empower companies that have bee n forward -thinking and progressive in their promotion of women to senior 
leadership positions and their reliance on women on the frontlines of energy access distribution, sales, finance, and service. We will encourage greater participation of women at the board level, 
ensure equal opportunity on the investing team, and do the same at the investee level. We will also comply with the Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC, respectively. And we 
acknowledge the acute dangers posed by the current crisis to women around the world, as 
highlighted in the UN Secretary General’s recent policy brief on the issue.  
 
Acumen has repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to gender equality and sensitivity, and we 
intend to continue to do so. In 2015 Acumen published a report, along with the International Center 
for Research on Women: Women and Social Enterprises: How Gender Integration Can Boost


---
*Page 114*
---

Page 111  
 
Entrepreneurial Solutions to Poverty.56 In 2018, Acumen partnered with Unilever to package its 
years of impact assessment insights into a series of toolkits,  A Lean Data How- To Guide: 
Understanding Gender Impact.57 And in 2020, research between 60 Decibels and GOGLA helped to 
fully communicate the depths of the struggle that off -grid energy customers were experiencing 
during the pandemic. Through this work, Acumen has developed new and better ways of listening 
to customers, and continues to believe wholeheartedly in its core tenets of putting vulnerable 
customers at the center of our work and empowering the companies whic h demonstrate an ability 
to serve them.  
 
Challenging Gender Stereotypes  
 
EARF will aim to protect the jobs of vulnerable female employees and agents at energy access 
companies . Women’s employment at all levels of the company workforce, particularly in a 
traditionally male dominated sector, challenges gender stereotypes and increases positive gender 
relations. It can cause a shift in power dynamics and relationships in the household and 
community.58   
EARF will also encourage greater mark eting towards women as energy customers and 
entrepreneurs, women participation at the board level, and ensure equal opportunity at the 
investing team and investee level.  
We will comply with Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC respective ly. 
 
  
 
56 Acumen, 2015.  
57 Acum en, 2019a, Acumen 2019b . 
58 https://www.energia.org/cm2/wp -content/uploads/2020/02/RA7 -Womens -Energy -Entrepreneurship -
Evidence -Report -Final.pdf  pg 18.


---
*Page 115*
---

Page 112  
 
Rwanda Gender Assessment 
Key Statistics on Gender Equality  
 
Rwanda was ranked 65 out of 120 in the 2019 Social Institutions and Gender Index with a score of 
.276 and 9 out of 153 in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index with a score of 0.791. Rwanda also  
ranked 95 out of 162 countries on the Gender Inequality Index, with a score of .412. All indices are on a 0 -1 scale. For the SIGI and Gender Inequality indices, 0 points to complete equality and 1 to 
complete inequality. For the Global Gender Gap Index, t he opposite holds true.  
 
 
Maternal mortality rate (2017)  248 (2017)  World Bank  
Infant mortality rate  27 (2018)  World Bank  
Adult literacy rate  69.4% female, 77.6% male 
(2018)  World Bank  
Employment to Population 
Ratio, age 15+  83% female, 82.5% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Unemployment Rate (% of 
respective labor force)  1.1% female, 1.0% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Life Expectancy  70.8 years (female), 66.5 years 
(male) (2018)  World Bank  
 
 
Political Participation   
In Nigeria, women have the same rights to vote and stand for election as men, and the Constitution 
guarantees equal participation in political life.59 The Rwandan government secures women’s 
political participation through quotas at both the national and subnational levels, and a parallel 
 
59 OECD, 2014.


---
*Page 116*
---

Page 113  
 
system of women’s only counc ils and women’s elections at the sub national levels.60 Rwanda has 
the world’s largest share of female parliamentarians at 61.3%. 49 out of 80 members in the 
Chamber of Deputies and 10 out of 26 Senators (38.5%) are women.61 Overall, public opinion on 
wome n politicians in Rwanda is evenly divided. According to a 2007 World Values Survey, 51% 
think that men make better political leaders than women do, versus 48% who disagree with that statement.
62 
 
Division of Labour and Participation in the Economy  
Accordin g to the World Bank, 51.7% of the labor force is female.  
Rwanda is a landlocked, low income country with few natural resources. It’s per capita income is 
$789 (2019) and over half the country lives in poverty. The economy is driven by subsistence 
agriculture and few exports like coffee, tea and minerals. 84.43% of adult women are employed 
(3rd out of the 118 low and middle -income countries reporting data in 2019), and women make up 
51.7% of the overall labor force.63 More than 75 percent of Rwandan women are engaged in 
farming, forestry, and fishing activities, and nearly two- thirds of them work in the subsistence 
agriculture segment.6412% women are engaged in wholesale or retail trade, 1.2% in construction 
and a further 1.25 in manufact uring.65 Encouragingly, 33.2% of management positions are held by 
women.  
 
Accessibility of Project Services and Technology  
Women are fully able and encouraged to purchase and use energy services from companies 
financed by the EARF. In fact, some companies have targeted marketing strategies for women 
customers such as selling directly to women’s village savings groups.   
Even op erating in markets where women do not always have control over purchasing decisions, 
approximately a third of the customer base of energy access companies is female, although there is 
significant variation between companies selling clean cookstoves (where women are 52% of 
customers), solar lanterns (38%), solar home systems (32%) and microgrids (25%).66  
 
60 Ibid., p.4 -5 
61 Inter- Parliamentary Union (IPU), Geneva, 2020  
62 OECD, 2014.  
63 World Development Indicators, 2020.  
64 Rwanda Labour Force Survey Re port, 2018  
65 ILOstat, 2016  
66 Acumen


---
*Page 117*
---

Page 114  
 
Because the energy products or services are generally for the household the customer data does not 
necessarily correspond with who is benefitting from the products. In other words, even where 
customer data indicates that most customers are men, we know that women are benefitting from 
the energy access in the home. This also illustrates the importance of Acumen’s lean data approach 
to gain such insights beyond who is simply the purchaser.  
Women also make up 32% of the energy access workforce, compared to 22% of the workforce in oil and gas.
67 
 
Needs and Priorities of Men and Women in EARF  
 
For the EARF programme, there are two contexts in which it is critical to examine the different 
needs/priorities of men and women: as employees/agents of energy access companies, and as 
customers of those same companies.  
 
Employment  
 
Although the energy access sector does a better job of employing women than does the oil and  gas 
sector, women are still currently a minority in the workforce. Moreover, they  are more likely to 
hold administrative positions (where 45% of all employees are women) than STEM- related jobs 
(just 28% of which are held by women).68 A 2019 survey from IRENA identified cultural norms, a 
lack of gender -sensitive policies or training opportunities, and an inequity in ownership of assets as 
the main barriers to women’s advancement in the energy access sector.69 However, multiple studies 
have demonstrated tha t women are equally, if not better, able to communicate the benefits of 
energy access, and make sales at comparable or higher rates than men when given similar opportunities.
70,71  
 
This is a difficult time for many women in the workforce of energy access companies. We know that 
the COVID -19 crisis is disproportionately affecting female workers, as they must meet the added 
burdens of daytime childcare and even additional household members while still fulfilling the 
 
67 IRENA, 2019.   
68 Ibid., p. 35.  
69 Ibid., p. 59.  
70 Clean Cooking Alliance, 2015.  
71 Value for Women, 2018.


---
*Page 118*
---

Page 115  
 
requirements of their jobs.72 This struggl e was summarized by a UN policy brief on the gendered 
effects of the pandemic: “Compounded economic impacts are felt especially by women and girls 
who are generally earning less, saving less, and holding insecure jobs or living close to poverty.”73 
Women, minorities, and other vulnerable workers face a dangerous and familiar outcome, of being 
the last hired in an economic upswing and the first fired in a crisis.74 
 
The EARF is meant to mitigate this risk through the use of covenants that will require energy  access 
firms to use 80% of the funds they receive to pay employee salaries and/or commissions. 
Furthermore, priority will be given to eligible firms that are owned and led by women. Lastly, 
companies receiving EARF funding will be expected to maintain or improve the gender balance of 
their staff and agent network while the loan is being repaid. In order to achieve this, companies will 
be expected to provide retention and recruitment plans for women employees and agents, and will be given guidance on how to adopt flexible work policies. Companies will verify their adherence to 
these covenants through regular data reporting, which can be verified by the Fund Manager and independent third parties, as necessary.  
 
Customers  
Women are the primary users of energy in a household, and are among the prime beneficiaries of 
access to modern energy services. Numerous studies have highlighted the benefits of modern energy for women: solar lanterns provide light for studying, reduce security risks, and displace 
dirty, harmful kerosene lanterns.
75 In one study, women using kerosene lanterns were nine times as 
likely to contract tuberculosis.76 Clean, efficient cookstoves bring down the time that women and 
girls must spend gathering fuel, while also reducing household air pollution, a major public health 
risk that kills over 4 million people annually and disproportionately affects women and girls.77 
Particularly during a pandemic that can cause lethal respiratory infections, the benefits of modern 
energy and cooking are needed more than ever.  
 
Energy also plays a major role in increasing productivity and effectiveness of the work that men 
and women do.78 In East Africa alone, solar home system companies have helped to create the 
 
72 World Economic Forum, 2020.  
73 UN, 2020.  
74 Bloomberg, 2020.  
75 Energia, 2019.  
76 Bates et al., 2013.   
77 WHO, n.d.  
78 SEAR, 2017.


---
*Page 119*
---

Page 116  
 
equivalent of over one million additional jobs, of which 52% have gone to women, bringing them an 
additional $552 per year.79 The EARF is meant to enable these benefits to continue, by funding 
companies to maintain their operations and customer service, while expanding sales to new 
customers. Without the EARF, millions of households and tens of millions of beneficiaries will not 
be able to access clean, modern, renewable energ y. 
 
Vulnerabilities and Mitigation Strategies  
 
EARF’s focus is on protecting the gains made so far by the energy access sector, maintaining service 
to existing renewable energy adopters, and safeguarding the future sales and impact that will be 
made by companies during the recovery from COVID- 19. Our response strategies are aimed at 
protecting the liquidity of viable energy access companies, and ensuring that there ability to serve current customers and reach new ones is not affected.  
 
EARF intends to focu s on two main areas to ensure that women’s role as agents and beneficiaries of 
energy access is not only maintained, but increased:  
 
- Protecting female staff and agents. The EARF will specifically ask companies to provide 
plans for retaining vulnerable staf f, including women, and maintaining or increasing the 
share of women in their employ. Companies will then be expected to adhere to those plans 
while using concessional finance. An indirect benefit of this approach is that female agents 
and call center oper atives have been shown to be particularly effective at marketing the 
benefits of energy products to other women. This contributes to the second key area.  
- Ensuring ongoing access to renewable energy products. By maintaining liquidity, supply 
lines, and staf fing, the EARF helps to preserve ongoing access to critical products. Families 
who are confined to rural households will be able to purchase high -quality solar products or 
cookstoves, while existing adopters will still be able to reach a customer service or 
maintenance representative to fix any product issues.  
 
Incorporating Local Knowledge and Skills  
 
Acumen has developed and published a Gender Sensitivity Policy that guides its investments and 
implementation in all programmes. For the EARF, we see a clear  opportunity to empower 
companies that have been forward -thinking and progressive in their promotion of women to senior 
 
79 GOGLA, 2020.


---
*Page 120*
---

Page 117  
 
leadership positions and their reliance on women on the frontlines of energy access distribution, 
sales, finance, and service. We will e ncourage greater participation of women at the board level, 
ensure equal opportunity on the investing team, and do the same at the investee level. We will also 
comply with the Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC, respectively. And we 
acknowledge the acute dangers posed by the current crisis to women around the world, as 
highlighted in the UN Secretary General’s recent policy brief on the issue.  
 
Acumen has repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to gender equality and sensitivity, and we 
intend to continue to do so. In 2015 Acumen published a report, along with the International Center 
for Research on Women: Women and Social Enterprises: How Gender Integration Can Boost 
Entrepreneurial Solutions to Poverty.80 In 2018, Acumen partnered with  Unilever to package its 
years of impact assessment insights into a series of toolkits,  A Lean Data How- To Guide: 
Understanding Gender Impact.81 And in 2020, research between 60 Decibels and GOGLA helped to 
fully communicate the depths of the struggle that off- grid energy customers were experiencing 
during the pandemic. Through this work, Acumen has developed new and better ways of listening to customers, and continues to believe wholeheartedly in its core tenets of putting vulnerable 
customers  at the center of our work and empowering the companies which demonstrate an ability 
to serve them.  
 
Challenging Gender Stereotypes  
 
EARF will aim to protect the jobs of vulnerable female employees and agents at energy access 
companies . Women’s employment at all levels of the company workforce, particularly in a 
traditionally male dominated sector, challenges gender stereotypes and increases positive gender 
relations. It can cause a shift in power dynamics and relationships in the household and community.
82   
EARF will also encourage greater marketing towards women as energy customers and 
entrepreneurs, women participation at the board level, and ensure equal opportunity at the 
investing team and investee level.  
We will comply with Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC respectively.  
  
 
80 Acumen, 2015.  
81 Acumen, 2019a , Acumen 2019b . 
82 https://www.e nergia.org/cm2/wp -content/uploads/2020/02/RA7 -Womens -Energy -Entrepreneurship -
Evidence -Report -Final.pdf  pg 18.


---
*Page 121*
---

Page 118  
 
Mozambique Gender Assessment  
Key Statistics on Gender Equality  
 
Mozambique was ranked 54 out of 120 in the 2019 Social Institutions and Gender Index with a 
score of .243 and 56 out of 153 in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index with a score of 0.723. 
Mozambique also ranked 142 out of 162 countries on the Gender Inequality Index, with a score of .569. All indices are on a 0- 1 scale. For the SIGI and Gender Inequality indices, 0 points to complete 
equality a nd 1 to complete inequality. For the Global Gender Gap Index, the opposite holds true.  
 
Maternal mortality rate (2017)  289 (2017)  World Bank  
Infant mortality rate  54 (2018)  World Bank  
Adult literacy rate  50.3% female, 72.6% male 
(2017)  World Bank  
Employment to Population 
Ratio, age 15+  74.6% female, 76.6% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Unemployment Rate (% of 
respective labor force)  3.5% female, 3.0% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Life Expectancy  63 years (female), 57.1 years 
(male) (2018)  World Bank  
 
 
Political Participation   
Mozambique ranks 14th in the world in terms of women’s political representation. 41.2% (103 out 
of 250) of the members of the Assembly of the Republic and 35.6% of the members of Provincial 
Assemblies are women.83  Although women have limited decision- making power at the non-
political level such as in households, communities, and societies, the prevalent high rates of political 
 
83 Inter- Parliamentary Union (IPU), Geneva, 2020


---
*Page 122*
---

Page 119  
 
participation of women was largely secured through the voluntary quota system implemented by 
political parties and gender equitable policies from changes to the constitution.84   
 
Divisi on of Labour and Participation in the Economy  
According to the World Bank, 52.1% of the labor force is female.  
Mozambique is a low income country that is dominated by agriculture and export of commodities 
like cotton, sugar, cashews, timber and prawns. 77.8% of adult women are employed (12th out of 
the 118 low and middle -income countries reporting data in 2019), and women make up 52.1 of the 
overall labor force.85 81.5% of adult women in the labor force work in agriculture, fishing or 
forestry, 8 .4% in wholesale or retail trade, 0.9% in public administration and defence, and 0.2% in 
construction.86 Mozambique has ratified the core ILO Labour Conventions, and its laws are non-
discriminatory, but enforcement of labour laws is often inadequate. The I nternational Trade Union 
Confederation (ITUC) reports notably file complaints over women receiving lower pay than men for 
work of equal value.87  
 
Accessibility of Project Services and Technology  
Women are fully able and encouraged to purchase and use energy services from companies 
financed by the EARF. In fact, some companies have targeted marketing strategies for women 
customers such as selling directly to women’s village savings groups.   
Even op erating in markets where women do not always have control over purchasing decisions, 
approximately a third of the customer base of energy access companies is female, although there is 
significant variation between companies selling clean cookstoves (where women are 52% of 
customers), solar lanterns (38%), solar home systems (32%) and microgrids (25%).88  
Because the energy products or services are generally for the household the customer data does not 
necessarily correspond with who is benefitting from the products. In other words, even where 
customer data indicates that most customers are men, we know that women are benefitting from the energy access in the home. This also illustrates the importance of Acumen’s lean data approach 
to gain such insights beyond who is simply the purchaser.  
 
84 JICA, 2015  
85 World Development Indicators, 2020.  
86 ILOstat, 2016  
87 Klavereen et al 2009  
88 Acumen


---
*Page 123*
---

Page 120  
 
Women also make up 32% of the energy access workforce, compared to 22% of the workforce in oil 
and gas.89 
 
Needs and Priorities of Men and Women in EARF  
 
For the EARF programme, there are two contexts in which it is critical to examine the different 
needs/priorities of men and women: as employees/agents of energy access companies, and as 
customers of those same companies.  
 
Employment  
 
Although the energy access sector does a better job of employing women than does the oil and  gas 
sector, women are still currently a minority in the workforce. Moreover, they  are more likely to 
hold administrative positions (where 45% of all employees are women) than STEM- related jobs 
(just 28% of which are held by women).90 A 2019 survey from IRENA identified cultural norms, a 
lack of gender -sensitive policies or training opportunities, and an inequity in ownership of assets as 
the main barriers to women’s advancement in the energy access sector.91 However, multiple studies 
have demonstrated tha t women are equally, if not better, able to communicate the benefits of 
energy access, and make sales at comparable or higher rates than men when given similar opportunities.
92,93  
 
This is a difficult time for many women in the workforce of energy access companies. We know that 
the COVID -19 crisis is disproportionately affecting female workers, as they must meet the added 
burdens of daytime childcare and even additional household members while still fulfilling the 
requirements of their jobs.94 This struggl e was summarized by a UN policy brief on the gendered 
effects of the pandemic: “Compounded economic impacts are felt especially by women and girls who are generally earning less, saving less, and holding insecure jobs or living close to poverty.”
95 
 
89 IRENA, 2019.   
90 Ibid., p. 35.  
91 Ibid., p. 59.  
92 Clean Cooking Alliance, 2015.  
93 Value for Women, 2018.  
94 World Economic Forum, 2020.  
95 UN, 2020.


---
*Page 124*
---

Page 121  
 
Women, minorities, and other vulnerable workers face a dangerous and familiar outcome, of being 
the last hired in an economic upswing and the first fired in a crisis.96 
 
The EARF is meant to mitigate this risk through the use of covenants that will require energy access 
firms to use 80% of the funds they receive to pay employee salaries and/or commissions. 
Furthermore, priority will be given to eligible firms that are owned and led by women. Lastly, 
companies receiving EARF funding will be expected to mainta in or improve the gender balance of 
their staff and agent network while the loan is being repaid. In order to achieve this, companies will be expected to provide retention and recruitment plans for women employees and agents, and will 
be given guidance on how to adopt flexible work policies. Companies will verify their adherence to 
these covenants through regular data reporting, which can be verified by the Fund Manager and 
independent third parties, as necessary.  
 
Customers  
Women are the primary users of energy in a household, and are among the prime beneficiaries of 
access to modern energy services. Numerous studies have highlighted the benefits of modern energy for women: solar lanterns provide light for studying, reduce security risks, and displace 
dirty, harmful kerosene lanterns.
97 In one study, women using kerosene lanterns were nine times as 
likely to contract tuberculosis.98 Clean, efficient cookstoves bring down the time that women and 
girls must spend gathering fuel, while also reducing household air pollution, a major public health 
risk that kills over 4 million people annually and disproportionately affects women and girls.99 
Particularly during a pandemic that can cause lethal respiratory infections, the benefits of modern energy and cooking are  needed more than ever.  
 
Energy also plays a major role in increasing productivity and effectiveness of the work that men 
and women do.
100 In East Africa alone, solar home system companies have helped to create the 
equivalent of over one million additional  jobs, of which 52% have gone to women, bringing them an 
additional $552 per year.101 The EARF is meant to enable these benefits to continue, by funding 
companies to maintain their operations and customer service, while expanding sales to new 
 
96 Bloomberg, 2020.  
97 Energia, 2019.  
98 Bates et al.,  2013.   
99 WHO, n.d.  
100 SEAR, 2017.  
101 GOGLA, 2020.


---
*Page 125*
---

Page 122  
 
customers. Wit hout the EARF, millions of households and tens of millions of beneficiaries will not 
be able to access clean, modern, renewable energy.  
 
Vulnerabilities and Mitigation Strategies  
 
EARF’s focus is on protecting the gains made so far by the energy access sec tor, maintaining service 
to existing renewable energy adopters, and safeguarding the future sales and impact that will be 
made by companies during the recovery from COVID- 19. Our response strategies are aimed at 
protecting the liquidity of viable energy ac cess companies, and ensuring that there ability to serve 
current customers and reach new ones is not affected.  
 
EARF intends to focus on two main areas to ensure that women’s role as agents and beneficiaries of 
energy access is not only maintained, but increased:  
 
- Protecting female staff and agents. The EARF will specifically ask companies to provide 
plans for retaining vulnerable staff, including women, and maintaining or increasing the 
share of women in their employ. Companies will then be expected to ad here to those plans 
while using concessional finance. An indirect benefit of this approach is that female agents and call center operatives have been shown to be particularly effective at marketing the 
benefits of energy products to other women. This contr ibutes to the second key area.  
- Ensuring ongoing access to renewable energy products. By maintaining liquidity, supply 
lines, and staffing, the EARF helps to preserve ongoing access to critical products. Families 
who are confined to rural households will be  able to purchase high -quality solar products or 
cookstoves, while existing adopters will still be able to reach a customer service or 
maintenance representative to fix any product issues.  
 
Incorporating Local Knowledge and Skills  
 
Acumen has developed and  published a Gender Sensitivity Policy that guides its investments and 
implementation in all programmes. For the EARF, we see a clear opportunity to empower 
companies that have been forward -thinking and progressive in their promotion of women to senior 
leadership positions and their reliance on women on the frontlines of energy access distribution, 
sales, finance, and service. We will encourage greater participation of women at the board level, 
ensure equal opportunity on the investing team, and do the same  at the investee level. We will also 
comply with the Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC, respectively. And we 
acknowledge the acute dangers posed by the current crisis to women around the world, as 
highlighted in the UN Secretary Gener al’s recent policy brief on the issue.


---
*Page 126*
---

Page 123  
 
 
Acumen has repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to gender equality and sensitivity, and we 
intend to continue to do so. In 2015 Acumen published a report, along with the International Center 
for Research on Women: Women and Social Enterprises: How Gender Integration Can Boost 
Entrepreneurial Solutions to Poverty.102 In 2018, Acumen partnered with Unilever to package its 
years of impact assessment insights into a series of toolkits,  A Lean Data How- To Guide: 
Understan ding Gender Impact.103 And in 2020, research between 60 Decibels and GOGLA helped to 
fully communicate the depths of the struggle that off -grid energy customers were experiencing 
during the pandemic. Through this work, Acumen has developed new and better wa ys of listening 
to customers, and continues to believe wholeheartedly in its core tenets of putting vulnerable 
customers at the center of our work and empowering the companies which demonstrate an ability 
to serve them.  
 
Challenging Gender Stereotypes  
 
EARF will aim to protect the jobs of vulnerable female employees and agents at energy access 
companies . Women’s employment at all levels of the company workforce, particularly in a 
traditionally male dominated sector, challenges gender stereotypes and incr eases positive gender 
relations. It can cause a shift in power dynamics and relationships in the household and 
community.104   
EARF will also encourage greater marketing towards women as energy customers and entrepreneurs, women participation at the board level, and ensure equal opportunity at the 
investing team and investee level.  
We will comply with Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC respectively.  
  
 
102 Acumen, 2015.  
103 Acum en, 2019a, Acumen 2019b . 
104 https://www.energia.org/cm2/wp -content/uploads/2020/02/RA7 -Womens -Energy -Entrepreneurship -
Evidence -Report -Final.pdf  pg 18.


---
*Page 127*
---

Page 124  
 
Kenya Gender Assessment 
Key Statistics on Gender Equality  
 
Kenya was ranked 83 out of 120 in the 2019 Social Institutions and Gender Index with a score of 
.355 and 109 out of 153 in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index with a score of 0.671. Kenya also 
ranked 134 out of 162 countries on the Gender Inequality Index, with a score of .545. A ll indices are 
on a 0 -1 scale. For the SIGI and Gender Inequality indices, 0 points to complete equality and 1 to 
complete inequality. For the Global Gender Gap Index, the opposite holds true.  
 
Maternal mortality rate (2017)  342 (2017)  World Bank  
Infant mortality rate  30.6 (2018)  World Bank  
Adult literacy rate  78.2% female, 85% male 
(2018)  World Bank  
Employment to Population 
Ratio, age 15+  70.1% female, 75.4% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Unemployment Rate  (% of 
respective labor force)  2.8% female, 2.5% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Life Expectancy  68.7 years (female), 64 years 
(male) (2018)  World Bank  
 
 
Political Participation   
21.8% (76 out of 349)  members of the National Assembly of Kenya and 30.9% (21 out of 68) 
Senators are women.105 Women and men enjoy the same rights to vote and stand for election in 
Kenya, although women standing for public office often face hostility.106 Quotas have been 
legislated at the national and sub -national levels to encourage women’s political participation, and 
several of the main political parties have enacted voluntary quotas that reserve one -third of the 
 
105 Inter- Parliamentary Union (IPU), Geneva, 2020  
106 OECD 2014


---
*Page 128*
---

Page 125  
 
seats for women. Despite this, implementation of these policies is inadequate and women’s 
participation in political life remains poor.107 However, in pu blic surveys, the majority of Kenyans 
indicate that they believe that men and women are equally capable as political leaders.108  
 
Division of Labour and Participation in the Economy  
According to the World Bank, 49% of the labor force is female.  
Kenya is Af rica’s 9th largest economy, with a GDP of over US$ 200 billion (PPP). It is a lower -middle 
income country with an economy dominated by agriculture, including the export of tea, coffee, 
flowers and vegetables. The country also has a sizable services sector (35.1%), notably tourism and 
financial services, amongst others. 72.51% of adult women are employed (20th out of the 118 low 
and middle -income countries reporting data in 2019), and women make up 49% of the overall 
labor force.109 They are most likely to work in informal occupations. 60% of employed women work 
in agriculture, compared to 48% of all men. Around 19% women and 14% men work in wholesale or retail trade and the female share of management positions is around one -fourth.
110  
 
Accessibility of Projec t Services and Technology  
Women are fully able and encouraged to purchase and use energy services from companies 
financed by the EARF. In fact, some companies have targeted marketing strategies for women customers such as selling directly to women’s villag e savings groups.   
Even operating in markets where women do not always have control over purchasing decisions, approximately a third of the customer base of energy access companies is female, although there is 
significant variation between companies selling clean cookstoves (where women are 52% of 
customers), solar lanterns (38%), solar home systems (32%) and microgrids (25%).
111  
Because the energy products or services are generally for the household the customer data does not necessarily correspond with wh o is benefitting from the products. In other words, even where 
customer data indicates that most customers are men, we know that women are benefitting from the energy access in the home. This also illustrates the importance of Acumen’s lean data approach 
to gain such insights beyond who is simply the purchaser.  
 
107 Ibid., p6 
108 Ibid., p6 & Pew Survey (2007)  
109 World Development Indicators, 2020.  
110 ILOstat 2020  
111 Acumen


---
*Page 129*
---

Page 126  
 
Women also make up 32% of the energy access workforce, compared to 22% of the workforce in oil 
and gas.112 
 
Needs and Priorities of Men and Women in EARF  
 
For the EARF programme, there are two context s in which it is critical to examine the different 
needs/priorities of men and women: as employees/agents of energy access companies, and as 
customers of those same companies.  
 
Employment  
 
Although the energy access sector does a better job of employing women than does the oil and gas 
sector, women are still currently a minority in the workforce. Moreover, they  are more likely to 
hold administrative positions (where 45% of all employees are women) than STEM- related jobs 
(just 28% of which are h eld by women).113 A 2019 survey from IRENA identified cultural norms, a 
lack of gender -sensitive policies or training opportunities, and an inequity in ownership of assets as 
the main barriers to women’s advancement in the energy access sector.114 However, multiple 
studies have demonstrated that women are equally, if not better, able to communicate the benefits of energy access, and make sales at comparable or higher rates than men when given similar opportunities.
115, 116  
 
This is a difficult time for many wom en in the workforce of energy access companies. We know that 
the COVID -19 crisis is disproportionately affecting female workers, as they must meet the added 
burdens of daytime childcare and even additional household members while still fulfilling the 
requi rements of their jobs.117 This struggle was summarized by a UN policy brief on the gendered 
effects of the pandemic: “Compounded economic impacts are felt especially by women and girls who are generally earning less, saving less, and holding insecure jobs or living close to povert y.”
118 
 
112 IRENA, 2019.   
113 Ibid., p. 35.  
114 Ibid., p. 59.  
115 Clean Cooking Alliance, 2015.  
116 Value for Women, 2018.  
117 World Economic Forum, 2020.  
118 UN, 2020.


---
*Page 130*
---

Page 127  
 
Women, minorities, and other vulnerable workers face a dangerous and familiar outcome, of being 
the last hired in an economic upswing and the first fired in a crisis.119 
 
The EARF is meant to mitigate this risk through the use of covenants that will r equire energy access 
firms to use 80% of the funds they receive to pay employee salaries and/or commissions. 
Furthermore, priority will be given to eligible firms that are owned and led by women. Lastly, 
companies receiving EARF funding will be expected to maintain or improve the gender balance of 
their staff and agent network while the loan is being repaid. In order to achieve this, companies will be expected to provide retention and recruitment plans for women employees and agents, and will 
be given guida nce on how to adopt flexible work policies. Companies will verify their adherence to 
these covenants through regular data reporting, which can be verified by the Fund Manager and 
independent third parties, as necessary.  
 
Customers  
Women are the primary use rs of energy in a household, and are among the prime beneficiaries of 
access to modern energy services. Numerous studies have highlighted the benefits of modern energy for women: solar lanterns provide light for studying, reduce security risks, and displac e 
dirty, harmful kerosene lanterns.
120 In one study, women using kerosene lanterns were nine times 
as likely to contract tuberculosis.121 Clean, efficient cookstoves bring down the time that women 
and girls must spend gathering fuel, while also reducing household air pollution, a major public 
health risk that kills over 4 million people annually and disproportionately affects women and girls.
122 Particularly during a pandemic that can cause lethal respiratory infections, the benefits of 
modern energy and cooki ng are needed more than ever.  
 
Energy also plays a major role in increasing productivity and effectiveness of the work that men 
and women do.123 In East Africa alone, solar home system companies have helped to create the 
equivalent of over one million addi tional jobs, of which 52% have gone to women, bringing them an 
additional $552 per year.124 The EARF is meant to enable these benefits to continue, by funding 
companies to maintain their operations and customer service, while expanding sales to new 
 
119 Bloomberg, 2020.  
120 Energia, 2019.  
121 Bates et al., 2013.   
122 WHO, n.d.  
123 SEAR, 2017.  
124 GOGLA, 2020.


---
*Page 131*
---

Page 128  
 
customer s. Without the EARF, millions of households and tens of millions of beneficiaries will not 
be able to access clean, modern, renewable energy.  
 
Vulnerabilities and Mitigation Strategies  
 
EARF’s focus is on protecting the gains made so far by the energy access sector, maintaining service 
to existing renewable energy adopters, and safeguarding the future sales and impact that will be made by companies during the recovery from COVID- 19. Our r esponse strategies are aimed at 
protecting the liquidity of viable energy access companies, and ensuring that there ability to serve 
current customers and reach new ones is not affected.  
 
EARF intends to focus on two main areas to ensure that women’s role  as agents and beneficiaries of 
energy access is not only maintained, but increased:  
 
- Protecting female staff and agents. The EARF will specifically ask companies to provide 
plans for retaining vulnerable staff, including women, and maintaining or increasi ng the 
share of women in their employ. Companies will then be expected to adhere to those plans 
while using concessional finance. An indirect benefit of this approach is that female agents 
and call center operatives have been shown to be particularly effec tive at marketing the 
benefits of energy products to other women. This contributes to the second key area.  
- Ensuring ongoing access to renewable energy products. By maintaining liquidity, supply 
lines, and staffing, the EARF helps to preserve ongoing access  to critical products. Families 
who are confined to rural households will be able to purchase high -quality solar products or 
cookstoves, while existing adopters will still be able to reach a customer service or maintenance representative to fix any product  issues.  
 
Incorporating Local Knowledge and Skills  
 
Acumen has developed and published a Gender Sensitivity Policy that guides its investments and 
implementation in all programmes. For the EARF, we see a clear opportunity to empower 
companies that have bee n forward -thinking and progressive in their promotion of women to senior 
leadership positions and their reliance on women on the frontlines of energy access distribution, 
sales, finance, and service. We will encourage greater participation of women at the board level, 
ensure equal opportunity on the investing team, and do the same at the investee level. We will also 
comply with the Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC, respectively. And we 
acknowledge the acute dangers posed by the current crisis to women around the world, as 
highlighted in the UN Secretary General’s recent policy brief on the issue.


---
*Page 132*
---

Page 129  
 
 
Acumen has repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to gender equality and sensitivity, and we 
intend to continue to do so. In 2015 Acumen published a report, along with the International Center 
for Research on Women: Women and Social Enterprises: How Gender Integration Can Boost 
Entrepreneurial Solutions to Poverty.125 In 2018, Acumen partnered with Unilever to package its 
years of impact assessment insights into a series of toolkits,  A Lean Data How- To Guide: 
Understanding Gender Impact.126 And in 2020, research between 60 Decibels and GOGLA helped to 
fully communicate the depths of the struggle that off -grid energy customers were experiencing 
during the pandemic. Through this work, Acumen has developed new and better ways of listening 
to customers, and continues to believe wholeheartedly in its core tenets of putting vulnerable 
customers at the center of our work and empowering the companies whic h demonstrate an ability 
to serve them.  
 
Challenging Gender Stereotypes  
 
EARF will aim to protect the jobs of vulnerable female employees and agents at energy access 
companies . Women’s employment at all levels of the company workforce, particularly in a 
traditionally male dominated sector, challenges gender stereotypes and increases positive gender relations. It can cause a shift in power dynamics and relationships in the household and 
community.
127   
EARF will also encourage greater mark eting towards women as energy customers and 
entrepreneurs, women participation at the board level, and ensure equal opportunity at the 
investing team and investee level.  
We will comply with Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC respective ly. 
  
 
125 Acumen, 2015.  
126 Acumen, 2019a , Acumen 2019b . 
127 https://www.energia.org/cm2/wp -content/uploads/2020/02/RA7 -Womens -Energy -Entrepreneurship -
Evidence -Report -Final.pdf  pg 18.


---
*Page 133*
---

Page 130  
 
Zambia Gender Assessment 
Key Statistics on Gender Equality  
 
Zambia was ranked 81 out of 120 in the 2019 Social Institutions and Gender Index with a score of 
.348 and 45 out of 153 in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index with a score of 0.731. Zambia also 
ranked 131 out of 162 countries on the Gender Inequality Index, with a score of .540. All indices are on a 0 -1 scale. For the SIGI and Gender Inequality indices, 0 points to complete equality and 1 to 
complete inequality. For the Global Gender Gap Index, the opposite holds true.  
 
Maternal mortality rate (2017)  213 (2017)  World Bank  
Infant mortality rate  40.4 (2018)  World Bank  
Adult literacy rate  83.1% female, 90.6% male 
(2018)  World Bank  
Employment to Population 
Ratio, age 15+  61.8% female, 70.6% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Unemployment Rate (% of 
respective labor force)  12.2% female, 10.7% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Life Expectancy  66.4 years (female), 60.5 years 
(male) (2018)  World Bank  
 
 
Political Participation   
Women have the same rights as men to vote and run for election in Zambia. Yet Zambia ranks 126th 
in terms of women’s political participation, only 1 6.8% (28 out of 167)  of its parliamentarians are 
women.128 The government cites the lack of quotas as a contributor to the low level of women 
participating in decision -making and leadership positions.129 
 
128 Inter- Parliamentary Union (IPU), Geneva, 2020  
129 OECD 2014


---
*Page 134*
---

Page 131  
 
 
Division of Labour and Participation in the Economy  
According to the World Bank, 48.3% of the labor force is female.  
Zambia is a lower middle income country with one of the highest rates of income inequality in the 
world. 58% Zambians earn less than the international poverty line of $1.90 per day (compared to 
41% across Sub -Saharan Africa) and three quarters of the poor live in rural areas.130 As one of Sub 
Saharan Africa’s most urbanized economies, it is dominated by the services and manufacturing sector, notably copper mining and processing, and c onstruction. 71.26% of adult women are 
employed (23rd out of the 118 low and middle -income countries reporting data in 2019), and 
women make up 48.3% of the overall labor force.
131 They are most likely to work in low -income, 
informal occupations. 54% of emp loyed women work in agriculture, compared to 44% of all men. 
42% of employed women and men work in the services sector. Zambia’s statutes generally grant 
women full legal rights before the law, however parallel customary and religious legal regimes do 
not always recognize the rights of women to own or inherit land and other assets.132 
 
Accessibility of Project Services and Technology  
Women are fully able and encouraged to purchase and use energy services from companies 
financed by the EARF. In fact, some companies have targeted marketing strategies for women customers such as selling directly to women’s village savings groups.   
Even operating in markets where women do not always have control over purchasing decisions, approximately a third of the customer bas e of energy access companies is female, although there is 
significant variation between companies selling clean cookstoves (where women are 52% of customers), solar lanterns (38%), solar home systems (32%) and microgrids (25%).
133  
Because the energy produc ts or services are generally for the household the customer data does not 
necessarily correspond with who is benefitting from the products. In other words, even where 
customer data indicates that most customers are men, we know that women are benefitting f rom 
the energy access in the home. This also illustrates the importance of Acumen’s lean data approach 
to gain such insights beyond who is simply the purchaser.  
Women also make up 32% of the energy access workforce, compared to 22% of the workforce in oil 
and gas.134 
 
130 World Development Indicators, 2020.  
131 Ibid.,  
132 OECD 2014  
133 Acumen  
134 IRENA, 2019.


---
*Page 135*
---

Page 132  
 
 
Needs and Priorities of Men and Women in EARF  
 
For the EARF programme, there are two contexts in which it is critical to examine the different 
needs/priorities of men and women: as employees/agents of energy access companies, and as 
customers o f those same companies.  
 
Employment  
 
Although the energy access sector does a better job of employing women than does the oil and gas 
sector, women are still currently a minority in the workforce. Moreover, they  are more likely to 
hold administrative pos itions (where 45% of all employees are women) than STEM- related jobs 
(just 28% of which are held by women).135 A 2019 survey from IRENA identified cultural norms, a 
lack of gender -sensitive policies or training opportunities, and an inequity in ownership of  assets as 
the main barriers to women’s advancement in the energy access sector.136 However, multiple 
studies have demonstrated that women are equally, if not better, able to communicate the benefits of energy access, and make sales at comparable or higher rates than men when given similar 
opportunities.
137, 138  
 
This is a difficult time for many women in the workforce of energy access companies. We know that 
the COVID -19 crisis is disproportionately affecting female workers, as they must meet the added 
burdens of daytime childcare and even additional household members while still fulfilling the 
requirements of their jobs.139 This struggle was summarized by a UN policy brief on the gendered 
effects of the pandemic: “Compounded economic impacts are felt esp ecially by women and girls 
who are generally earning less, saving less, and holding insecure jobs or living close to poverty.”140 
Women, minorities, and other vulnerable workers face a dangerous and familiar outcome, of being 
the last hired in an economic upswing and the first fired in a crisis.141 
 
135 Ibid., p. 35.  
136 Ibid., p. 59.  
137 Clean Cooking Alliance, 2015.  
138 Value for Women, 2018.  
139 World Economic Forum, 2020.  
140 UN, 2020.  
141 Bloomberg, 2020.


---
*Page 136*
---

Page 133  
 
 
The EARF is meant to mitigate this risk through the use of covenants that will requir e energy access 
firms to use 80% of the funds they receive to pay employee salaries and/or commissions. 
Furthermore, priority will be given to eligible firms that are owned and led by women. Lastly, 
companies receiving EARF funding will be expected to maintain or improve the gender balance of 
their staff and agent network while the loan is being repaid. In order to achieve this, companies will 
be expected to provide retention and recruitment plans for women employees and agents, and will 
be given guidance o n how to adopt flexible work policies. Companies will verify their adherence to 
these covenants through regular data reporting, which can be verified by the Fund Manager and 
independent third parties, as necessary.  
 
Customers  
Women are the primary users of  energy in a household, and are among the prime beneficiaries of 
access to modern energy services. Numerous studies have highlighted the benefits of modern 
energy for women: solar lanterns provide light for studying, reduce security risks, and displace 
dirty, harmful kerosene lanterns.142 In one study, women using kerosene lanterns were nine times 
as likely to contract tuberculosis.143 Clean, efficient cookstoves bring down the time that women 
and girls must spend gathering fuel, while also reducing household air pollution, a major public 
health risk that kills over 4 million people annually and disproportionately affects women and girls.
144 Particularly during a pandemic that can cause lethal respiratory infections, the benefits of 
modern energy and cooking ar e needed more than ever.  
 
Energy also plays a major role in increasing productivity and effectiveness of the work that men 
and women do.145 In East Africa alone, solar home system companies have helped to create the 
equivalent of over one million additiona l jobs, of which 52% have gone to women, bringing them an 
additional $552 per year.146 The EARF is meant to enable these benefits to continue, by funding 
companies to maintain their operations and customer service, while expanding sales to new 
customers. Wi thout the EARF, millions of households and tens of millions of beneficiaries will not 
be able to access clean, modern, renewable energy.  
 
 
142 Energia, 2019.  
143 Bates et al., 2013.   
144 WHO, n.d.  
145 SEAR, 2017.  
146 GOGLA, 2020.


---
*Page 137*
---

Page 134  
 
Vulnerabilities and Mitigation Strategies  
 
EARF’s focus is on protecting the gains made so far by the energy access se ctor, maintaining service 
to existing renewable energy adopters, and safeguarding the future sales and impact that will be 
made by companies during the recovery from COVID- 19. Our response strategies are aimed at 
protecting the liquidity of viable energy a ccess companies, and ensuring that there ability to serve 
current customers and reach new ones is not affected.  
 
EARF intends to focus on two main areas to ensure that women’s role as agents and beneficiaries of 
energy access is not only maintained, but i ncreased:  
 
- Protecting female staff and agents. The EARF will specifically ask companies to provide 
plans for retaining vulnerable staff, including women, and maintaining or increasing the 
share of women in their employ. Companies will then be expected to a dhere to those plans 
while using concessional finance. An indirect benefit of this approach is that female agents 
and call center operatives have been shown to be particularly effective at marketing the 
benefits of energy products to other women. This cont ributes to the second key area.  
- Ensuring ongoing access to renewable energy products. By maintaining liquidity, supply 
lines, and staffing, the EARF helps to preserve ongoing access to critical products. Families who are confined to rural households will b e able to purchase high -quality solar products or 
cookstoves, while existing adopters will still be able to reach a customer service or maintenance representative to fix any product issues.  
 
Incorporating Local Knowledge and Skills  
 
Acumen has developed and published a Gender Sensitivity Policy that guides its investments and 
implementation in all programmes. For the EARF, we see a clear opportunity to empower 
companies that have been forward -thinking and progressive in their promotion of women to senior 
leadership positions and their reliance on women on the frontlines of energy access distribution, sales, finance, and service. We will encourage greater participation of women at the board level, 
ensure equal opportunity on the investing team, an d do the same at the investee level. We will also 
comply with the Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC, respectively. And we acknowledge the acute dangers posed by the current crisis to women around the world, as 
highlighted in the UN Se cretary General’s recent policy brief on the issue.  
 
Acumen has repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to gender equality and sensitivity, and we 
intend to continue to do so. In 2015 Acumen published a report, along with the International Center 
for Resear ch on Women: Women and Social Enterprises: How Gender Integration Can Boost


---
*Page 138*
---

Page 135  
 
Entrepreneurial Solutions to Poverty.147 In 2018, Acumen partnered with Unilever to package its 
years of impact assessment insights into a series of toolkits,  A Lean Data How- To Gui de: 
Understanding Gender Impact.148 And in 2020, research between 60 Decibels and GOGLA helped to 
fully communicate the depths of the struggle that off -grid energy customers were experiencing 
during the pandemic. Through this work, Acumen has developed new and better ways of listening 
to customers, and continues to believe wholeheartedly in its core tenets of putting vulnerable 
customers at the center of our work and empowering the companies which demonstrate an ability 
to serve them.  
 
Challeng ing Gender Stereotypes  
 
EARF will aim to protect the jobs of vulnerable female employees and agents at energy access 
companies . Women’s employment at all levels of the company workforce, particularly in a 
traditionally male dominated sector, challenges gender stereotypes and increases positive gender 
relations. It can cause a shift in power dynamics and relationships in the household and 
community.149   
EARF will also encourage greater marketing towards women as energy customers and 
entrepreneurs, women part icipation at the board level, and ensure equal opportunity at the 
investing team and investee level.  
We will comply with Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC respectively.  
  
 
147 Acumen, 2015.  
148 Acumen, 2019a , Acumen 2019b . 
149 https://www.energia.org/cm2/wp -content/uploads/2020/02/RA7 -Womens -Energy -Entrepreneurship -
Evidence -Report -Final.pdf  pg 18.


---
*Page 139*
---

Page 136  
 
Democratic Republic of Congo Gender Assessment 
Key Statistics on Gender Equality  
 
The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) was ranked 88 out of 120 in the 2019 Social Institutions 
and Gender Index with a score of .395 and 149 out of 153 in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index with 
a score of 0.578. DRC also ranked 156 out o f 162 countries on the Gender Inequality Index, with a 
score of .655. All indices are on a 0 -1 scale. For the SIGI and Gender Inequality indices, 0 points to 
complete equality and 1 to complete inequality. For the Global Gender Gap Index, the opposite hold s true.  
 
Maternal mortality rate (2017)  473 (2017)  World Bank  
Infant mortality rate  68.2 (2018)  World Bank  
Adult literacy rate  66.5% female, 88.5% male 
(2016)  World Bank  
Employment to Population 
Ratio, age 15+  58.7% female, 62.9% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Unemployment Rate (% of 
respective labor force)  3.4% female, 5.0% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Life Expectancy  61.9 years (female), 58.9 years 
(male) (2018)  World Bank  
 
 
Political Participation   
 
The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has one of the lowest representations of women in 
political life, in Africa. Only 12.8% (64 out of 500) memb ers of the National Assembly and 21.1% 
(23 out of 109) Senators are women.150 Although the constitution guarantees equitable 
representation and parity in national, provincial, and local institutions, there were no effective 
 
150 Inter- Parliamentary Union (IPU), Geneva, 2020


---
*Page 140*
---

Page 137  
 
measures to support equality betw een men and women. High registration fees (that increased 
nearly fourfold in 2018) posed significant barriers for female candidates to register and contest 
elections.151 
 
Division of Labour and Participation in the Economy  
According to the World Bank, 48.3%  of the labor force is female.  
The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) is Africa’s largest country by size and has a population of 
84 million people. It is also one of the world’s poorest countries, with over 72% of its population living in extreme poverty.  Years of ethnic conflicts, civil war and corruption have left the country 
poor despite an abundance of valuable, natural resources like cobalt, copper and diamonds. 62% of adult women are employed
152 and they are most likely to work in low -income, informal  occupations 
like agriculture and services. 72% of employed women work in agriculture, compared to 58% of all men. 2.6% women work in manufacturing, 0.7% in mining and 18.4% in services. While women and men are afforded the same rights and responsibilities  under statutory law, law reinforces social 
and cultural norms that place women as inferior to men. Further, places married women under the 
guardianship of their husband, where they are legally obliged to obey their husband, live with him, 
and request permission to travel.
153 Discriminatory legislation and norms assign women specific 
roles in the household such as childcare and domestic responsibilities, that constrain from taking up employment.
154 
 
Accessibility of Project Services and Technology  
Women are fully able and encouraged to purchase and use energy services from companies 
financed by the EARF. In fact, some companies have targeted marketing strategies for women 
customers such as selling directly to women’s village savings groups.   
Even op erating in markets where women do not always have control over purchasing decisions, 
approximately a third of the customer base of energy access companies is female, although there is 
significant variation between companies selling clean cookstoves (where women are 52% of 
customers), solar lanterns (38%), solar home systems (32%) and microgrids (25%).155  
Because the energy products or services are generally for the household the customer data does not 
necessarily correspond with who is benefitting from the products. In other words, even where 
customer data indicates that most customers are men, we know that women are benefitting from 
 
151 The Carter Center, 2019  
152 World Development Indicators, 2020.  
153 US Dept. of State 2017, USAID 2012  
154 Samndong, Kjosavik, 2017  
155 Acumen


---
*Page 141*
---

Page 138  
 
the energy access in the home. This also illustrates the importance of Acumen’s lean data approach 
to gain such insights beyond who is simply the purchaser.  
Women also make up 32% of the energy access workforce, compared to 22% of the workforce in oil 
and gas.156 
 
Needs and Priorities of Men and Women in EARF  
 
For the EARF programme, there are two contexts in which it is critical to examine the different 
needs/priorities of men and women: as employees/agents of energy access companies, and as 
customers of those same companies.  
 
Employment  
 
Although the energy a ccess sector does a better job of employing women than does the oil and gas 
sector, women are still currently a minority in the workforce. Moreover, they  are more likely to 
hold administrative positions (where 45% of all employees are women) than STEM- related jobs 
(just 28% of which are held by women).157 A 2019 survey from IRENA identified cultural norms, a 
lack of gender -sensitive policies or training opportunities, and an inequity in ownership of assets as 
the main barriers to women’s advancement in the energy access sector.158 However, multiple 
studies have demonstrated that women are equally, if not better, able to communicate the benefits 
of energy access, and make sales at comparable or higher rates than men when given similar 
opportunities.159, 160  
 
This is a difficult time for many women in the workforce of energy access companies. We know that 
the COVID -19 crisis is disproportionately affecting female workers, as they must meet the added 
burdens of daytime childcare and even additional household member s while still fulfilling the 
requirements of their jobs.161 This struggle was summarized by a UN policy brief on the gendered 
effects of the pandemic: “Compounded economic impacts are felt especially by women and girls 
 
156 IRENA, 2019.   
157 Ibid ., p. 35.  
158 Ibid., p. 59.  
159 Clean Cooking Alliance, 2015.  
160 Value for Women, 2018.  
161 World Economic Forum, 2020.


---
*Page 142*
---

Page 139  
 
who are generally earning less, saving  less, and holding insecure jobs or living close to poverty.”162 
Women, minorities, and other vulnerable workers face a dangerous and familiar outcome, of being 
the last hired in an economic upswing and the first fired in a crisis.163 
 
The EARF is meant to mitigate this risk through the use of covenants that will require energy access 
firms to use 80% of the funds they receive to pay employee salaries and/or commissions. 
Furthermore, priority will be given to eligible firms that are owned and led by women. La stly, 
companies receiving EARF funding will be expected to maintain or improve the gender balance of 
their staff and agent network while the loan is being repaid. In order to achieve this, companies will 
be expected to provide retention and recruitment pla ns for women employees and agents, and will 
be given guidance on how to adopt flexible work policies. Companies will verify their adherence to 
these covenants through regular data reporting, which can be verified by the Fund Manager and independent third p arties, as necessary.  
 
Customers  
Women are the primary users of energy in a household, and are among the prime beneficiaries of access to modern energy services. Numerous studies have highlighted the benefits of modern 
energy for women: solar lanterns provide light for studying, reduce security risks, and displace 
dirty, harmful kerosene lanterns.
164 In one study, women using kerosene lanterns were nine times 
as likely to contract tuberculosis.165 Clean, efficient cookstoves bring down the time t hat women 
and girls must spend gathering fuel, while also reducing household air pollution, a major public 
health risk that kills over 4 million people annually and disproportionately affects women and 
girls.166 Particularly during a pandemic that can cause  lethal respiratory infections, the benefits of 
modern energy and cooking are needed more than ever.  
 
Energy also plays a major role in increasing productivity and effectiveness of the work that men 
and women do.167 In East Africa alone, solar home system companies have helped to create the 
equivalent of over one million additional jobs, of which 52% have gone to women, bringing them an 
additional $552 per year.168 The EARF is meant to enable these benefits to continue, by funding 
 
162 UN, 2020.  
163 Bloomberg, 2020.  
164 Energia, 2019.  
165 Bates et al., 2013.   
166 WHO, n.d.  
167 SEAR, 2017.  
168 GOGLA, 2020.


---
*Page 143*
---

Page 140  
 
companies to maintain their  operations and customer service, while expanding sales to new 
customers. Without the EARF, millions of households and tens of millions of beneficiaries will not 
be able to access clean, modern, renewable energy.  
 
Vulnerabilities and Mitigation Strategies  
 
EARF’s focus is on protecting the gains made so far by the energy access sector, maintaining service 
to existing renewable energy adopters, and safeguarding the future sales and impact that will be 
made by companies during the recovery from COVID- 19. Our response strategies are aimed at 
protecting the liquidity of viable energy access companies, and ensuring that there ability to serve current customers and reach new ones is not affected.  
 
EARF intends to focus on two main areas to ensure that women’s rol e as agents and beneficiaries of 
energy access is not only maintained, but increased:  
 
- Protecting female staff and agents. The EARF will specifically ask companies to provide 
plans for retaining vulnerable staff, including women, and maintaining or increas ing the 
share of women in their employ. Companies will then be expected to adhere to those plans 
while using concessional finance. An indirect benefit of this approach is that female agents 
and call center operatives have been shown to be particularly effe ctive at marketing the 
benefits of energy products to other women. This contributes to the second key area.  
- Ensuring ongoing access to renewable energy products. By maintaining liquidity, supply 
lines, and staffing, the EARF helps to preserve ongoing acces s to critical products. Families 
who are confined to rural households will be able to purchase high -quality solar products or 
cookstoves, while existing adopters will still be able to reach a customer service or 
maintenance representative to fix any produc t issues.  
 
Incorporating Local Knowledge and Skills  
 
Acumen has developed and published a Gender Sensitivity Policy that guides its investments and 
implementation in all programmes. For the EARF, we see a clear opportunity to empower 
companies that have been forward -thinking and progressive in their promotion of women to senior 
leadership positions and their reliance on women on the frontlines of energy access distribution, 
sales, finance, and service. We will encourage greater participation of women at the board level, 
ensure equal opportunity on the investing team, and do the same at the investee level. We will also 
comply with the Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC, respectively. And we


---
*Page 144*
---

Page 141  
 
acknowledge the acute dangers posed by th e current crisis to women around the world, as 
highlighted in the UN Secretary General’s recent policy brief on the issue.  
 
Acumen has repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to gender equality and sensitivity, and we 
intend to continue to do so. In 2015 Ac umen published a report, along with the International Center 
for Research on Women: Women and Social Enterprises: How Gender Integration Can Boost 
Entrepreneurial Solutions to Poverty.169 In 2018, Acumen partnered with Unilever to package its 
years of impac t assessment insights into a series of toolkits,  A Lean Data How- To Guide: 
Understanding Gender Impact.170 And in 2020, research between 60 Decibels and GOGLA helped to 
fully communicate the depths of the struggle that off -grid energy customers were experie ncing 
during the pandemic. Through this work, Acumen has developed new and better ways of listening 
to customers, and continues to believe wholeheartedly in its core tenets of putting vulnerable 
customers at the center of our work and empowering the companies which demonstrate an ability to serve them.  
 
Challenging Gender Stereotypes  
 
EARF will aim to protect the jobs of vulnerable female employees and agents at energy access 
companies . Women’s employment at all levels of the company workforce, particularly in a 
traditionally male dominated sector, challenges gender stereotypes and increases positive gender relations. It can cause a shift in power dynamics and relationships in the household and community.
171   
EARF will also encourage greater mark eting towards women as energy customers and 
entrepreneurs, women participation at the board level, and ensure equal opportunity at the 
investing team and investee level.  
We will comply with Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC respective ly. 
  
 
169 Acumen, 2015.  
170 Acumen, 2019a , Acumen 2019b . 
171 https://www.energia.org/cm2/wp -content/uploads/2020/02/RA7 -Womens -Energy -Entrepreneurship -
Evidence -Report -Final.pdf  pg 18.


---
*Page 145*
---

Page 142  
 
Senegal Gender Assessment 
Key Statistics on Gender Equality  
 
Senegal was ranked 86 out of 120 in the 2019 Social Institutions and Gender Index with a score of 
.370 and 99 out of 153 in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index with a score of 0.684. Senegal also 
ranked 125 out of 162 countries on the Gender Inequality Index, with a score of .523. All indices are 
on a 0 -1 scale. For the SIGI and Gender Inequality indices, 0 points to complete equality and 1 to 
complete inequality. For the Global Gender Gap Inde x, the opposite holds true.  
 
Maternal mortality rate (2017)  315 (2017)  World Bank  
Infant mortality rate  31.8 (2018)  World Bank  
Adult literacy rate  39.8% female, 64.8% male 
(2017)  World Bank  
Employment to Population 
Ratio, age 15+  32.4% female, 54% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Unemployment Rate (% of 
respective labor force)  7.4% female, 6% male (2019)  World Bank  
Life Expectancy  69.6 years (female), 65.5 years 
(male) (2018)  World Bank  
 
 
Political Participation   
In Senegal, women have the same rights to vote and contest elections as men. According to the  Law 
on Equality of Men and Women in Electoral Lists adopted in 2012, candidate lists put forth by 
parties are required to have gender parity and alternation, to be legally admissible.172 
Consequently, 43% (71 out of 165) members of the legislature are women.173  
 
172 OECD 2014  
173 Inter- Parliamentary Union (IPU), Geneva, 2020


---
*Page 146*
---

Page 143  
 
 
Division of Labour and Participation in the Economy  
According to the World Bank, 40.4% of the labor force is female.  
Senegal is a low income, mixed economy country that is driven by the service sector (tourism, 
construction) and commodity exports like fish, phosphates and groundnuts. There is also a large, rainfed subsistence agriculture sector that is prone to frequent droughts. 36% of adult women are 
employed (ranks 100th out of the 118 low and middle -income count ries reporting data in 2019), 
and women make up 40.4% of the overall labor force.
174 They are most likely to work in low -
income, informal occupations. Only 24% of employed women work in agriculture, compared to 
33% of all men. Nearly 70% women work in the s ervices sector, compared to 48% men. One in five 
management positions are held by women.175 There are no laws in Senegal mandating non-
discrimination based on gender in hiring, nor laws penalizing or preventing the dismissal of 
pregnant women. Further, alth ough civil law mandates equal rights to inheritance, parallel 
customary and religious legal regimes do not always recognize the rights of women to own or inherit land and other assets.
176 
 
Accessibility of Project Services and Technology  
Women are fully able and encouraged to purchase and use energy services from companies 
financed by the EARF. In fact, some companies have targeted marketing strategies for women customers such as selling directly to women’s village savings groups.   
Even op erating in markets where women do not always have control over purchasing decisions, 
approximately a third of the customer base of energy access companies is female, although there is significant variation between companies selling clean cookstoves (where women are 52% of 
customers), solar lanterns (38%), solar home systems (32%) and microgrids (25%).
177  
Because the energy products or services are generally for the household the customer data does not necessarily correspond with who is benefitting from the products. In other words, even where 
customer data indicates that most customers are men, we know that women are benefitting from 
the energy access in the home. This also illustrates the importance of Acumen’s lean data approach 
to gai n such insights beyond who is simply the purchaser.  
Women also make up 32% of the energy access workforce, compared to 22% of the workforce in oil 
and gas.
178 
 
174 World Development Indicators, 202 0. 
175 ILOstats, 2020  
176 OECD 2014  
177 Acumen  
178 IRENA, 2019.


---
*Page 147*
---

Page 144  
 
 
Needs and Priorities of Men and Women in EARF  
 
For the EARF programme, there are two contexts in which it is critical to examine the different 
needs/priorities of men and women: as employees/agents of energy access companies, and as 
customers of those same companies.  
 
Employment  
 
Although the energy access sector does a better job of employing women than does the oil and gas 
sector, women are still currently a minority in the workforce. Moreover, they  are more likely to 
hold administrative positions (where 45% of all employees are women) than STEM- related jobs 
(just 28% of which are held by women).179 A 2019 survey from IRENA identified cultural norms, a 
lack of gender -sensitive policies or training opportunities, and an inequity in ownership of assets as 
the main barriers to women’s advancement in the energy access sector.180 However, multiple 
studies have demonstrated that women are equally, if not better, able to communicate the benefits 
of energy access, and make sales at comparable or higher rates than men when given similar opportunities.
181, 182  
 
This is a difficult time for many women in the workforce of energy access companies. We know that 
the COVID -19 crisis is disproportionately affecting female workers, as they must meet the added 
burdens of daytime childcare and even additional household members while still fulfilling the 
requirements of their  jobs.183 This struggle was summarized by a UN policy brief on the gendered 
effects of the pandemic: “Compounded economic impacts are felt especially by women and girls 
who are generally earning less, saving less, and holding insecure jobs or living close t o poverty.”184 
Women, minorities, and other vulnerable workers face a dangerous and familiar outcome, of being the last hired in an economic upswing and the first fired in a crisis.
185 
 
179 Ibid., p. 35.  
180 Ibid., p. 59.  
181 Clean Cooking Alliance, 2015.  
182 Value for Women, 2018.  
183 World Economic Forum, 2020.  
184 UN, 2020.  
185 Bloomberg, 2020.


---
*Page 148*
---

Page 145  
 
 
The EARF is meant to mitigate this risk through the use of covenants tha t will require energy access 
firms to use 80% of the funds they receive to pay employee salaries and/or commissions. 
Furthermore, priority will be given to eligible firms that are owned and led by women. Lastly, 
companies receiving EARF funding will be exp ected to maintain or improve the gender balance of 
their staff and agent network while the loan is being repaid. In order to achieve this, companies will 
be expected to provide retention and recruitment plans for women employees and agents, and will 
be given guidance on how to adopt flexible work policies. Companies will verify their adherence to 
these covenants through regular data reporting, which can be verified by the Fund Manager and 
independent third parties, as necessary.  
 
Customers  
Women are the primary users of energy in a household, and are among the prime beneficiaries of 
access to modern energy services. Numerous studies have highlighted the benefits of modern 
energy for women: solar lanterns provide light for studying, reduce security risks, and displace 
dirty, harmful kerosene lanterns.186 In one study, women using kerosene lanterns were nine times 
as likely to contract tuberculosis.187 Clean, efficient cookstoves bring down the time that women 
and girls must spend gathering fuel, while also re ducing household air pollution, a major public 
health risk that kills over 4 million people annually and disproportionately affects women and 
girls.188 Particularly during a pandemic that can cause lethal respiratory infections, the benefits of 
modern energ y and cooking are needed more than ever.  
 
Energy also plays a major role in increasing productivity and effectiveness of the work that men 
and women do.189 In East Africa alone, solar home system companies have helped to create the 
equivalent of over one million additional jobs, of which 52% have gone to women, bringing them an 
additional $552 per year.190 The EARF is meant to enable these benefits to continue, by funding 
companies to maintain their operations and customer service, while expanding sales to new customers. Without the EARF, millions of households and tens of millions of beneficiaries will not 
be able to access clean, modern, renewable energy.  
 
 
186 Energia, 2019.  
187 Bates et al., 2013.   
188 WHO, n.d.  
189 SEAR, 2017.  
190 GOGLA, 2020.


---
*Page 149*
---

Page 146  
 
Vulnerabilities and Mitigation Strategies  
 
EARF’s focus is on protecting the gains made so far by the energy access sector, maintaining service 
to existing renewable energy adopters, and safeguarding the future sales and impact that will be 
made by companies during the recovery from COVID- 19. Our response strategies are aimed at 
protecting the liquidity of  viable energy access companies, and ensuring that there ability to serve 
current customers and reach new ones is not affected.  
 
EARF intends to focus on two main areas to ensure that women’s role as agents and beneficiaries of 
energy access is not only maintained, but increased:  
 
- Protecting female staff and agents. The EARF will specifically ask companies to provide 
plans for retaining vulnerable staff, including women, and maintaining or increasing the 
share of women in their employ. Companies will then be expected to adhere to those plans 
while using concessional finance. An indirect benefit of this approach is that female agents 
and call center operatives have been shown to be particularly effective at marketing the 
benefits of energy products to other women. This contributes to the second key area.  
- Ensuring ongoing access to renewable energy products. By maintaining liquidity, supply 
lines, and staffing, the EARF helps to preserve ongoing access to critical products. Families who are confined to ru ral households will be able to purchase high -quality solar products or 
cookstoves, while existing adopters will still be able to reach a customer service or maintenance representative to fix any product issues.  
 
Incorporating Local Knowledge and Skills  
 
Acumen has developed and published a Gender Sensitivity Policy that guides its investments and 
implementation in all programmes. For the EARF, we see a clear opportunity to empower 
companies that have been forward -thinking and progressive in their promotion of women to senior 
leadership positions and their reliance on women on the frontlines of energy access distribution, sales, finance, and service. We will encourage greater participation of women at the board level, 
ensure equal opportunity on the investing  team, and do the same at the investee level. We will also 
comply with the Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC, respectively. And we acknowledge the acute dangers posed by the current crisis to women around the world, as 
highlighted in the UN Secretary General’s recent policy brief on the issue.  
 
Acumen has repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to gender equality and sensitivity, and we 
intend to continue to do so. In 2015 Acumen published a report, along with the International Center 
for Research on Women: Women and Social Enterprises: How Gender Integration Can Boost


---
*Page 150*
---

Page 147  
 
Entrepreneurial Solutions to Poverty.191 In 2018, Acumen partnered with Unilever to package its 
years of impact assessment insights into a series of toolkits,  A Lean Data H ow-To Guide: 
Understanding Gender Impact.192 And in 2020, research between 60 Decibels and GOGLA helped to 
fully communicate the depths of the struggle that off -grid energy customers were experiencing 
during the pandemic. Through this work, Acumen has devel oped new and better ways of listening 
to customers, and continues to believe wholeheartedly in its core tenets of putting vulnerable 
customers at the center of our work and empowering the companies which demonstrate an ability 
to serve them.  
 
Challenging G ender Stereotypes  
 
EARF will aim to protect the jobs of vulnerable female employees and agents at energy access 
companies . Women’s employment at all levels of the company workforce, particularly in a 
traditionally male dominated sector, challenges gender stereotypes and increases positive gender 
relations. It can cause a shift in power dynamics and relationships in the household and community.
193   
EARF will also encourage greater marketing towards women as energy customers and 
entrepreneu rs, women participation at the board level, and ensure equal opportunity at the 
investing team and investee level.  
We will comply with Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC respectively.  
  
 
191 Acumen, 2015.  
192 Acumen, 2019a , Acumen 2019b . 
193 https://www.energia.org/cm2/wp -content/uploads/2020/02/RA7 -Womens -Energy -Entrepreneurship -
Evidence -Report -Final.pdf  pg 18.


---
*Page 151*
---

Page 148  
 
Sierra Leone Gender Assessment  
Key Statistics on Gender Equality  
 
Sierra Leone was ranked 105 out of 120 in the 2019 Social Institutions and Gender Index with a 
score of .476 and 111 out of 153 in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index with a score of 0.668. Sierra 
Leone also ranked 153 out of 162 countries on  the Gender Inequality Index, with a score of .644. All 
indices are on a 0 -1 scale. For the SIGI and Gender Inequality indices, 0 points to complete equality 
and 1 to complete inequality. For the Global Gender Gap Index, the opposite holds true.  
 
Maternal mortality rate (2017)  1120 (2017)  World Bank  
Infant mortality rate  78.5 (2018)  World Bank  
Adult literacy rate  34.9% female, 51.6% male 
(2018)  World Bank  
Employment to Population 
Ratio, age 15+  55.2% female, 55.4% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Unemployment Rate (% of 
respective labor force)  3.6% female, 5.2% male 
(2019)  World Bank  
Life Expectancy  55.1 years (female), 53.5 years 
(male) (2018)  World Bank  
 
Political Participation   
 
Women’s participation in political life, especially in decision making positions remains low in Sierra 
Leone, and influenced by their husbands or other patriarchal figures as well as prevailing cultural 
and traditional attitudes.194 Although there are no national quotas for women, women are granted 
equal repres entation in subnational governance apparatus like ward committees and local 
government, and women’s rights to contest for Chieftaincy in parallel governments is also 
 
194 ODI 2012


---
*Page 152*
---

Page 149  
 
recognized. Despite such efforts, only 12.3% of Sierra Leone’s parliamentarians (18 out of  146) are 
women.195   
 
Division of Labour and Participation in the Economy  
According to the World Bank, 49.7% of the labor force is female.  
Sierra Leone is a low income country with a GDP of under US$ 5billion (PPP). Two thirds of the 
population practices subsistence agriculture, which accounts for over half of the country’s GDP. Sierra Leone also exports commodities like diamonds, aluminum, titanium and cocoa beans.  
59% of adult women are employed and women make up 49.7% of the overall labor force.
196 They 
are most likely to work in low -income, informal occupations. 51% of employed women work in 
agriculture, compared to 58% of all men. 41% of women work in wholesale and retail trade, 1.5% 
in education and 0.6% construction and manufacturing, respectively. Me anwhile, 6.3% of men work 
in construction, 4.4% in transport and storage, and 2% in construction jobs.197 Although there are 
laws protecting women’s rights to work and equal pay, women continue to experience 
discrimination with regard to access to employment, especially in formal sector.198 
 
Accessibility of Project Services and Technology  
Women are fully able  and encouraged to purchase and use energy services from companies 
financed by the EARF. In fact, some companies have targeted marketing strategies for women 
customers such as selling directly to women’s village savings groups.   
Even operating in markets w here women do not always have control over purchasing decisions, 
approximately a third of the customer base of energy access companies is female, although there is 
significant variation between companies selling clean cookstoves (where women are 52% of 
customers), solar lanterns (38%), solar home systems (32%) and microgrids (25%).199  
Because the energy products or services are generally for the household the customer data does not necessarily correspond with who is benefitting from the products. In other w ords, even where 
customer data indicates that most customers are men, we know that women are benefitting from 
the energy access in the home. This also illustrates the importance of Acumen’s lean data approach 
to gain such insights beyond who is simply the purchaser.  
 
195 Inter- Parliamentary Union (IPU), Geneva, 2020  
196 World Development Indicators, 2020.  
197 ILOstat 2020  
198 US Dept. of State, 201 7 
199 Acumen


---
*Page 153*
---

Page 150  
 
Women also make up 32% of the energy access workforce, compared to 22% of the workforce in oil 
and gas.200 
 
Needs and Priorities of Men and Women in EARF  
 
For the EARF programme, there are two contexts in which it is critical to examine the diffe rent 
needs/priorities of men and women: as employees/agents of energy access companies, and as 
customers of those same companies.  
 
Employment  
 
Although the energy access sector does a better job of employing women than does the oil and gas 
sector, women are still currently a minority in the workforce. Moreover, they  are more likely to 
hold administrative positions (where 45% of all employees are women) than STEM- related jobs 
(just 28% of which are held by women).201 A 2019 survey from IRENA identifi ed cultural norms, a 
lack of gender -sensitive policies or training opportunities, and an inequity in ownership of assets as 
the main barriers to women’s advancement in the energy access sector.202 However, multiple 
studies have demonstrated that women are e qually, if not better, able to communicate the benefits 
of energy access, and make sales at comparable or higher rates than men when given similar 
opportunities.203, 204  
 
This is a difficult time for many women in the workforce of energy access companies. We  know that 
the COVID -19 crisis is disproportionately affecting female workers, as they must meet the added 
burdens of daytime childcare and even additional household members while still fulfilling the 
requirements of their jobs.205 This struggle was summari zed by a UN policy brief on the gendered 
effects of the pandemic: “Compounded economic impacts are felt especially by women and girls who are generally earning less, saving less, and holding insecure jobs or living close to poverty.”
206 
 
200 IRENA, 2019.   
201 Ibid., p. 35.  
202 Ibid., p. 59.  
203 Clean Cooking Alliance, 2015.  
204 Value for Women, 2018.  
205 World Economic Forum, 2020.  
206 UN, 2020.


---
*Page 154*
---

Page 151  
 
Women, minorities, a nd other vulnerable workers face a dangerous and familiar outcome, of being 
the last hired in an economic upswing and the first fired in a crisis.207 
 
The EARF is meant to mitigate this risk through the use of covenants that will require energy access 
firms  to use 80% of the funds they receive to pay employee salaries and/or commissions. 
Furthermore, priority will be given to eligible firms that are owned and led by women. Lastly, 
companies receiving EARF funding will be expected to maintain or improve the g ender balance of 
their staff and agent network while the loan is being repaid. In order to achieve this, companies will be expected to provide retention and recruitment plans for women employees and agents, and will 
be given guidance on how to adopt flexible work policies. Companies will verify their adherence to 
these covenants through regular data reporting, which can be verified by the Fund Manager and 
independent third parties, as necessary.  
 
Customers  
Women are the primary users of energy in a househol d, and are among the prime beneficiaries of 
access to modern energy services. Numerous studies have highlighted the benefits of modern energy for women: solar lanterns provide light for studying, reduce security risks, and displace 
dirty, harmful kerosene lanterns.
208 In one study, women using kerosene lanterns were nine times 
as likely to contract tuberculosis.209 Clean, efficient cookstoves bring down the time that women 
and girls must spend gathering fuel, while also reducing household air pollution, a maj or public 
health risk that kills over 4 million people annually and disproportionately affects women and girls.
210 Particularly during a pandemic that can cause lethal respiratory infections, the benefits of 
modern energy and cooking are needed more than ever.  
 
Energy also plays a major role in increasing productivity and effectiveness of the work that men 
and women do.211 In East Africa alone, solar home system companies have helped to create the 
equivalent of over one million additional jobs, of which 52% have gone to women, bringing them an additional $552 per year.
212 The EARF is meant to enable these benefits to continue, by funding 
companies to maintain their operations and customer service, while expanding sales to new 
 
207 Bloomberg, 2020.  
208 Energia, 2019.  
209 Bates et al., 2013.   
210 WHO, n.d.  
211 SEAR, 2017.  
212 GOGLA, 2020.


---
*Page 155*
---

Page 152  
 
customers. Without the EARF, millions of households and tens of millions of beneficiaries will not 
be able to access clean, modern, renewable energ y. 
 
Vulnerabilities and Mitigation Strategies  
 
EARF’s focus is on protecting the gains made so far by the energy access sector, maintaining service 
to existing renewable energy adopters, and safeguarding the future sales and impact that will be made by companies during the recovery from COVID- 19. Our r esponse strategies are aimed at 
protecting the liquidity of viable energy access companies, and ensuring that there ability to serve 
current customers and reach new ones is not affected.  
 
EARF intends to focus on two main areas to ensure that women’s role  as agents and beneficiaries of 
energy access is not only maintained, but increased:  
 
- Protecting female staff and agents. The EARF will specifically ask companies to provide 
plans for retaining vulnerable staff, including women, and maintaining or increasi ng the 
share of women in their employ. Companies will then be expected to adhere to those plans 
while using concessional finance. An indirect benefit of this approach is that female agents 
and call center operatives have been shown to be particularly effec tive at marketing the 
benefits of energy products to other women. This contributes to the second key area.  
- Ensuring ongoing access to renewable energy products. By maintaining liquidity, supply 
lines, and staffing, the EARF helps to preserve ongoing access  to critical products. Families 
who are confined to rural households will be able to purchase high -quality solar products or 
cookstoves, while existing adopters will still be able to reach a customer service or maintenance representative to fix any product  issues.  
 
Incorporating Local Knowledge and Skills  
 
Acumen has developed and published a Gender Sensitivity Policy that guides its investments and 
implementation in all programmes. For the EARF, we see a clear opportunity to empower 
companies that have bee n forward -thinking and progressive in their promotion of women to senior 
leadership positions and their reliance on women on the frontlines of energy access distribution, 
sales, finance, and service. We will encourage greater participation of women at the board level, 
ensure equal opportunity on the investing team, and do the same at the investee level. We will also 
comply with the Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC, respectively. And we 
acknowledge the acute dangers posed by the current crisis to women around the world, as 
highlighted in the UN Secretary General’s recent policy brief on the issue.


---
*Page 156*
---

Page 153  
A
cumen has repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to gender equality and sensitivity, and we 
intend to continue to do so. In 2015 Acumen published a report, along with the International Center 
for Research on Women: Women and Social Enterprises: How Gender Integration Can Boost 
Entrepreneurial Solutions to Poverty.213 In 2018, Acumen partnered with Unilever to package its 
years of impact assessment insights into a series of toolkits,  A Lean Data How- To Guide: 
Understanding Gender Impact.214 And in 2020, research between 60 Decibels and GOGLA helped to 
fully communicate the depths of the struggle that off -grid energy customers were experiencing 
during the pandemic. Through this work, Acumen has developed new and better ways of listening 
to customers, and continues to believe wholeheartedly in its core tenets of putting vulnerable 
customers at the center of our work and empowering the companies which demonstrate an ability to serve them.  
Challenging Gender Stereotypes  
EA
RF will aim to protect the jobs of vulnerable female employees and agents at energy access 
companies . Women’s employment at all levels of the company workforce, particularly in a 
traditionally male dominated sector, challenges gender stereotypes and increases positive gender 
relations. It can cause a shift in power dynamics and relationships in the household and community.
215   
EARF will also encourage greater marketing towards women as energy customers and entrepreneurs, women participation at the board level, and ensure equal opportunity at the 
investing team and investee level.  
We will comply with Gender Equality Standards as defined by the ILO and IFC respectively.  
213 Acumen, 2015.  
214 Acumen, 2019a , Acumen 2019b . 
215 https://www.e nergia.org/cm2/wp -content/uploads/2020/02/RA7 -Womens -Energy -Entrepreneurship -
Evidence -Report -Final.pdf  pg 18.


---
*Page 157*
---

Page 154  
GENDER ACTION PLAN – ENERGY ACCESS RELIEF FUND  
I
mpact statement: Continued operations by energy access companies ensures employment opportunities for women towards increased 
economic empowerment; and improved customer service and increased sales to customers by women employees and sales agents leads 
to increased company growth and efficiency in the long term enjoyed by more gender -diverse companies  
Outcome statement: 1)  3,150 women employed in the off- grid energy sector in selected African countries retain employment and are 
supported by a more gender -inclusive workplace with equal opportunity, flexible working, and protection from sexual harassment 2) a 
gender lens applied to the administration of relief funding for covid -19 recovery enables companies to ensure that the renewable energy 
access needs of their male and female customers and potential customers are considered and met.  
Output statement: Significant  funding disbursed to enable and support companies to  retain 3,150 women employees and create more 
gender -inclusive workplaces 
ACTIVITIES  BASELINE  TARGETS  INDICATORS  TIMELINE  RESPONSIBILITY  
Prioritize eligible (flagged for 
IC) women owned/led (51% or 
more ownership/leadership) 
companies for funding  N/A  6 # of women 
owned/led companies for funding  12 months 
from the first GCF capital call  EARF Investment 
Committee


---
*Page 158*
---

Page 155  
Require 1 -page summary of a 
company’s demonstrated 
commitment and approach to 
retaining female full -time and 
contracted employees during 
the immediate crisis, and weighting that summary in the eligibility/investment criteria at IC level  N/A  100% of 
applicants # Retention plans 
for female full -
time and 
contracted 
employees included in proposal and score  12 months  SIMA  
In same 1 -page summary, 
require company to demonstrate its commitment and approach to increasing 
their share of female employees 
long -term, and weighting that 
summary in the eligibility/investment criteria at IC level  N/A  100% of 
applicants  # Recruitment 
plans for female full-time and 
contracted 
employees 
included in proposal and score  12 months  SIMA  
Support companies that do not 
have a gender empowerment plan to undertake a gender 
baseline assessment and develop a plan within 90 days of 
signing loan agreement  Companies have not 
undertaken gender 
baseline assessments or gender action plans  100% of 
company beneficiaries submit a gender action plan or 
complete a 
gender baseline 
assessment and develop a  plan  Gender baseline 
assessment and gender action plan submitted to SIMA by each company  3 months 
of company signing loan agreement Acumen Gender 
Expert


---
*Page 159*
---

Page 156  
N/A  
Require companies to collect 
and report customer data 
disaggregated by sex to 
understand the number of female customers benefitting from off -grid energy services 
and products.  # of companies 
collecting sex -
disaggregated 
customer data 
(number of customers m/f) to be determined following company gender baseline 
assessments  All companies 
collect sex -
disaggregated customer data 
(number of customers m/f)  # of male and 
female custome rs 
reported at 
baseline and end 
of loan agreement  For the full 
Fund tenor (4 years 
with 
possibility of two 1-year extensions)  SIMA  
Develop anonymous employee 
engagement survey with a focus on gender -inclusion and have 
companies administer within 
90 days of signing loan 
agreement and at end of loan term.  Companies do not 
currently administer employee 
engagement survey 
with a focus on gender inclusion  All companies 
administer employee engagement 
survey twice 
during loan agreement  Baseline summary 
findings of employee engagement 
survey and final 
summary findings of employee engagement survey  For the full 
Fund tenor (4 years with 
possi bility 
of two 1-
year extensions)  Acumen Gender 
Expert and SIMA  
Synthesize gender -specific 
lessons learned and disseminate to wider sector and AE staff  N/A  Two (2) Publications or 
webinars with a dedicated focus or sub- focus on 
gender issues in 
energy access  Fund tenor  Acumen Gender 
Expert, Acumen 
staff, and SIMA