=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/CreationDate: D:20251013134826+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20756
/ModDate: D:20251014093843+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20756


---
*Page 1*
---

This document is prepared and transmitted for consideration by the GCF Board at a Board meeting. It is published on the GCF p ublic 
website in that context, which does not imply a presumed outcome. Decisions taken in relation to this document and updates to  it, if any, 
will be made publicly available in accordance with applicable GCF policies.
Meeting of the Board  
27 – 30 October 202 5 
Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 10 GCF/B.43/0 2/Add.29 
14 October 2025  
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum XXIX 
Funding proposal package f or FP 264  
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven  parts:  
a)A funding proposal summary titled “ Prosperete Growth Fund”  by Prosperet e
I
nvestment Management Ltd ;
b)No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or foc al
p
oint(s);
c)Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat ’s assessment of the Project -specific Assessment Approach (PSAA)
Applicant;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;
f)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g)Gender documentation of the funding proposal.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.43/02 /Add.29  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Content  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  82 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure  86 
Secretariat’s assessment of the Project -specific Assessment Approach (PSAA) Applicant;  89 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment  115 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s 
assessment   125 
Gender documentation  127 
  
 
Disclaimer :  
The designations and the presentation of the materials used in this document, including their respective 
citations, maps and references, have been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Green Climate Fund concerning the legal status 
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers 
or boundaries. Also, the boundaries and names shown, and the designations used in this document have 
been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by 
the Green Climate Fund.  
Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal is being 
circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure 
confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally pr ivileged or commercially sensitive information of the 
entity.


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Prosperete Growth Fund  
Country(ies):  Bangladesh, India, Mauritius   
Accredited Entity:  Prosperete Investment Management Ltd.  (Submission under 
PSAA)  
Date of first submission:  [2024 /05/18]  
Date of current submission  [2025/05 /12]  
Version number  [V.020]


---
*Page 4*
---

GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
 Contents 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill o ut information on disclosure in section G.4 .   
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name]- [Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1  
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Private  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets  
below . For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co -
financers’ contribution  devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively.  
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total  70 % 70 % 
☒ Energy generation and access 25 % 25 % 
☒ Low-emission transport  25 % 25 % 
☒ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  20 % 20 % 
☐ Forestry and land use  0 % 0 % 
Adaptation total  30 % 30 % 
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  10 % 10 % 
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  10 % 10 % 
☒ Infrastructure and built environment  10 % 10 % 
☐ Ecosystems and ecosystem services  0 % 0 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  9.2mn tonne  A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)  3.2mn  
Direct: 1. 7mn Indirect: 1.5mn 
0.1%  0.1% 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance2)  USD 220 million   
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  USD 50 million  
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal.  
2 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2  
 A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for the 
GCF funding Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent with A.8.  
☐ Grant  Enter number   
☐ Loan  Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☒ Equity – Junior / Concessional USD 50 million 
☐ Results -based payment   Enter number  
A.11. 
Implementation 
period  12 years (10 years plus  
two 1- year extensions)  
Investment period – five  
years from initial close  A.12. Total lifespan  12 years maximum fund life  
 
A.13. Expected date 
of AE internal 
approval  This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/ 
programme, if available.  
 
Click or tap to enter a date.  
 A.14. ESS category  I-2 
A.15. Has this FP 
been submitted as a 
CN before?  Yes ☒  No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☐  No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the 
entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒  No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☐  No ☒ 
A.19. 
Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, etc.)? If yes, please 
elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
A.20. Executing 
Entity information   
The Accredited Entity ( AE) is:  
 
• Prosperete Investment Management Ltd.: An investment manager ("IM"), incorporated as a 
company limited by shares with a Global Business License (GBL) and licensed as a Collective 
Investment Scheme (CIS) Manager by the Financial Services Commission, Mauritius (FSC).  
The executing entities are:  
 
• The Fund: Prosperete Growth Fund I: A fund in Mauritius (the "Fund" or "Prosperete Growth Fund") 
incorporated as a company limited by shares with a GBL and licensed as a closed- ended fund ("CEF") 
by the FSC.  
• The Investment Manager i.e. Prosperete Investment Management Ltd.  
 
• The Sub- Advisor: Prosperete Growth Advisors LLP, a Limited Liability Partnership established under 
the laws of India. This entity is the investment sub- advisor to the Mauritius IM .


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3  
 A.21. Executive summary  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Climate change problem  
1. Climate change has emerged as the paramount challenge confronting humanity, particularly pronounced in Emerging 
Markets (EMs) worldwide. These regions face heightened vulnerability to the impacts of climate change, which 
necessitates building resilience of the vulnerable population, which can be achieved by increasing access to mitigation 
and adaptation solutions in these markets along their financial capacity.  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) forecasts that temperature increases in various EMs will surpass the global mean rise, leading to significant 
repercussions in health, agriculture, and food security.  
2. Countries such as Bangladesh, India  and Mauritius  (Target Countries) are significantly impacted by climate change, 
experiencing a variety of effects from rising temperatures and sea levels to increased frequency of extreme weather events.  Nearly 1 billion people in developing countries live in low -elevation coastal zones, with mega- cities  like Dhaka, 
Mumbai,  and large parts of Bangladesh are at very high risk of flooding
1. 2.3 billion face water stress, with emerging 
markets particularly affected due to under -developed food and water systems.2 Small Island Nations have been facing 
severe effects of climate change, for instance a ccentuated beach erosion has shrunk the width of the beaches around 
certain coastal areas by up to 20 m over the last few decades  in Mauritius.3 
a. Excessive Rainfall/Flooding  In Bangladesh, flooding damages crops and infrastructure, affecting regions like 
Chattogram. India faces crop damage and infrastructure issues, resulting in $1.5 billion in damages since 2019. Future 
scenarios predict increased rainfall variability and intensity . 
b. Drought/Water Scarcity  currently affects millions; 30% of Bangladesh's population and 18.75 million people in India 
face chronic water scarcity. Projections indicate worsening drought conditions due to increased temperatures and erratic rainfall, threatening water resources and agricultural productivity. Rainfall in Mauritius has seen a decline of 8% 
on average since the 1950s.
4 
c. Heat Waves are increasingly frequent  and intense, with Bangladesh experiencing record- breaking temperatures and 
India seeing a 14.7% rise  in heat -related mortality.  
d. Tropical Cyclones  Cyclone Amphan in Bangladesh affected 2.6 million people, while Cyclone Tauktae in India caused 
$8.3 billion in damages. Future projections suggest an increase in cyclone intensity and frequency.  
e. Sea Level Rise threatens coastal areas; Bangladesh, India and Mauritius face annual rises of 3- 6 mm, with projections 
of up to 1.5 meters by 2100, leading to land loss, displacement, and economic impacts.   
f. Annexure 23 presents  a summary of hazards baseline and future scenario for Bangladesh, India  and Mauritius  
3. Emerging economies need to balance the dual objectives of ensuring inclusive growth and fighting climate change. By 
2050, nations currently classified as EMs are projected to house 88% of the global population and their share of global GDP is expected to increase from 50% today to 62%
5. Estimates suggest 88% of the growth in electricity demand between 
2019 and 2040 is expected to come from EMs6. A focus on climate -friendly  growth is essential as most of the factories, 
buildings, vehicles, and power plants for emerging economies are yet to be built. Ensuring such growth in EMs will be critical for global climate goals, particularly for the most vulnerable. According to the IFC, the climate transition presents a USD 29.4 trillion investment opportunity in Emerging Markets
7. 
4. Target countries  contribute to 7. 9% of global  GHG  emissions , this share has increased from 5. 6% at the turn of the 
century8. There exists an urgent need to decouple growth and environmental degradation.  Investments in energy transition 
and cooling are critical  as India's per capita cooling demand was 69 kWh in 2020, far below the world average, but is 
expected to increase as India faces increasingly frequent heat waves9. In Bangladesh, fossil fuels make up 77% of the 
energy mix, contributing to 34% of emissions. The transportation sector is heavily reliant on fossil fuels and the country's NDC prioritizes energy efficiency investments. Similarly, c oal and oil form more than 85% of the energy mix for Mauritius
10.  
5. Prosperete has received a NOL from the Economic Relations Division, Ministry of Finance, Bangladesh.  Prosperete 
has a NOL issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change , India , the NDA for GCF. Mauritius 
is key for Prosperete to catalyse climate finance for emerging markets in general and SIDS countries in particular, as it is a globally accepted investment destination for investors , and Prosperete has received an NOL from Ministry of 
Finance, Mauritius . There has been consultation with all three country NDAs and strong country ownership from 
Bangladesh, India and Mauritius.  Prosperete is collaborating with the Government of Mauritius to build climate capacity 
on island nation, including assistance in development of  climate programs, promoting global climate finance awareness, 
and establishing green finance education initiatives to position Mauritius as a regional hub for sustainable finance.  
6. While many emerging markets  are actively developing climate solutions, progress is not uniform. Some markets remain 
in the nascent stages of establishing robust climate ecosystems. It might  take years for these economies to tread growth 
trajectories and develop climate solutions. The world is in urgent need of accelerating climate action. An integrated 
approach is essential, wherein markets exchange solutions with one another. A collaborative approach not only provides  
nascent markets access to climate solutions but also accelerates progress by avoiding duplicate efforts. Furthermore, it 
fosters the continued creation and expansion of climate ecosystems on a global scale.  
7. As part of this integrated approach,  technology transfer  among emerging markets is essential for developing resilient 
ecosystems and addressing climate change. Sharing innovations across mitigation and adaptation solutions can


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 4 
 accelerate the transition to low -carbon economies. This exchange enhances technological capabilities, reduces costs, and 
promotes the adoption of best practices, fostering economic growth and creation of new climate companies . 
Proposed interventions  
Prosperete invest s in scalable climate solutions and facilitates technology transfer across emerging markets for 
widescale adoption to mobilize large -scale private capital. Proliferation and exchange of the best technologies will 
create a shared climate funding  ecosystem across emerging markets , accelerating development in each country  and 
benefitting communities  by enabling access to affordable climate solutions .  
8. Prosperete is raising  a USD 220mn growth equity fund to promote SMEs  and startups  focused on climate mitigation 
and adaptation by leveraging technology and / or business models to provide solutions at scale. The fund utiliz es a blended 
structure to catalyse  private capital for climate investments into emerging markets, which are not able to mobilize the 
funding required with the required urgency.   
9. The Fund will invest across both mitigation and adaptation solutions, and has identified four thematic verticals that 
represent the new landscape of low -carbon solutions :  
9.1 Energy Transition: The Fund is looking to invest in companies that provide energy storage solutions, distributed 
energy systems, and solutions that modernize grids to increase renewable energy adoption. In energy efficiency, the 
Fund intends to address challenges such as knowledge gaps and high upfront costs by investing in monit oring, pay -
as-you-go models, and industrial efficiency solutions.  
9.2 Low Emission Transport: Transportation  and logistics sectors are witnessing significant transformations. These 
advancements are fostering rapid innovation across battery technology, equipment manufacturing, charging and 
swapping ecosystems. Growth of these sectors  also requires investment in appropriate financing solutions.  
9.3 Food and Water Security: The Fund aims to invest in agriculture and food security by promoting superior technologies, 
sustainable farming techniques and increasing climate resilience, aiming to increase productivity. Additionally, the Fund plans to address water security by implementing energy -efficient water systems and improving waste- water 
treatment, aiming to enhance adaptive capacity . 
9.4 Urban environment and data systems: The Fund’s investments target the development of sustainable urban 
infrastructure and climate information systems to mitigate barriers like inadequate waste treatment and emissions monitoring. By promoting low -carbon building materials and renewable energy  solutions, the Fund aims to reduce 
GHG emissions, enhance urban resilience, and improve disaster preparedness . 
10. Prosperete has done extensive work, for more than two years , to develop a pipeline of climate companies and design 
appropriate interventions for growth in climate solutions. Prosperete enables  global expansion  through a multi- pronged 
approach – i) Evaluate global scalability of companies before investment and help develop country -specific expansion 
plans and ii) Work with portfolio companies utilizing its global network and expertise to execute expansion, and iii) Leverage 
partnerships with institutions and funds across its focus markets to enable flow of knowledge and investments amongst different markets.  Prosperete has been working with its pipeline companies to enable expansion to other markets using 
experience and network.  
11. Prosperete has identified and evaluated several climate solutions that can scale and expand across emerging markets that are encountering similar challenges.  These companies have developed solutions across solar -powered water pump, 
low-carbon building material  etc. and are now seeking growth equity to fulfil increasing demand.  With Prosperete’s 
investment , these companies will be able to scale. Increase affordability and achieve their goal of deploying these solutions 
across different markets and enable technology transfer. Ability to enable technology transfer and  work across multiple 
geographies is a key evaluation criterion for Prosperete. Several  of sample pipeline companies already have multi -country 
presence or planning for in the near -term. 
12. Such exchange of solutions will help companies increase addressable market , reduce cost due to scale, and solve climate 
problems at large. As solutions scale in nascent markets, they are expected to enable creation of ecosystems through 
increased entrepreneurship, expertise of local financiers in climate, and increased availability  of capital.  
13. Creating more growth stage funds is critical to advancing progress on climate change in emerging markets. Our research 
highlights only 9% of c limate companies in EMs  successfully transition to  growth stage after seed funding, 
compared to the global average of 27% for similar companies
11. This stark difference underscores the critical funding 
gap, which  hinder s the efforts of promising climate start -ups to expand operations. This creates higher risk perception for 
the climate investing ecosystem, while the underlying reason is missing growth stage capital. Without such growth capital, 
climate solutions plateau at early stages of development . IEA estimates  that approximately 75% emissions reduction by 
2050 is expected to come from technologies not yet mature, with 41% reduction from technologies currently under early 
adoption12. 
14. Prosperete is focus ed on growth stage climate start-ups, S mall and M edium Enterprises (SMEs) , and companies , investing 
ticket sizes of USD 5 million – USD 2 0 million and on Prosperete team’s  core expertise of scaling businesses. Prosperete 
has identified 2,000+ companies and solutions in the climate and sustainability space undertaking market  study , and 
spoken to more than 100+ companies , receiving feedback that founders find it difficult to raise funds  at the growth stage.


---
*Page 9*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 5 
 Climate results/benefits  
15. The purpose of the Prosperete Fund is to help create global enterprises that address climate mitigation and adaptation in 
Emerging Markets and can attract large scale commercial institutional capital and thereby urgently address the needs of 
vulnerable populations in these markets. The Fund  will provide growth capital along with support for market expansion, 
technology and strategic decision making, team building, and ESG. This growth capital will ensure the company transitions  
to a large organisation, including by replicating its innovations and success across Emerging Markets.  
16. Prosperete’s approach of technology transfer and development of local financiers’ capacity will allow markets to evolve 
rapidly. This evolution of markets will be achieved through better availability of affordable climate mitigation and adaptati on 
solutions, increased number of growing startups, as well as increased flow of climate investments through local financier’s 
capacity building and reduced perceived risk of international investors. Over the coming years and subsequent funds, these markets will be able to foster development of solutions and enable multiple interventions in newer markets.  
17. Prosperete addresses the  missing middle of growth stage between early -stage capital and l ate-stage capital . Growth 
equity, along with Prosperete’s support for portfolio companies  for multi -country expansion, enables  creation of large- scale 
enterprises that can successfully crowd- in late -stage private capital.  Prosperete has extensively engaged with late- stage 
investors, who are keen to invest in climate sectors in emerging markets but fail to find large scale companies  that can 
attract investments of USD 100mn+ ticket size.  
18. Identification of most -suitable solution across markets and scaled d eployment can not only reduce emissions, but also 
enhance access to services, create jobs, increase resilience of infrastructure assets , and build local capacity . Additionally, 
deployment of these solutions at scale will ensure that these critical climate related solutions and products are available at affordable prices to underserved communities.  
19. Mitigation Impact (MRA 1, MRA 2, MRA 3) : Prosperete’s investment diligence  includes mandatory climate assessment, 
including product lifecycle emissions to present  a comprehensive view , in-line with global standards. Based on a sample 
portfolio, Prosperete Growth Fund will enable  direct and indirect  mitigation of estimated 9 million tons+ of carbon emissions 
based on a USD 220mn fund.  
20. Adaptation  Impact  (ARA 1, ARA 2, and ARA 3) : Through its investments , Prosperete will enhance resilience of climate 
hazards  and increase access to resources (energy, water, building materials, etc.) for about 3 .2 million direct and indirect 
beneficiaries.  Focus areas for the fund include agriculture productivity , water conservation, and infrastructure resilience.  
21. Prosperete enab les companies with solutions in the T arget Countries to verify emissions reductions  by mapping operations 
to relevant CDM, Verra or Gold Standard methodologies  for estimating the mitigation impact created by virtue of the 
company’s operations. The calculations for emissions are done in accordance with ISO 14064 (for company level 
consolidation) and/or ISO 14067 (for product level consolidation) standards.   
22. Prosperete team has seen the positive impacts of the scale up of technologies such as mobile telephony and distributed 
solar energy which,  when scaled,  have  transformed the lives of people across developing countries.  The Fund intends  to 
replicate these outcomes in emerging climate solutions to enable widespread adoption.  
Prosperete’s Project Development with GCF  
23. The Prosperete team began engaging with GCF in 2023 and,  since then , the GCF secretariat has conducted detailed 
diligence, including external reviews , of Prosperete’s proposal. The location of the AE entity in the structure is in line with 
the fund thesis  with Mauritius being a Target Country .  
24. In 2025, climate action faces growing opposition amid economic uncertainty, geopolitical tensions, and domestic 
pressures, leading to a more cautious investment environment. Capital is increasingly directed toward domestic priorities in developed markets, while cross -border climate investments , especially in emerging markets , are declining. This double 
hit of reduced climate finance and reallocation is widening the investment gap in regions most vulnerable to climate change.  Concessional instruments like GCF’s junior equity can play a catalytic role by de- risking investments and 
attracting commercial capital.  
25. Prosperete has garnered interest from several institutional investors who support the F und's investment thesis but exhibit 
low-risk tolerance due to their capital profile. An anchor contribution from GCF in the form of junior equity (capped 
at 25% of the fund) would be a key catalyst in Prosperete’s progress by providing the necessary signal to other 
investors. GCF’s due diligence would serve as an endorsement, encouraging investors to consider investing in a climate fund. The availability of junior capital would further address investor concerns by offering downside protection. Prosperete has garnered interest  from multiple investors, with potential contributions exceeding USD 200 million, basis a commitment 
from GCF.  
25.1 GCF’s additionality to the Fund is already being demonstrated as Prosperete has attracted interest from another 
junior capital provider. The ability of GCF to mobilize complementary junior capital, de- risk private sector investment, 
and attract interest fr om multilaterals underscores both the strength of the Prosperete Growth Fund’s thesis and 
Prosperete’s capacity to attract a diverse investor base around climate- focused opportunities in emerging markets.


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 6  
   
  
3 Prosperete is working with the NDA of Indonesia to obtain a compliant NO L. Additional countries may join the program 
following the Board approval, provided they submit an NOL in compliance with the GCF's no-objection procedures and 
receive subsequent approval from  the GCF  Board.  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Section 1: Overview and Focus Countr ies 
1. Emerging market economies  are the most vulnerable to climate 
change impacts under all climate scenarios. Despite having 
contributed the least to global warming historically, these markets 
face exponential collateral  damage, posing systemic risks to 
economies, infrastructure investments, water and food systems, public health, agriculture, and livelihoods, threatening to undo development gains.   
2. Many emerging markets are in tropical or subtropical regions, 
making them particularly susceptible to the impacts of climate change. For instance, countries in sub- Saharan Africa, South Asia, 
and Southeast Asia face significant risks from rising sea levels, desertification, and increased frequency of extreme weather events. Research indicates  that a 2- meter rise in sea levels could displace 190 million people in Southeast Asia 
alone
13. Heatwaves  pose a significant threat to public health in these countries due to air conditioning. 
3. Prosperete has selected target countries basis (i) Prosperete team expertise (ii) country needs and priorities (iii)  evolving 
early -stage ecosystems that require growth capital to scale climate solutions, and (iv) ability to interchange solutions 
through export of solutions and expanding presence.  
4. Prosperete has identified Bangladesh, India, and Mauritius  (together referred to as ‘Target Countries’3). Prosperete 
continues to identify more emerging countries where the growth fund can participate in the acceleration of climate 
solutions. Prosperete has received the NOL from  Government of Bangladesh, Government  of India , and Government of 
Mauritius . Prosperete may add countries to the program, subject to receiving NOLs from the relevant NDA and GCF’s 
approval. Below is an overview of our country selection framework:  
5. The identified countries offer strong markets where low -cost solutions can scale due to supportive ecosystems of 
customers, financiers, talent, and institutions. These nations face pressing climate challenges and vulnerable 
populations, making scale- up capital critical for climate mitigation and adaptation. Prosperete's bespoke approach targets 
climate solutions, scaling them across Asia, Africa and other emerging markets. This cross -border strategy leverages 
similarities in climate needs, facilitating faster technology rollouts and creating global enterprises.


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 7  
   
 6. Prosperete has received encouraging feedback from the NDA of its target countries. Set out below is a table highlighting 
how the Fund is aligned with the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) of its focus countries.  
Country  Prosperete Contribution to NDC / National Plans  
Bangladesh Prosperete contributes to 6 out 9 sub-sectors  (Power, Transport, Industry, Agriculture, Residential and commercial , and 
Waste) where  the mitigation actions are being implemented. This will help achieve Bangladesh’s conditional 89.47 MtCO2e 
by 2030 compared to business as usual.  
Similarly, Prosperete address all 5 action areas for Adaptation ( Sustainable Livelihood, Disaster Management, Agriculture 
and Food Security, Water Management, and Surface Water Use and Management) Notably, Bangladesh identifies 
infrastructure as a key pillar for adaptation measures. Prosperete’s focus on technologies that allow for real time monitoring 
and predictability of performance, will help Bangladesh improve infrastructure resilience  to climate change.  
India  Prosperete contributes to 6 of 8 out of India’s NDC commitments  (#2 to #4, #6 to #8) , including achieving Green Growth, 
building Adaptation & Resilience, reducing Emission Intensity, increasing Renewable Energy capacity and adoption. 
Prosperete further contributes to India’s NDC for mobilizing funds from developed markets.  
One key pillar of India’s NDC is to build capacities, create domestic framework and international architecture for quick 
diffusion of cutting -edge climate technology in India and for joint collaborative R&D. To enable this, Prosperete is focused on 
scaling  viable solutions across EMs for large scale impact, building institutional capacity and creating an eco- system for 
climate.  
Mauritius  Prosperete contributes to 4 out of 5 sectors (Energy, Transport, Waste,  Agriculture)  where Mauritius is implementing 
mitigation measures under its NDC. Prosperete addresses 4 out 8 sectors ( Infrastructure Risk, Agriculture, Water , Cross 
Cutting ) for adaptation in Mauritius , In its updated NDC, Mauritius raised its ambition to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
by 40% in 2030 compared to business -as-usual, instead of the initial NDC target of 30%.  Prosperete will enable such 
reduction in emissions through deployment of solutions across renewable energy and energy efficiency, in line with country priorities. Mauritius has taken significant strides to establish Mauritius as a climate finance hub , especially for Africa.  Initiatives 
include the creation of the Mauritius International Financial Centre, which offers a conducive environment for green finance and sustainable investments.  
Section 2: Adaptation Impact 
Country Specific Contexts:  
7. Bangladesh is the world's seventh most climate risk -affected country, 
with 185 extreme events recorded and 0.38 fatalities per 100,000 
inhabitants over the past two decades. Bangladesh faces heightened 
risks from climate -related natural hazards, with frequent cyclones, 
storm surges, and flooding threatening coastal areas and livelihoods. Sea level rise exacerbates these risks, increasing asset vulnerability 
and impacting agriculture, water supply, and ecosystems. Challenges 
related to health, food, and water security are prevalent, including 
issues such as untreated water discharge into rivers, high mortality 
rates linked to waterborne diseases, and limited access to clean 
cooking fuels for a significant portion of the population.  Water resources 
will diminish due to salinity intrusion and altered rainfall patterns, 
impacting drinking water, agriculture, and coastal livelihoods. Eighty percent of wastewater is discharged into rivers without treatment, and 8.5% of deaths are attributed to waterborne diseases.
14 Notably, Bangladesh identifies 
infrastructure as a key pillar for adaptation measures.  
 
8. India experiences diverse climate impacts, including temperature rise, extreme weather events, water scarcity, and agricultural challenges. 
Future climate 
projections anticipate heightened intensity in extreme weather events and erratic rainfall patterns, with a potential 10% increase in monsoon precipitation 
by the century's end.15  Resilient infrastructure is paramount, given the 
anticipated increase in grid variability and peak demand, coupled with the 
substantial amount of infrastructure yet to be built. Approximately 70% of urban 
infrastructure in India  needed by 2047 is yet to be built16, and the country has 
proactively adopted the  Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructur e to 
enhance resilience against disasters17.  
Approximately 820 million people in India have water availability close to or lower than Falkenmark Index for water scarcity
18. Approximately 60% of the 
country's cultivated area relies on rain- fed agriculture and is significantly 
influenced by climatic conditions19. India is an agrarian economy and expected 
to witness increased vulnerabilities in the sector. Wheat yields might decline by 6-25% by 2100, and rice yields could decrease by 4- 6% by 2050.
20


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 8  
   
 9. According to UNFCCC data, Mauritius contributes  only 0.01 percent to 
global GHG emissions. However, it is among the most vulnerable to 
natural disaster shocks and ranks low in adaptive capacity, as indicated by the World Risk Index 2021. As a Small Island Developing State  
(SIDS) , the Republic of Mauritius is particularly susceptible to the 
adverse effects of climate change, especially in its coastal zones. Here, the convergence of accelerating sea level rise and the increasing frequency and intensity of tropical cyclones —characterized by more 
intense rainfall events and stronger winds —poses significant risks, 
including substantial economic losses, humanitarian crises, and environmental degradation.  
Mauritius frequently experiences climate- related shocks, averaging four adverse events, predominantly tropical 
cyclones, every decade. The past decade has witnessed a notable increase in the number of people affected by such shocks, particularly during tropical storm Berguitta in 2018. Data from the Emergency Events Database (EM- DAT) 
reveals that between 1960 and 2022, Mauritius endured 22 extreme weather events, each causing socio- economic 
damages ranging from USD 160 to 245 million, equivalent to 1.5- 2.3 percent of the FY2021/22 GDP.
21  
 
Table 1: Country -specific projections for climate hazards (Source: IPCC WGI Interactive Atlas)  
Region  Extreme Heat  River Flood  Heavy 
precipitation 
and pluvial 
flood  Coastal flood  Drought  Projected change in annual 
exceedance probability of largest 
1-day precipitation of a 50- year 
event 
Bangladesh  High confidence 
of increase  Medium 
confidence of increase  High confidence of increase  High confidence of increase  - 2.07 times from baseline  
India  2 times from baseline  
Mauritius  High confidence of increase  Low 
confidence in direction of change High confidence of increase  High confidence of increase  Medium  
confidence of increase  1.43 times from baseline  
10. Presented below is the summary of climate hazards addressed by Prosperete across its target geographies and 
potential solutions. Further details on climate hazards and future scenarios are provided in Annexure 23.  
11. Excessive Rainfall and Flooding:   Heavy rains in Bangladesh disrupt agriculture and cause severe urban waterlogging 
in cities like Dhaka, leading to health hazards and infrastructure damage. In India, several states are experienc ing 
widespread impacts, including crop damage and power outages, with financial damages since 2019 totalling $1.5 billion 
(Mongabay -India, SpringerLink, Down To Earth). Future projections show increased rainfall variability and intensity, 
doubling the risk of extreme events by 2050 (IPCC WGI Interactive Atlas).  
12. Drought and Water Scarcity:   Bangladesh's drought worsens due to climate change, affecting 30% of the population 
(World Bank, SpringerLink, Mongabay). India faces severe agricultural and infrastructural challenges from erratic rains, 
affecting 180 million people (Nature, World Bank). Future projections indicate worsening conditions, reducing water availability and impacting agriculture, with river flows in India decreasing by 8- 20% by mid- century (IPCC) . Mauritius 
has faced a 
decrease of mean annual rainfall by 104 mm between 1951- 2020 – a decrease of around 8% since the 
1950s . 
13. Heat Waves:   Bangladesh's temperature rise by 0.5°C causes health and agricultural impacts, increasing cooling 
demands by 15% (World Bank, Down to Earth, Environmental Challenges).  India sees a 14.7% increase in mortality 
during heat waves, with over 400 deaths reported since 2019 (Environment International, Business Standard, EM-DAT). Future projections indicate worsening heat waves, with frequency in India increasing 2.5 times by mid -century 
(Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology).  
14. Tropical Cyclones:  Bangladesh, India  and Mauritius face severe impacts from cyclones, causing deaths and extensive 
damage (EM- DAT). Future projections suggest increased cyclone frequency and intensity, worsening impacts due to 
warming seas (United Nations, World Bank, Climate Dynamics, MDPI, SpringerLink).  
15. Sea Level Rise:   Bangladesh faces severe vulnerability with a current rise rate of 3 mm/year, impacting coastal regions. 
India’s coastline, with a similar rise rate, affects cities like Mumbai. In Mauritius, the data analysis from Port Louis tide 
gauge shows an increase of the sea level with a mean rise of 4.7 mm per year during 1987- 2020.22  Climate change-
induced sea- level rise in SIDS is estimated to be up to four times the global average according to UNEP .  Prosperete's 
mitigation activities, play a crucial role in helping island nations tackle the severe impacts of climate change.  
Climate Hazard  Vulnerable Systems  Impacts of hazard on system  Impact Community / 
Suggested 
intervention: Invest 
in companies that:  in Bangladesh  In India  In Mauritius


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 9 
   
 Excessive rainfall / 
Heavy precipitation and 
flooding Electricity generation and 
distribution  Excessive rainfall leads to 
flooding that affects the operation of power plants, 
particularly those located 
near rivers. Flooding can cause prolonged outages 
and damage to electrical 
infrastructure, impacting energy distribution and 
reliability (World Bank , 
2023).  Excessive rainfall affects 
hydropower generation 
due to siltation in dams 
and reservoirs. Heavy 
rains also lead to flooding, which can damage energy 
infrastructure, disrupt coal 
supplies, and impact thermal power plants. The 
variability in monsoon 
patterns  poses challenges 
for consistent energy 
production (Nature, 2023; 
MOSPI, 2023). 
Floodwaters can damage 
critical infrastructure, requiring extensive 
repairs and investment. 
This is especially problematic in states like 
Bihar and Assam (World 
Bank, 2023).  Mauritius faces climate -
related threats to electricity generation due 
to its coastal power 
infrastructure. Flooding, a major hazard, can cause 
power outages, damage 
electrical equipment, and disrupt energy supply. 
Coastal inundation also 
hampers fuel trans portation and 
storage, compounding risks to electricity 
production. These 
vulnerabilities threaten the island’s energy security, 
highlighting the urgent 
need for resilient infrastructure and 
adaptive strategies to 
safeguard power generation systems.. 
(ReliefWeb)  Low- to middle -
income groups:  
• provide efficient and affordable battery 
storage systems  
Agriculture - including farm 
and supply chain  Heavy rains damage rice 
crops, forcing farmers to 
replant. This is particularly 
severe in coastal regions 
prone to flooding and 
saltwater intrusion (Eco -
Business, 2023). Annual floods affect millions, 
destroying crops and reducing food security. 
The coastal areas are 
particularly vulnerable, with flooding impacting 
rice yields significantly 
(PLOS ONE, 2023). Heavy rains cause 
logistical bottlenecks, 
affecting the supply chain efficiency. Storage 
facilities often get 
inundated, leading to spoilage of stored grains 
and perishables (World 
Bank, 2023). Floodwaters 
inundate warehouses and cold storage units, leading 
to significant losses in 
perishable goods. This disrupts the supply chain 
and increases food prices 
(Eco-Business, 2023).  Excessive rainfall leads to 
waterlogging, delayed planting, and crop 
damage. In Kerala, 
variations in rainfall 
significantly affect crop 
productivity, particularly in 
rainfed regions where 
40% of agriculture is unirrigated (Krishnakumar 
et al., 2021). Furt hermore, 
the flooding that occurs as 
a result from heavy 
precipitation impact 
agricultural activities, especially in the IGP 
region, resulting in income 
losses. Excessive rainfall disrupts transportation 
and storage, leading to 
delays and spoilage. Flooded roads and 
railways slow down the movement of goods from 
farms to markets, causing financial losses and food 
wastage (McKinsey, 
2023). Storage facilities in flood- prone areas suffer 
significant damage, leading to food spoilage and economic losses 
(World Ba nk, 2023). 
Flooded roads and 
railways slow down the 
movement of goods from 
farms to markets, causing 
financial losses and food 
wastage (McKinsey, 
2023).  In 2024, Cyclone Belal 
triggered flash floods in Mauritius, severely 
affecting agricultural 
production. Floodwaters 
can damage crops, soil 
quality, and farming 
infrastructure. These 
disruptions extend to the supply chain, hindering 
transport and distributi on 
of produce. As extreme 
weather events become 
more frequent, the 
agricultural sector faces increasing vulnerability, 
threatening food security 
and farmer livelihoods across the island. 
(Government of Mauritius)  
 Farming Community:  
• provide solutions on 
climate resilient 
horticulture  
• provide solutions on smart farming (data 
and IoT based farming solutions, 
climate data 
monitoring and 
optimization 
solutions are indicative examples)  
• provide solutions on climate resilient storage and 
warehousing of 
agricultural produce  
• provide solutions on 
decentralized cold -
storage for 
agricultural produce  
Urban areas and 
infrastructure  Heavy rainfall often 
results in flooding in Dhaka's urban slums, 
leading to the destruction 
of makeshift homes and contamination of drinking water sources. This exacerbates health 
issues, including 
outbreaks of waterborne diseases such as cholera 
and diarr hea. The flooding 
also disrupts daily 
activities and access to Urban flooding caused by 
excessive rainfall disrupts 
transportation and 
damages infrastructure. 
The requirement of land for waste and wastewater management will increase as more towns urbanize 
(World Bank, 2021). 
Excessive rainfall leads to severe flooding in urban 
slums, damaging homes and infrastructure. Poor 
drainage systems Mauritius’ disaster risk 
profile by the Global 
Facility for Disaster 
Reduction and 
Recovery  highlights that 
flooding is the second largest risk after cyclones, causing 20 per cent of the 
direct economic losses 
associated with disasters. Most of these costs arise 
from damage to people’s 
homes. Floods and 
storms account for 80% of Urban slum dwellers 
or BOP segment:  
• provide climate -
resilient building 
construction material  
• provide decentralized 
and affordable 
drinking water 
solutions  
• provide decentralized solutions for sanitation in water -logged areas  
• provide solutions for 
managing critical


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 10 
   
 essential services, further 
marginalizing the urban 
poor (Springer, 2023).  exacerbate the issue, 
causing waterlogging and creating breeding grounds 
for waterborne diseases. 
The 2018 Kerala floods resulted in over $4.25bn 
in damages, affecting 
buildings and infrastructure (Nature, 
2023).  disasters by Frequency 
(CDRI)  public health 
infrastructure  
Drought or increasing 
water scarcity/ stress  Agriculture - including farm 
and supply chain  Climate projections 
indicate that Bangladesh will experience increased 
temperatures and more 
erratic rainfall patterns, which will intensify 
drought conditions. By 
2050, the frequency and duration of droughts are 
expected to increase, 
leading to severe wat er 
shortages. The 
Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change 
(IPCC) projects a rise in 
temperature of up to 2.6°C by the 2060s, which 
will exacerbate 
evapotranspiration rates 
and reduce water 
availability. This will particularly impact 
agricultural producti vity, 
with significant declines in 
yields for staple crops like rice and wheat, thereby 
threatening food security (World Bank, 2021).
 The agricultural sector, 
which is highly vulnerable to climatic changes, will 
be significantly impacted 
by future drought and water stress. Wheat yields 
are projected to decline 
by 6-25% by 2050 under 
moderate to high 
emission scenarios, and 
rice yields co uld decrease 
by 4-6% per decade due 
to increasing temperatures and 
changing precipitation 
patterns. This decline in crop productivity will have 
severe implications for 
food security and rural 
incomes. Moreover, as 
water becomes scarcer, competition for wat er 
resources between agricultural, industrial, and 
domestic users will 
intensify, leading to 
conflicts and further stressing the already 
overburdened water 
supply systems (World 
Bank, 2021).  According to the UN 
report ‘SIDS in Numbers 2017’, Mauritius is 
projected to become a 
water stressed country by 2025 and its agricultural 
production may decline by 
as much as 30% .  
Due to the temporal and spatial distribution of 
rainfall, Mauritius is said 
to have inadequate water resources, especially 
during the dry months of 
October to December, to meet the growing 
demand. Thus, the island experiences seasonal 
water scarcity. (SADR I, 
2020)  
Prolonged dry spells are also a major emerging constraints that are being 
encountered by the food 
sector. (Government of Mauritius)  Farming community:  
• provide solutions on climate resilient 
horticulture  
• provide solutions on 
water -efficient 
agricultural practices (including efficient  
water pumps)  
• provide solutions on smart farming (data and IoT based farming 
solutions, climate data 
monitoring and 
optimization are 
indicative examples)  
• provide solutions on 
climate resilient 
storage and 
warehousing of 
agricultural produce  
• provide solutions on 
decentralized cold -
storage for agricultural  
produce  
Electricity generation and 
distribution  The reliability of hydropower is threatened by variability in rainfall and increased 
evaporation rates. Hydropower potential is expected to decrease by up to 30% in 
some regions by 2050 due to reduced water availability (World Bank, 2021). 
Moreover, drough t reduces the water available for cooling in thermal power plants and 
for hydroelectric generation. This can lead to decreased power output and increased 
operational costs. Water scarcity also affects coal mining operations, further impacting 
power generat ion (Nature, 2023). Lastly, water shortages limit the operation of thermal 
and hydroelectric power plants, leading to reduced power generation and reliability 
issues. Drought conditions also increase the reliance on imported fuels, raising energy 
costs (Wo rld Bank, 2023).  Low- to middle -
income groups:  
• provide efficient and affordable battery 
storage systems  
• provide decentralized renewable energy 
generation systems  
Urban areas and 
infrastructure  Drought conditions lead to 
severe water shortages in urban slums, affecting 
sanitation and hygiene. 
This increases the prevalence of waterborne 
diseases and impacts the 
overall health of the residents. The economic 
impact is also significant 
as the cost of  water rises 
(World Bank, 2023). In 
Dhaka, drought conditions 
lead to reduced 
groundwater levels, 
causing buildings to settle and foundations to crack. 
This structural damage 
requires costly repairs and increases the 
vulnerability of buildings 
to future cl imatic events 
(Springer, 2023).
 Droughts impact urban 
slums by exacerbating water scarcity. This leads 
to reduced access to 
clean water, affecting hygiene and increasing 
the risk of diseases. The 
economic burden on slum dwellers increases as 
they have to pay higher 
prices for water. Drou ght 
impacts buildings by 
causing the soil to dry and 
shrink, leading to 
foundation settling and 
cracking. This is particularly evident in 
regions with clayey soils. 
The lack of moisture also increases the risk of fires, 
which can damage 
buildings and infrastructure (Nature, 
2023).  Mauritius is also highly 
vulnerable to climate change, whose negative 
impacts are being already 
felt in the last decade through longer dry 
seasons, shorter wet 
seasons and increased intensity of droughts. This 
results in more than 20% 
of the population suf fering 
recurrent intermittent 
water supply under 
normal conditions (i.e. 
even during the wet 
season) – a figure that 
can rise to 75% during the 
dry season. (SADRI, 
2020
23) Low- to middle -
income groups:  
• Water treatment services  
Heat Waves  Agriculture - including farm 
and supply chain  Agriculture faces severe 
risks from increased 
temperatures and Heat waves reduce wheat 
yields and damage heat -
sensitive crops like rice. Increasing heat waves 
due to climate change 
pose a significant threat to Farming community:


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 11 
   
 changing rainfall patterns, 
which are likely to result in 
reduced crop yields, 
especially for rice, the 
staple food crop (World Bank, 2021). Recent 
research reveals that 
human health can also be affected by the physical 
impact of the heat wave 
on the food system, particularly with regard to 
diet-related impacts and 
food- borne diseases 
within vulnerable 
communities (Environmental 
Challenges 14, 2024)
 The greatest risk from 
extreme heat waves is in 
the densely populated 
agricultural regions of the 
Ganges and Indus river basins (IMD, 2023). 
According to the ICAR, 
average maximum temperature of more than 
30°C during the grain 
filling stage of the wheat crop adversely affects 
plant growth and for every 1-degree rise in 
temperature, there is a 3-4% drop in wheat yield. In 2022, due to strong heat 
wave activity, wheat 
production was expected to have fallen by 4.5 per 
cent, in some regions 
losses could be up t o 15 
per cent (IMD, 2023). 
High value horticulture 
crops like grape may get 
negatively impacted by 
high temperatures and 
yields may reduce 63% 
(Springer India, 2013)  agriculture in Mauritius. 
The island nation's tropical climate, already 
characterized by high 
temperatures, is becoming even hotter. 
This can lead to crop 
stress, reduced yields, and changes in plant 
growth cycles. 
Additionally, heat waves can increase wat er 
evaporation and soil moisture loss, making it 
more difficult to maintain 
healthy crops. (FAO) 
 • provide solutions on 
climate resilient horticulture  
• provide solutions on water -efficient 
agricultural practices 
(including efficient water pumps)  
• provide solutions on smart farming (data and IoT based farming 
solutions, climate data 
monitoring and optimization solutions 
are indicative 
examples)  
• provide solutions on decentralized cold -
storage for agricultural 
produce  
• provide solutions on 
climate resilient 
storage and 
warehousing of 
agricultural produce  
Urban areas and 
infrastructure  Expected health impacts include increased incidences of heat -related illnesses and 
vector -borne diseases like malaria and dengue. Further, the incidence of waterborne 
diseases such as cholera could increase by 3- 5% with every 1°C rise in temperature. 
Moreo ver, urban areas will face compounded risks from heat stress and flooding, 
exacerbated by the urban heat island effect. This could impact labor productivity and infrastructure stability (World Bank, 2021). High temperatures also increase energy 
costs, whic h many slum dwellers cannot afford (SEforALL, 2023). Furthermore, 
climate -induced urban migration could exacerbate these challenges, with millions 
potentially displaced by 2050. Lastly, in countries like India, the economic cost of heatwaves in urban areas  (especially urban slums), in terms of lost labor productivity, 
could exceed $450 million per year by 2030 (World Bank, 2021).  Low- to middle -
income groups:  
• Sustainable HVAC 
systems  
Urban transport  Heat waves impact the transportation sector by increasing the need for cooling 
systems in vehicles and infrastructure, which raises operational costs. The heat also makes travel uncomfortable (especially low -income transportation providers like 
rickshaw pu llers in the EMs), affecting the overall efficiency and reliability of 
transportation services (Springer, 2023). Furthermore, heat waves exacerbate traffic congestion as more people opt for private vehicles over public transport to avoid the 
heat, increasi ng the load on urban roads. This leads to higher emissions and 
deteriorates air quality (MDPI, 2023).  Low- to middle -
income groups:  
• Electrified climate -
resilient transportation fleets (especially for 
last-mile connectivity)  
Electricity generation and 
distribution  Heat waves lead to higher electricity consumption for cooling, increasing the load on 
power plants. This can result in power cuts and blackouts during peak demand 
periods (ADB, 2023). Moreover, increased air temperatures reducing the efficiency of 
thermal power generation. Thermal power plant efficiency could decrease by 0.45% 
for every 1°C increase in temperature (World Bank, 2021).  Low- to middle -
income groups:  
• provide efficient and 
affordable battery 
storage systems  
• provide decentralized 
renewable energy 
generation systems  
Tropical cyclone  Urban areas and 
infrastructure  Cyclones cause extensive damage to urban slums, destroying homes and 
infrastructure.  Furthermore, cyclones result in large- scale migration as in the case of 
Bangladesh (Springer, 2023). The resulting displacement and loss of livelihoods 
exacerbate poverty  and health risks. The recovery process is slow due to the lack of 
resources and support for slum dwellers (Nature, 2023).  The most common natural 
hazards posing a significant risk to Mauritius include tropical cyclones and flooding.   Tropical cyclones and floods have contributed to Mauritius experiencing 
approximately US$110 million in combined direct losses each year. Tropical cyclones 
account for about 80% of average annual losses for all hazards, while flooding 
accounts for the remaining 20%. (ReliefWeb, 2024
24) Urban slum dwellers 
or BOP segment  
• provide climate -
resilient building construction material  
• provide decentralized 
and affordable 
drinking water 
solutions  
• 
Provide decentralized solutions for sanitation 
in water -logged areas  
Electricity generation and 
distribution  Cyclones cause extensive damage to energy infrastructure, including power plants, 
transmission lines, and substations. Coastal power plants are particularly vulnerable to storm surges and high winds, leading to prolonged outages and costly repairs 
(Nature,  2023). Recovery and repair efforts are costly and time- consuming, affecting 
energy supply stability (ADB, 2023).
 Low- to middle -
income groups:  
• provide efficient and 
affordable battery 
storage systems  
• provide decentralized 
renewable energy 
generation systems  
Sea Level Rise  Agriculture - including farm 
and supply chain  Rising sea levels lead to increased salinity, reducing the productivity of rice paddies in 
coastal areas. It affects approximately 8 million people currently, expected to rise to Farming community:


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 12 
   
 13.5 million by 2050. Sea level rise impacts coastal storage facilities, leading to 
frequent flooding and spoilage of stored goods. This disrupts the supply chain and 
affects food security (Eco- Business, 2023).  • provide solutions on 
smart farming (data and IoT based farming 
solutions, climate data 
monitoring and optimization solutions 
are indicative 
examples)  
• provide solutions on climate resilient 
storage and 
warehousing of 
agricultural produce  
• 
provide solutions on decentralized cold -
storage for agricultural 
produce  
Urban areas and 
infrastructure  Rising sea levels threaten coastal slums, leading to increased flooding and erosion. 
This impacts the livelihoods and homes of slum dwellers, increasing displacement and health risks. The economic impact is significant as many residents lose their homes 
and sources of income (Nature, 2023). Additionally, rising sea levels threaten coastal 
buildings with increased flooding and salinity. This leads to structural damage and higher maintenance costs. Long- term exposure to saltwater corrodes building 
materials, reducing their lifespan and increasing repair needs (Nature, 2023).  
 Urban slum dwellers 
or BOP segment:  
• provide climate -
resilient building 
construction material  
• provide decentralized 
and affordable 
drinking water 
solutions  
• provide decentralized 
solutions for sanitation in water -logged areas  
• 
provide solutions for 
managing critical 
public health 
infrastructure  
Electricity generation and 
distribution  Rising sea levels threaten coastal power plants and infrastructure, leading to 
increased salinity and corrosion. This affects the longevity and reliability of energy 
infrastructure in coastal areas (Nature, 2023). This leads to higher maintenance costs 
and potential relocations of critical facilities (ADB, 2023).  Low- to middle -
income groups:  
• provide efficient and 
affordable battery 
storage systems  
• provide decentralized 
renewable energy 
generation systems  
Section 3: Mitigation Impact 
16. The below presents mitigation narrative with sectoral context for each country:  
17. Bangladesh:  The country's contribution to climate change stems from its increasing greenhouse gas emissions, 
primarily from energy generation and transportation, with fossil fuels comprising a significant portion of the energy mix. 
In 2020, Bangladesh emitted approxi mately 225 million metric tonnes of CO2 equivalent, projected to rise to 409.4 
million metric tonnes by 2030 under business -as-usual scenarios25, reflecting a substantial increase in emissions 
contributing to global climate change. Energy generation remains a key contributor to emissions, with fossil fuels comprising 77% of the energy mix and contributing to 34% of emissions. Similarly, transporta tion is heavily reliant on 
fossil fuels, with oil constituting 72% of the energy mix and natural gas accounting for the remainder
26. 
18. India:  India’s substantial emissions come from power generation, transport, and industry. In 2022, India emitted 
approximately 3.9 gigatonnes of CO2 equivalent27, with a projected 41% increase in greenhouse gas emissions by 
2030 under business -as-usual conditions. The energy sector is the largest emitter, accounting for 37% of India's 
greenhouse gas emissions28. Efforts to transition towards renewable energy and improve energy efficiency are critical, 
as highlighted by India's target of achieving 500 gigawatts of renewable energy capacity by 2030, requiring investments totalling USD 223bn
29. Additionally, Climate Policy Initiative estimates India needs USD 10 trillion+ of investment to 
achieve Net -Zero by 2030, alongside previous commitments requiring USD 2.5 trillion by 203030. Further, efforts to 
promote low -emission transport, including increasing electric vehicle penetration to 30% by 2030, could potentially save 
up to 846 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent31. 
19. Mauritius:  The primary energy source for Mauritius is imported fossil fuel. As part of its NDC, the Mauritian Government 
has implemented a comprehensive renewable energy policy aimed at achieving 60% renewable energy by 2030 and to completely phase out coal by 2030.  In 2019, Mauritius developed the Renewable Energy Roadmap 2030 for the 
Electricity Sector, outlining the development of renewable energy technologies, diversifying the country’s electricity mix, and adopting cleaner energy sources. The plan incl udes installing solar photovoltaic systems on the rooftops of 10,000 
low-income households. The Mauritian power system acknowledges that reduction in demand for electricity is just as 
important as growing renewable sources of generation. The plans encourage consumers to participate in energy -
saving. measures through education and incentive programs.


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 13 
   
 20. Through its investments in energy transition, low -emission transportation, and built environment, Prosperete is expected 
to enable mitigation of close to 9.2mn tonnes of GHG emissions  (direct and indirect). Mitigation estimates quantifying 
emission reduction strategies based on activity data and emission factors for the company have been estimated basis 
activity emission / mitigations with use CDM, IPCC measurement, and other methodologies.    
Theme  Country  Baseline Country Context  Future Country Context  Prosperete's Interventions  
Energy Transition  Bangladesh  Heavy reliance on fossil fuels (70% of 
total energy). Only 3% renewable energy 
in energy mix. 20 million people without access to electricity.  Increase renewable energy to 20% by 
2030. Implement smart grid technologies to reduce losses by 15%. Achieve 100% electricity access by 
2030.  Investments in distributed energy resource systems (DERS) 
and modernization of grids to enhance resilience. Supporting clean energy production equipment and energy storage solutions. Investments in real -time data analytics to improve 
grid resilience.  
India  55% of power generation from coal. 
Renewable energy capacity at 100 GW (as 
of 2021). 24 million people lack electricity 
access.  ~93% of energy supply from fossil 
fuels; 2nd largest source of emissions (39% of GHG emissions)  
Plans to increase RE share to  44% by 
2030 from around 12% in 2022  Increase renewable energy capacity to 
500 GW by 2030. Achieve 40% of 
energy from non -fossil sources by 
2030. 100% electricity access by 2025.  Investment in technologies increasing renewable energy 
adoption such as grid monitoring, rooftop solar, and energy efficiency measures. Supporting energy -efficient industrial 
solutions to reduce energy intensity and GHG emissions.  
Mauritius  In 2021, the percentage of emissions from 
coal represented 71.9% of the total emissions.
32 The government aims to achieve  60% of 
energy production from green sources by 2030, phasing out the use of coal 
and increasing energy efficiency by 
10% based on a 2019 baseline.  Investment in technologies increasing renewable energy 
adoption such as grid monitoring, rooftop solar, and energy 
efficiency measures. Supporting energy -efficient industrial 
solutions to reduce energy intensity and GHG emissions.  
Low Emissions 
Transport  Bangladesh  95% of vehicles run on diesel or petrol. 
Only 1% electric vehicles (EVs) in the 
market. High urban air pollution levels 
(PM2.5 at 83 µg/m³ in Dhaka).  Increase EV share to 15% by 2030. 
Expand public transport by 30% by 
2030. Reduce urban air pollution by 25%.  Investments in EV supply chain, charging solutions, and fleet 
solutions. Supporting green financial services to improve the affordability of EVs. Development of clean mobility infrastructure to reduce emissions and increase low -emission 
transport adoption.  
India  Transport sector contributes  ~28% of 
energy -related GHG emissions  
90% of transport sector dependent on fossil fuels. Only 2% EV penetration. Air pollution causing 1.2 million deaths 
annually.  Achieve 30% EV penetration by 2030. 
Expand metro networks in 10 major cities. Reduce transport sector emissions by 35% by 2030.  Investments in the electric mobility ecosystem including 
charging, financing, and manufacturing EVs. Support for green financial services to improve livelihoods and adoption of low -
emission transport. Facilitating the development of low -
carbon pathways for  urban ecosystems.  
Mauritius  In transport, which forms ~28% of 
country’s emissions, the vast majority of  
emissions in most countries come from cars, which are still overwhelmingly reliant on oil -based fuels.  Expand rail and public transportation 
system. Increase electric vehicle 
penetration.  Investments in EV supply chain, charging solutions, and fleet 
solutions. Supporting green financial services to improve the affordability of EVs. Development of clean mobility 
infrastructure to reduce emissions and increase low -emission 
transport adoption.  
Urban 
Environment and 
Data Systems  Bangladesh  Urban population growth at 3.2% 
annually. 60% of urban waste goes untreated. Poor air quality with PM2.5 levels often exceeding 100 µg/m³.  
NDC conditionally targets achieving 20% 
energy efficiency in the Industry sub -
sector by 2030  Implement smart city initiatives in 5 
major cities by 2030. Treat 90% of 
urban waste by 2030. Reduce PM2.5 levels by 30%.  Support for low -carbon building materials and circular 
economy practices. Enhancing urban infrastructure with sustainable solutions and advanced monitoring systems.  
India  Urban population growth at 2.4% 
annually. 70% of urban waste goes untreated. Air pollution levels among highest globally.  Develop smart city projects in 100 
cities by 2030. Achieve 80% waste treatment and recycling by 2030. Reduce air pollution by 40%.  Investments in advanced data systems for emissions 
monitoring and smart farming techniques. Support for sustainable urban infrastructure and low -carbon production 
methods. Promoting real -time data analytics for better urban 
management and resilience.  
Mauritius  Over 10 million tons of wastes already 
buried at the Mare Chicose landfill since its establishment in 1997. P rojections 
show an alarming increase in waste intake, reaching 650,000 tons in 2023 
with an annual growth rate of 2.5%33 Divert up to 70% of wastes from 
Mauritius' landfill and  strong public -
private partnerships to transition to a circular economy.  Investments in waste and wastewater management to 
improve health and resilience. Promoting circular economy practices and low -carbon infrastructure to enhance urban 
sustainability. 
Section 4: Need for Technology Transfer in Emerging Markets  
1. Many emerging markets are still in the early stages of developing robust climate ecosystems, and it may take years for 
these economies to establish growth trajectories and climate solutions. The urgent need for accelerated climate action 
necessitates an integrated approach, where emerging markets exchange solutions. This collaboration grants emerging 
markets faster access to essential climate technologies, thus speeding up progress and avoiding duplication of efforts. 
It also fosters the continued creation and expansion of global climate ecosystems.  
2. Currently, many critical technologies for transitioning to low -carbon practices in emerging markets are 
restricted to individual markets, leading to high costs, duplication and the absence of global climate companies serving these regions.  To overcome these challenges, technology transfer among emerging markets is crucial. 
Sharing innovations in energy transition, low -emission transport, sustainable agriculture, and waste management can 
significantly accelerate the shift to low -carbon econo mies and contribute to the development of resilient climate


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 14 
   
 ecosystems.  Prosperete’s investment thesis is built on identifying best solutions across emerging markets and 
expanding them to other countries in order to have the highest possible mitigation and adaptation impact from the fund.  
3. Multiple benefits accrue to the company and to the “receiving” emerging markets in which climate solutions are 
accelerated.  
• Larger climate outcomes as the company is able to serve a bigger market through expansion and growth;  
• Scale creates economies which enhance the affordability of solutions thereby wider adoption of such solutions; and  
• The demonstration effect of a success story coming out of the emerging markets is stronger as it motivates others 
from similar markets to emulate such success in climate. This will incentivize both investors and investee companies to work on scaling climate solutions.  
4. Prosperete Growth Fund will invest in companies with operations in Bangladesh, India , and Mauritius , then 
focus on expansion of these solutions to other emerging markets across Asia and Africa.  Nigeria, Indonesia, 
and South Africa, markets where there is  nascent climate ecosystem but demand for climate- friendly solutions, present 
as examples of Prosperete’s technology transfer thesis. Prosperete is in the process of formalizing partnerships across 
each of these countries while engaging with national stakeholders to ensure smooth development and execution of the 
Fund’s plans.  
4.1 N igeria confronts climate hazards like floods, droughts, and heatwaves, impacting water resources, agriculture, 
and economic sectors. Nigeria emits approximately  128 million metric tonnes of CO 2 equivalent annually, with 
projections indicating a rise to 900 million metric tonnes by 2030 under business -as-usual scenarios34. Emissions 
primarily come from energy generation and transport, highlighting the need for sustainable development strategies 
and resilience- building measures. Despite being the largest emitter in the region, less than half of Nigeria’s 
population has access to grid- connected electricity, and power supply only meets an estimated third of demand 
creating strong opportunities for off grid solutions.35Therefore, Energy generation and access remain critical 
concerns, with energy poverty affecting 57% of the population, and energy accounting for 60% of emissions.  
Vulnerable communities face significant challenges, with floods displacing approximately 1.9 million people in 
2019 alone36. Moreover, health, food, and water security issues persist, with 70% of the population lacking access 
to clean drinking water37 and 25 million people at risk of food insecurity by 202338. Addressing these multifaceted 
challenges is essential to ensuring the resilience and well -being of Nigeria's population.  
4.2 In 2020, Indonesia's emissions averaged 1.5 gigatonnes of CO2 equivalent, with projections indicating a rise to 2.9 gigatonnes by 2030 under business -as-usual scenarios
39. These emissions primarily come from the energy 
sector, with fossil fuels constituting approximately 93% of the energy supply. Efforts are underway to increase renewable energy adoption to 44% by 2030, up from around 12% in 2022
40. Initiatives such as establishing electric 
vehicle charging stations align with Indonesia's commitment to reducing emissions from the transport sector and 
addressing climate change impacts. Indonesia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) commits to a 31.89% 
(unconditional) and 43.2% (conditional) emission reduction by 2030 and includes the development of an action 
plan on adaptation. The country faces rising temperatures, sea level rise, and intensified climate hazards, with vulnerability heightened by its heavy reliance on fossil fuels for energy. Despite challenges, the costs of building resilience are estimated to be only around 3% of overall investment needs
41, highlighting the potential for impactful 
interventions in Indonesia's infrastructure sector. Health, food, and water security remain pressing concerns, with issues such as stunted growth in over 20% of children and significant levels of food waste produc tion
42. Water 
resources are expected to decline, impacting dry season supplies amid growing demand. Agriculture, especially 
rice production, faces yield reductions due to changing rainfall patterns and higher temperatures. While 
hydropower reliability is threatened, opportunities exist for expanding renewable energy sources.  
4.3 South Africa grapples with temperature increases, water scarcity, and urban challenges from climate change, 
driven by emissions from energy and industry. The country's emissions range from 398 to 510 million metric tonnes 
of CO2 equivalent annually, with a commitment to reduce emissions to 350- 420 million metric tonnes by 2030. 
These emissions come primarily from the energy sector, emphasizing the importance of decarbonization efforts and infrastructure resilience to mitigate climate impacts.  South Africa aims to achieve deeper decarbonization in transportation beyond 2030. Efforts to address emissions from building, cities, industries, and appliances are also underway, recognizing that construction and operations 
contribute approximately 7% of  direct emissions. South Africa commits to a fixed target for GHG emission levels 
of 398- 510 MtCO
2e by 2025, and 350 -420 MtCO 2e by 2030. To achieve such emission reduction targets, South 
Africa aims to utilize USD 8 billion per annum by 2030.43  
Vulnerabilities persist, particularly among vulnerable communities facing income inequality, exacerbated by the 
projected increase in climate- related incidents, especially in farming communities. The country is increasingly 
vulnerable to natural hazards like droughts and floods, with the Western Cape experiencing decreased rainfall exacerbating drought conditions, while the east anticipates increased rainfall and flooding. Urban areas are at heightened risk of heatwaves, water shortages, and flooding, impac
ting infrastructure resilience and urban 
productivity, with increased demand for waste and wastewater management land as towns urbanize. Water 
security is a significant concern, with projections indicating a 17% demand -supply gap by 2030, especially in wat er-


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 15 
   
 stressed western areas44. Agricultural productivity may decline due to temperature rises and altered rainfall 
patterns, potentially reducing maize yields by up to 20% by 2050.  
5. There are existing funds that are looking to invest in climate solutions. T here are several  early -stage  funds as well as 
debt providers such as Infrastructure Development Company Limited ( IDCOL ) in Bangladesh who look to scale 
solutions in their markets through the availability of growth equity. They act as key stakeholders in expansion of 
solutions as well as a credible source of deal pipeline for Prosperete. Prosperete is also in active conversation with financiers  in Africa who can help portfolio companies with local expertise and potential financing as they look to expand 
to the continent.  
6. Prosperete aims to establish a supportive ecosystem for climate solutions by leveraging investments from other funds, exporting solutions to diverse markets, and sharing best practices. This initiative will drive the creation of climate solutions across em
erging markets and build the capacity of regional funds and local financiers. By facilitating 
technology transfer and reducing perceived investment risks, Prosperete enhance s the availability of affordable climate 
mitigation and adaptation solutions, increase the number of startups, and attract more climate investments. Over time, these efforts will enable the development of new solutions and interventions in its target markets already underway and in additional markets, promoting sustainable growth and resilience across the global south. 
Section 5: Focus Sectors  
7. While the focus areas highlighted below are indicative, most of Prosperete’s investments are intended to overlap 
and create climate impact with interventions across multiple sectors.  Similarly, there are activities which contribute 
to both climate change mitigation and climate change adaptation.  
 
7.1 Energy Transition: Reliable access to energy is still a major gap across emerging markets. Prosperete aims to invest 
in sectors like energy access and power generation, identifying barriers such as unreliable and high- carbon energy 
sources and adoption issues like financing availability for clean energy. Potential interventions include Distributed Energy Resource Systems (DERS) and modernization of grids to enhance grid resilience and increase renewable energy adoption, resulting in sustainable energy access and reduced greenhouse gas emissions. In energy efficiency, Prosperete plans to address barriers like knowledge gaps and high upfront costs by investing in energy monitoring, pay-as-you-go models, and industrial efficiency solutions, leading to reduced energy intensity in industries and GHG 
emissions.  
Energy access and power generation are critical components of global development, particularly in emerging markets. Projections indicate that a substantial 88% of the growth in electricity demand between 2019 and 2040 will originate from these regions
45, highlighting the significance of addressing energy needs in these areas. However, despite this 
growing demand, investment spending on battery storage has been notably inadequate in emerging markets during the period spanning from 2016 to 2020. This deficit in investment poses a challenge to ensuring reliable and sustainable energy access, underscoring the urgent need for increased investment and attention in this crucial sector. Addressing these gaps in investment and infrastructure is essential for facilitating inclusive economic growth and meeting the energy needs of communities in emerging markets.  
Energy efficiency remains a crucial aspect of global energy management, yet recent trends highlight significant challenges. In 2021, the rate of primary energy intensity improvement stood at just 1.9%, falling short of historical growth rates
46. Specifically, this rate was below the historic five- year compound annual primary energy intensity growth 
rate of 2.3% observed in the previous decade and notably lower than the 4.2% deemed necessary in the International Energy Agency's (IEA) Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario for the current decade leading up to 2030
47. Despite 
these challenges, energy efficiency continues to stand out as the most cost -effective energy source, with costs ranging 
between 3 to 5 cents per kilowatt -hour (kWh). This underscores the importance of prioritizing and investing in energy 
efficiency initiatives to maximize energy savings and mitigate environmental impacts.  
Sectors  Identified Mitigation Solutions (non-exhaustive)  Identified Adaptation Solutions (non-exhaustive)  
 Barriers  Potential 
Intervention / 
Investment  Illustrative 
Impact  Barriers  Potential 
Intervention / 
Investment  Illustrative 
Impact


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 16 
   
 Energy 
access and 
power 
generation 
(20%)  • Unreliable and high -
carbon energy 
generation  
• Adoption issues: financing availability and upfront cost of clean energy  
• Limited ability of grid to meet load demand with increasing RE share  • Distributed Energy Resources ( DERS ) 
• Energy Supply Chain: Clean energy production equipment such as hydrogen electrolysers and solar panels  
• Modernization of Grids: Grid resilience using analytics to increase RE adoption 
despite variability  • Increased in 
sustainable energy access  
• Increase renewable energy mix in the grid  
• Reduced GHG emissions  • Increasing load on grid due to extreme weather events such as heat or cold waves  
• Increased grid failure instances with varied generation and demand peaks due to unpredictable climate patterns  • Smart Grids: Real time data and analytics leading to more effective maintenance, reliable and predictable performance, and a more resilient grid  • Reduced number of grid outages to ensure reliable energy access  
• Faster grid expansion to improve access  
• Improved recovery 
and/or resilience of energy system post extreme weather events  
 
 
 
Energy 
efficiency 
(10%)  • Limited adoption due 
to knowledge gaps  
• High-upfront cost of 
energy efficient 
systems • Energy Monitoring: 
Monitoring and development of better processes for lower energy consumption  
• Pay-As-You-Go: Use 
of efficient equipment and reduction in HVAC services consumed for savings  
• Industrial Efficiency: Energy efficient equipment across HVAC, motors, 
pumps etc.  • Reduced energy 
intensity of industries leading to GHG emissions reduction  - - • Adaptation benefits of businesses receiving a more reliable power supply  
• Improved resilience of the energy network through use of more energy -efficient 
appliances.  
 
7.2 Low Emission Transport: Prosperete plans to invest in clean mobility to address barriers like high- carbon 
transportation systems and adoption obstacles such as charging anxiety and upfront costs. Interventions include 
supporting electric vehicle (EV) manufacturers, developing EV supply chains, providing charging solutions, and 
implementing fleet solutions, resulting in reduced greenhouse gas emissions, increased adoption of low -emission 
transportation, and the establishment of low -carbon pathways for urban ecosystems. Prosperete aims to mitigate high 
upfront costs of low -emission transport through investments in green financial services, thereby improving livelihoods 
and enabling greater participation of low -skill workers.  
 
Low emission transport initiatives play a pivotal role to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. Currently, transportation 
constitutes approximately 24% of direct greenhouse gas emissions stemming from fuel combustion on a global scale48. 
However, there exists a notable disparity in car ownership between emerging economies and developed markets. While 
the average car ownership stands at around 120 units per 1,000 people in emerging economies, it significantly 
surpasses this figure at appr oximately 500 units in developed markets49. This discrepancy underscores the importance 
of implementing strategies to promote low emission transport solutions, particularly in emerging economies where transportation emissions are significant contributors to overall greenhouse gas emissions. By prioritizing the adoption 
of cleaner and more sustainable transportation alternatives, such as electric vehicles and public transportation systems, countries can work towards reducing their carbon footprint and fostering a more environmentally friendly transport 
sector.  
Sectors  Identified Mitigation Solutions (non-exhaustive)  Identified Adaptation Solutions (non-exhaustive)  
 Barriers  Potential 
Intervention / 
Investment  Illustrative 
Impact  Barriers  Potential 
Intervention / 
Investment  Illustrative 
Impact  
 
Low 
emission 
transport 
(25%)  • High-carbon and 
inefficient 
transportation systems 
• Adoption barriers due to charging / range anxiety / upfront cost  
• Limited supply chain to support growth of industry  • EV Manufacturers: 
Sale of electric vehicles, help increase affordability  
• EV Supply Chain: Components for EVs such as motors, battery technology / manufacturers  
• Charging Solutions: Helps reduce barriers for EV  
• Fleet Solutions: Reduction of emissions through 
use of EVs  • Reduced GHG 
emissions with clean transportation  
• Improved adoption of low-emission 
transportation  
• Development of low -
carbon pathways for urban ecosystems  • High upfront cost of 
low-emission 
transport limited ability to adapt to low-
carbon  economy  • Green Financial 
Services: Improve livelihoods of vulnerable communities through improved affordability of EVs and other income generating assets  • Improved livelihoods 
and participation of low-skill workforce in 
low-carbon  economy


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 17 
   
 7.3 Food and Water Security: Prosperete  aims to invest in agriculture and food security by investments  that are projected 
to increase farm productivity  and build climate resilience. Additionally, Prosperete plans to invest in water security by 
focusing on energy -efficient water systems to ensure water availability. Further interventions involve improving waste-
water treatment for health and water security, enhancing irrigation metho ds, and implementing smart farming 
techniques. These efforts aim to enhance the adaptive capacity of communities to cope with changing water levels and 
improve overall food and water security.  
Agriculture and food security are critical concerns, particularly in emerging markets (EMs), where a significant portion of global food production originates. Despite working on less than two hectares of land, approximately 600 million smallholder farmers,  predominantly in EMs, contribute substantially to crop production, accounting for 28- 31% of the 
total output
50. However, projections indicate looming challenges for the agricultural sector. By 2030, crop yields are 
expected to decline by 10- 50%, while the demand for food production must escalate by 30- 60% by 2050 to 
accommodate the needs of a growing global population and shifting dietary patterns. These forecasts underscore the urgent need for innovative agricultural practices, sustainable farming techniques, and investments in agricultural infrastructure to ensure food security and mitigate the potential impacts of climate change on crop yields.  
 Water security is a pressing global concern, with projections indicating a significant challenge in the coming years. By 2025, an estimated 1.8 billion people are expected to reside in countries or regions facing absolute water scarcity, as reported by UN -Water. This scarcity not only affects basic needs but also has far -reaching health implications. 
Inadequate access to clean water and sanitation is closely linked to up to 80% of illnesses in the developing world. These statistics underscore the critical importance of prioritizing initiatives aimed at ensuring sufficient and safe water sources for communities worldwide.
51 
Sectors  Identified Mitigation Solutions (non-exhaustive)  Identified Adaptation Solutions (non-exhaustive)  
 Barriers  Potential 
Intervention / 
Investment  Illustrative 
Impact  Barriers  Potential 
Intervention / 
Investment  Illustrative 
Impact  
Agriculture 
and food 
security 
(5%)  - - - • Reduced agricultural 
productivity and crop 
yield due to increasing temperatures  
• High food wastage due to improper storage  
• Interseason rainfall variability threatening 
livelihoods  • Smart Farming: Crop 
monitoring facilitating climate informed advisory and risk management services  
• Cold Chain: Enables food to last longer  • Increased resilience 
of agriculture, particularly smallholder farmers, to climate change effects  
• Increased food security reducing vulnerability to other climate events  
 
Water 
security 
(10%)  • Use of energy 
intensive methods  
• Limited availability of urban space for treatment  • Water Systems: 
Energy efficient / clean -energy 
powered water systems that reduce emissions  • Availability of water 
through energy efficient treatment  • Increasing water 
scarcity due to changing weather patterns  
• Lack of access to clean drinking water  • Waste -Water 
treatment: Improve health and water security through efficient treatment  
• Water Systems: Enhance food and water security through improved 
irrigation methods  • Enhanced adaptive 
capacity of populations to changing water levels  
 
7.4 Urban environment and data systems: Prosperete plans to invest in cities, buildings, and urban systems and address 
barriers such as undeveloped low -emission, climate- resilient cities and improper waste treatment. Interventions include 
deploying distributed renewable energy systems with storage solutions, promoting low -carbon building materials, and 
implementing circular economy practices to reduce emissions. These investments aim to increase sustainable energy access, construct low -carbon resilient infrastructure, and adopt low -
carbon production methods. Additionally, 
Prosperete intends to invest in climate information and early warning systems by focusing on emissions monitoring to design effective interventions and improving climate information systems for  health and water security. These efforts 
seek to reduce GHG emissions, enhance resilience to climate hazards, and improve urban planning.  
Cities, buildings, and urban systems play a pivotal role in shaping the future sustainability of our planet. Projections 
indicate that by 2050, nearly 75% of all infrastructure expected to be developed globally will be concentrated in cities that are yet to be built
52, highlighting the immense potential for urban development and its associated environmental 
impact. Moreover, the building and construction sector stands out as a significant contributor to carbon emissions, accounting for approximately 35% of final energy  use CO2 emissions
53. Addressing the environmental footprint of 
urban development and construction activities is imperative for mitigating climate change and promoting sustainable 
urbanization. By implementing energy -efficient building designs, adopting low-carbon  building materials, and investing


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 18 
   
 in renewable energy sources for urban infrastructure, cities can play a crucial role in reducing their carbon footprint and 
fostering a more sustainable future.  
Climate information and early warning systems are indispensable tools for mitigating the impact of weather, water, and 
climate -related hazards on communities worldwide. Over the period spanning from 1970 to 2019, an overwhelming 
79% of disasters recorded g lobally were associated with these hazards, underscoring the critical importance of 
preparedness and risk management strategies54. Furthermore, the frequency of recorded disasters has surged 
dramatically, increasing by five times, while economic losses have soared by a factor of seven since 1970. These 
statistics highlight the escalating risks posed by climate -related events and emphasize the urgent need for robust early 
warning systems and comprehensive climate information platforms. By investing in these systems and enhancing global cooperation on disaster preparedness and response, nations can better protect vulnerable communities  and 
build resilience in the face of climate change- induced disasters.
 
Sectors  Identified Mitigation Solutions (non-exhaustive)  Identified Adaptation Solutions (non-exhaustive)  
 Barriers  Potential 
Intervention / 
Investment  Illustrative 
Impact  Barriers  Potential 
Intervention / 
Investment  Illustrative 
Impact  
Cities, 
buildings, 
and urban 
systems 
(20%)  • Undeveloped low -
emission climate 
resilient cities  
• Improper segregation and treatment of waste  • DERS: Distributed 
renewable energy systems including storage solutions  
• Building Materials: Low-carbon building 
material  
• Circular Economy: Reduce emissions from virgin mining and procurement  • Increase in 
sustainable energy access  
• Construction of low -
carbon resilient infrastructure  
• Low-carbon 
production methods and procurement of resources  • Increased exposure 
of urban infrastructure to climate hazards  
• Limited visibility on infrastructure operating conditions leading to frequent service breakdowns  • Building Materials: 
Building materials that enable infrastructure to last longer  
• Infra Monitoring: Infrastructure monitoring, analytics, and predictive maintenance solutions through 
digitization  • Increased adaptive 
capacity of urban infrastructure and populations to risk of climate hazards and events  
 
 
Emission 
Monitoring 
Systems  
(10%)  • Limited availability of 
information to design 
effective carbon reduction interventions  • Emissions 
Monitoring: Helps gather source of emissions by a particular source to design appropriate intervention  • Reduced GHG 
emissions  
• Improved monitoring of emissions to ensure accountability  • Lack of preparedness 
for climate hazards due to non- availability 
of climate information  
• Non availability of risk mitigation products to safeguard from weather changes  • Climate Information 
systems: Ensuring health and water security through modelling effect of climate change on regions and sectors  
• Parametric insurance systems: Protect livelihoods with insurance outcomes based on climate 
events  • Increased resilience 
of populations to climate hazards  
• Improved availability of climate information for urban planning  
 
Section 6: Climate Finance Context  
8. Emerging markets need climate financing as they need to balance the dual objectives of ensuring inclusive growth and 
fighting climate change. Fulfilment of this vision requires a well -executed multi -step strategy and the need to balance 
preferences of investors and stakeholders. Prosperete has selected target countries to establish the foundations for an 
emerging market focused financing ecosystem. The fund showcases the viability of climate solutions in EMs, attracting 
more capital for future funds and encouraging investors . 
9. Emerging markets face higher real -GDP losses, with losses of up to 15% of per capita GDP in South Asia and 6% in 
Africa and the Middle East by 205055, if the scale of investments remains unchanged.   Developing economies alone 
will require up to USD 5.8-5.9 trillion by 2030 for climate change action56, compared to USD 400 billion of investments 
planned currently57. The public sources of capital in EMs have fewer financial resources and lack institutional capacity 
to adapt to the impacts of climate change. Therefore, foreign investment, especially private capital, will be needed for 
Emerging Markets to achieve their climate goals. The International Monetary Fund ( IMF) estimates that the private 
sector will need to supply about 80% of the required climate investment for EMs, and this share rises to 90% exc. China
58. The perceived dual risk of financing EMs as well as climate solutions has restricted the flow of 
investments required to scale such solutions.  
 
A summary of climate financing gaps by country is highlighted below  
Country  Aspect  Agriculture and 
Food Security  Water Treatment 
and Water 
Security  Energy Access 
and Power 
Generation  Energy 
Efficiency  Low Emission 
Transport  
Bangladesh  Current  $5 billion  $2 billion  $8 billion  $1 billion  $3 billion


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 19 
   
 Financ e Gap $27 billion  $9 billion  $25 billion  $10 billion  $30 billion  
India Current  $50 billion  $45 billion  $100 billion  $25 $30 billion  
Financ e Gap $200 billion  $291 billion  $500 billion  $150 billion  $600 billion  
Mauritius  59,60 Current  $3 million  $50 million  $90 million  - $2 million  
Financ e Gap $1 billion  $1 billion  $2 billion  $1 billion  $2 billion  
10. There are only a few climate funds focused on Emerging Markets  and based in Emerging Markets. Our research 
highlights the difficulty, with only 9% of companies in EMs, in the climate space, successfully transitioning to Series 
B after seed funding, compared to the global average of 27% for similar companies . This stark difference 
underscores the critical funding gap hindering the efforts of promising climate start -ups to expand and scale operations, 
often leading to premature closure.   
11. The existing funds in these regions have built capacity to finance renewable energy 
projects but lack sectoral expertise to underwrite upcoming climate solutions.  In 
Bangladesh, climate companies have access to incubation and early- stage 
capital but need capital to scale operations post development of product / service.  Prosperete has done a landscaping of Venture Capital and Private Equity 
funds in Bangladesh and found that 80% of the private funds operating (exc. DFIs) in Bangladesh are restricted to early -stage venture capital investments.   
12. As an example, India itself has a capital availability gap of USD9 bn+ for climate solutions and this is most acute at the “missing middle” i.e., Growth stage, with an 85% gap based on the number of active climate funds.  
13. Addressing the funding gap is key to a vibrant climate ecosystem in EMs. Prosperete’ growth stage fund is targeted to 
fill this gap. In fact, the success of early -stage funds depends on the availability of growth stage capital to provide 
successful exits for their portfolio investments. Furthermore, these markets should be leverage to export climate solutions to other emerging markets and accelerate the creation of climate ecosystems across different markets.  
14. Through the creation of scaled companies, Prosperete will be able to attract large- scale commercial capital to climate 
finance. Currently, commercial and institutional investors find climate solutions unattractive due to limited scale and low-ticket size. A key emphasis is laid upon scaling Prosperete’s portfolio companies for investment by large institutional 
investors. Prosperete has also developed a strong network of partner funds across key markets to co- invest in growth 
stage companies across EMs.  
15. Driving a substantial increase in investment through blended finance mechanisms is imperative to attain climate objectives effectively. The Fund has  a blended structure and include a concessional layer to crowd in commercial 
investors, who have a high -risk perception due to the dual perceived risks of emerging markets and adoption risks of 
climate solutions. This strategic approach aims to broaden the spectrum of climate investors and expand private sector 
climate financing beyond traditional multilateral and development finance institutions. Investing at an inflection point for 
company growth and scale, Prosperete crowds  in equity co- investors in company financing rounds, as well as provide 
the critical equity layer that allows for additional debt leveraging.   
Section 6: Prosperete’s interventions designed to help vulnerable communities  
16. Prosperete's focus countries are highly susceptible to increasing hazardous climate effects. As outlined in Annex 23, these nations face significant risks from flooding, heatwaves, and droughts. IPCC AR6 identifies South Asia along with SIDS such as Maurit ius as global hotspots of high vulnerability. Vulnerability is higher in locations with poverty and high 
levels of climate- sensitive livelihoods
61. In line with UNDRRR62, vulnerability is defined as “The conditions determined 
by physical, social, economic, and environmental factors or processes which increase the susceptibility of an individual, a community, assets, or systems to the impacts of hazards”. Several of Prosper ete’s interventions lead to direct benefit 
to vulnerable communities by enhancing their income / greater resilience and indirect benefit by using technology to make climate solutions affordable.  
17. A few of illustrative vulnerabilities and Prosperete’s interventions are highlighted below:  
• The AR6 highlights that climate change will increasingly put pressure on food production and access, especially in vulnerable regions, undermining food security and nutrition.  Reports suggest 70% of smallholder farmers in India 
have lost 50% or more of a crop in the past three years due to climate related challenges  such as rainfall variability
63, 
putting a pressure on the livelihoods and food security of the farmers.  Prosperete may invest in increasing livelihood 
stability in climate vulnerable sectors such as agriculture through climate- resilient inputs, precision agriculture, and 
other interventions.  
• Research suggests that climate change can exacerbate energy poverty, especially in rural areas64. Prosperete’s 
investments are intended to increase the access to climate resilient livelihood by enabling access to reliable energy. Access to reliable energy can increase climate resilience for vulnerable households by powering essential services, enabling the use of energy -efficient technologies, and providing opportunities for income generation.  Furthermore, 
Investments in innovations in the agriculture- energy nexus such as solar powered irrigation and cold storage are 
expected to increase resilience of rural communities through productive use assets


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 20 
   
 • IPCC AR6 Chapter 8 highlights p oor households often lack the financial resources, social networks, and access to 
information needed to adapt to climate change impacts65. Prosperete will enable access and affordability of 
productive use assets for communities through investment and support for financiers who provide low -cost, often 
unsecured, lending to poor households. This can help people move from heat -wave prone manual  labour activities 
such as peddled- rickshaws to more productive use assets such as e- rickshaws, increasing income and reducing 
climate -related hazards.  
18. Prosperete invest s in scalable climate solutions and effectuate technology transfer across emerging markets for 
widescale adoption to mobilize large- scale private capital. Proliferation and exchange of best technologies will create 
a shared climate funding ecosystem across emerging markets, accelerating development in each country and 
benefitting communities with affordable climate solutions.  
19. The above are just illustrations of how Prosperete’s interventions will particularly benefit lower strata of society, 
enhancing their income, financial inclusion and reducing vulnerability of such citizens. Prosperete will particularly focus on gender outc omes as well to make sure its interventions benefit female members of society as well , as highlighted in 
section D.3.   
Section 7: Strategic Alignment 
How Prosperete complements existing projects  
20. Prosperete Growth Fund, through its themes, structure and investment instruments is designed to complement existing climate financing projects , as follows:  
The Prosperete Growth Fund, driven by private sector leadership, distinguishes itself from existing  public  interventions 
like the Global Environment Facility and the Climate Investment Fund by operating as a private sector fund that 
complements public sector energy transition endeavours. It addresses the dual challenge of leveraging catalytic capital 
to unlock  private and institutional investments for the development of low -carbon solutions , while simultaneously 
delivering essential services to underserved populations across the continent.  
While public sector initiatives play a vital role in realizing the goals of the Paris Accord through substantial interventions, emerging markets require approximately $1 trillion annually for mitigation and adaptation actions, with 90% of this financing ex pected to come from private capital. The Prosperete Growth Fund, through equity investments, aims to 
identify replicable business models in these sectors and provide equity financing to support further capital leveraging in their structures. This approach complements other GCF -funded projects, such as the KawiSafi II (FP210), and 
Avaana Sustainability Fund (SAP037), which offer capital across early  stage companies  and the Green Growth Equity 
Fund (FP164) that focuses on later stages of climate infrastructure solutions.  Prosperete is a bridge between regional 
funds looking to expand their solutions to, as well as implementing solutions from, other emerging markets. Prosperete is also work ing with debt capital providers to enable availability of additional funding for climate solutions.  
21. The Fund help s enhance the outcomes of climate- focused early- stage capital programs and green 
infrastructure programs:  
Emerging markets have attracted more than USD 2bn of early -stage capital in climate solutions between 2017- 2022. 
Without growth capital, such early -stage capital is at risk as investee companies will fail to scale. This is already visible 
in 3x mortality rate (vs. global climate  companies) by the companies reach Series B  or growth stage. Without adequate 
growth capital, the climate ecosystem will not mature and may face drying up of funding.  
Resilience and monitoring solutions are critical for trillions of dollars invested across infrastructure as well as security of clean energy investments. More than 1TW of global solar capacity is at risk of physical damage due to extreme weather conditions  caused by climate change. Insurance premiums in the solar industry are up 15% -45% and are 
becoming a major concern for the industry. Assets in high- hazard zones are finding it difficult to get insurance coverage 
from a single carrier beyond USD 5 million
66. 
Investments in digitization of green infrastructure will lead to higher utilization and life of infrastructure assets. 
Furthermore, data analytics will help study and design future climate resilient infrastructure. Prosperete’s investments will complement low-carbon infrastructure by enabling lower costs, improving reliability, helping consumer adoption, 
and/or improving performance and resilience of infrastructure assets . Prosperete’s investee companies will therefore 
be able to improve the r isk-return profile of existing and new climate infrastructure.  
Alignment with GCF’s Private Sector Strategy  
Prosperete Growth Fund is closely aligned to the key priorities set out in GCF’s Private Sector Strategy (19 May  
2022):  
22. Promote a conducive investment environment for combined climate and economic growth activities:   
The Prosperete Growth Fund plays a pivotal role in fostering an enabling investment environment within its targeted nations, thereby catalysing climate- friendly  
growth. It achieves this by showcasing the viability of private equity 
investment in these markets and actively contributing to the evolution of the investment ecosystem. This involvement 
encompasses engagement in consultations with the public sector and c ivil society, as well as the provision of support


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 21 
   
 for ecosystem development initiatives. By undertaking these measures, the fund not only facilitates sustainable 
economic development but also cultivates an environment conducive to long- term investment and growth.  
23. Accelerate innovation for business models, financial instruments and climate solutions :  
The Prosperete Growth Fund is structured to provide strategic support to pioneering enterprises and firms utilizing 
climate technologies within its designated sectors. Employing equity and quasi -equity financial instruments, the fund is 
distinguished by its adeptness in introducing innovative and adaptable terms into its investment agreements. This approach ensures that incentives are aligned, benefits are shared, and risks are effectively mitigated. Prosperete Growth Fund, through its equity investments, is dedicated to filling the gap of growth capital that is cons training the 
scale up of climate solutions.  
24. De-risk market -creating investments to crowd in private climate finance:  
The investment from the GCF in the Junior Equity tranche of the Prosperete Growth Fund will be pivotal to catalysing private climate finance to the climate solutions sector in Emerging Markets. Investors have the option of investing in developed markets (which they are closer to) and there are proactive government support programs in these countries such as the Inflation Reduction Act in USA, and the Green Deal in Europe. By mitigating investment risks and enhancing 
the appeal of risk -adjusted returns, the GCF's involvement will effectively address perceived and real risks for greater 
participation from private investors, thereby bolstering the flow of capital into climate- related initiatives.   
25. Strengthen domestic and regional financial institutions to scale up private climate finance:  
Prosperete investments in climate solutions will be a catalyst for investments from other financial institutions. Further, as portfolio companies scale and expand to other EMs, Prosperete will partner with regional funds for co- investment in 
such companies. Co- investment with Prosperete will help these funds underwrite deals and develop sector expertise. 
Furthermore, regional funds would provide local market understanding and support to expanding portfolio companies. The similarities in the climate needs and solutions across these countries and regions suggest clear benefits from following a cross -border approach to scaling. This will create an ecosystem for climate investing across EMs.  
26. Leverage improvements in the accreditation process, including a project -specific assessment approach and enhance 
GCF engagement with non -accredited entities.  
Prosperete Growth Stage Fund is an innovative fund utilizing a unique global emerging market collaborative approach to enable climate outcomes. Prosperete, backed by the extensive experience of its team, is approaching GCF directly through the PSAA route.  
GCF will act as Prosperete Growth Fund’s anchor investor, which will enable Prosperete to leverage GCF’s resources for enhancing climate outcomes of companies. By leveraging PSAA and programme- specific assessment, Prosperete 
will be able to work  with GCF directly and leverage GCF’s expertise in assisting portfolio companies. Success of 
Prosperete will serve as a template of how GCF supports innovative climate strategies in creating scaled outcomes for EMs.  
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages  plus diagram ) 
 
1. Prosperete Growth Fund aims to achieve climate mitigation and adaptation outcomes in emerging markets by investing 
for green growth. Unlike developed countries, emerging markets are not able to mobilize the funding required to scale climate solutions with the necessary  urgency.  
 While developed countries have large internal programs (Inflation 
Reduction Act in the US and the European Green Deal) to address climate mitigation and adaptation, emerging markets have limited resources to run such programs.  
2. An encouraging trend is a growing number of companies, both global and from emerging markets, have the ability to create cost -effective solutions that improve  access for people vulnerable to climate impacts in emerging societies. In 
most markets, such climate solutions have access to early -stage capital, allowing them to establish proof of concept.
   
However, the lack of growth capital poses a significant challenge in scaling and accelerating climate solutions in developing countries.  
3. Prosperete is therefore utilizing the innovative approach of undertaking a multi -country approach and utilizing 
technology transfer to ensure availability of climate solution in different markets and enable creation of ecosystems.  
The Prosperete Growth Fund theory of change is centred around the following paradigm shift:  
a) IF Prosperete  unlocks growth capital for low -carbon businesses and enables technology -transfer across emerging 
markets through capacity building, skill development, partnerships  and scaling of companies  
b) THEN  the ecosystem for climate investment will be catalyzed and accelerated through increased availability of 
climate solutions, leading to more commercial capital and more climate- focused companies  that will scale climate 
technologies and solutions across emerging markets leading to reduced GHG emissions and improved resilience  
c) BECAUSE  Prosperete’s demonstration effect of investment returns and high impact will create large- scale 
enterprises that focus on climate solutions


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 22 
   
  
 
                            Paradigm
ShiftIFProsperete unlocks growth capital forlow-carbon businesses andenables technology -transfer across emerging
markets through capacity building ,skilldevelopment ,partnerships andscaling ofcompanies THEN theecosystem
forclimate investment willbecatalyzed andaccelerated through increased availability ofclimate solutions ,leading
tomore commercial capital andmore climate -focused companies thatwillscale climate technologies andsolutions
across emerging markets leading toreduced GHG emissions and improved resilience BECAUSE Prosperete ’s
demonstration effect ofinvestment returns and high impact willcreate large -scale enterprises that focus on
climate solutions .
Assumptions
•Availability of attractive growth stage climate companies in participating countries
•Continued ability of emerging market economies to export climate solutions to each other
•Continued macro -economic stability in focus markets with ability to continue business operations and access ﬁnancing
•Rising demand for clean energy , mobility , and productive use products and services oﬀered by Prosperete investees .
•Costs of clean technologies and key companies continue to fall with economies of scale
•Ability of GCF and Prosperete ’s investments to create demonstration eﬀect , attracting private capital to climate companies
•Increasing maturity of climate capital markets and maturing of PE industry , including large climate funds looking to invest l arger amounts ,
which oﬀer exit opportunities for Prosperete portfolio companies
•Supportive policy and regulative environment and an ability to inﬂuence the sameBarrier
RisksLimited cr oss -
market
expansion and
exchange of
technologyFinancial barriers :
•Limited scale up
capital
•Risk-reward proﬁle
unattractive for
private investorsActivitiesActivity 1: Setting
Up Equity Fund
•1.1: Equity Fund
Formation
•1.2: T eam Buildout
•1.3: Fundraising
Activities
•1.4: Management
over 10-year life ;OutputsOutcome
And Co -
Beneﬁts
Adoption barriers for
climate solutions
driven by high cost
(adverse economies
scale with limited
scale in single market )4: Capacity Building
•4.1:Development of Action Plan
and organization building
•4.2: Participation in Management /
Board Meetings of portfolio
compa nies
•4.3: Knowledge and best practices
sessions
•4.4: Holding mentorship sessions
for women in climate ecosystem
and focus on women in pipeline
Risks :
•Failure of existing climate
tech investments
•Limited scale of companies
•Growth constrains in EMsActivity 3: Technology
transfer
•3.1: Development of expansion
plan for portfolio companies
•3.2: Export to o ther mark ets
through inputs and Prosperete
network
•3.3:Regional funds
collaboration (via partnerships
or otherwise ) for assistance
and knowledge exchangeActivity 2: Growth Stage
Investments
•2.1:Ongoing operations : Equity
Fund administration and
reporting , deal sourcing , due
diligence
•2.2: Deployment of capital in 10 to
12 Portfolio companies
•2.3: Post -Investment Engagement
•2.4: Exit investments , return
capital and proﬁts to investors ,
close Equity fund
Nascent
climate
ecosystems in
emerging
marketsOutcome 1: Reduced
GHG emissions due to
adoption of solutions
in energy transition ,
low-emissions
transportation and
urban environmentOutcome 2: Increased
climate resilience for
vulnerable populations ,
increased food and
water security and
enabling resilient
infrastructureOutcome 3:
Increased
availability of
climate solutions
across emerging
markets through
technology transferOutcome 4:
Strengthened
ecosystem for
climate innovations
with knowledge
exchange , skills
developmentEconomic Co -
beneﬁt :
Creation of
jobs in
climate
sectorGender Co -
beneﬁt :
Enhanced
gender
inclusivity in
climate
ecosystem
Output 1:
Creation of
Prosperete
Growth FundOut put  2: Grow th
Stage Investments
and support for
sca ling  of a pprox . 10
to 12 portfolio
compa niesOut put  3: T echnology
transfer by companies
through sharing of
knowledge , exports ,
expansion of
operations , or joint
venturesOut put  4:Collaboration
(via partnerships or
otherwise ) established
with regional funds for
assistance , knowledge
exchange and co -
investmentsOutput 5: Skills
developed in climate
ecosystem through
mentorship sessions
and publishing of best
practices


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 23 
   
  
4. The theory of change addresses the key market barriers and risks as follows:  
 
a) Barrier 1: Limited scale up capital and Risk -reward profile unattractive for private investors  
Limited access to growth equity is one of the most significant barriers hindering the transfer of necessary low -
carbon and climate resilient technologies. In earlier tech funding waves, and to a large extent even today, the 
focus has been on asset -light so lutions, which do not require large amounts of capital. However, the 
development of climate solutions requires technology to work on physical assets, leading to significantly higher 
capital needs and longer gestation periods. Absence of growth capital affects companies’ ability to scale and 
create the required impact which in turn reduces their ability to provide attractive returns to commercial investors. Emerging markets have sector agnostic funds providing initial capital but face a dearth of capital for growth stage.  
This gap has been widely acknowledged, with IEA stating “outside major hubs like the US and China, most 
countries do not have available local investment funds to match the needs of their clean energy start -ups, 
especially during scale- up”
 67 
At an early stage, the funding requirements for climate solutions are not substantial. As a result, a number of 
early -stage climate funds have been established using domestic capital. However, as climate solutions 
progress and scale, several founders across emerging markets have highlighted the absence of the larger fundraising required during the growth stage. There is a need for growth equity capital  to catalyse  capital crowd-
in to climate solutions. There is not enough local institutional capital available with a mandate to invest in green 
projects. There is an urgent need for innovative financial solutions to de- risk institutional investors, pool funds 
at scale and provide the much- needed equity capital.  
b) Barrier 2: Adoption barriers for climate solutions driven by high cost  
 
Climate change solutions often encounter limited scalability when confined to a single market  as they are local 
and contextualised, inhibiting their overall impact. Expanding into multiple markets not only broadens their 
reach but also unlocks a larger Total Addressable Market (TAM), fostering greater adoption and accelerating 
the transition to sustainable practices on a global scale. Serving the larger number  of businesses and 
consumers  provides climate solutions the critical scale required and helps them reduce cost through economies 
of scale, thereby increasing the affordability of the solution. This broader reach allows for more c omprehensive 
implementation of solutions, thereby maximizing their effectiveness in mitigating climate change impacts.  
 
c) Barrier 3:  Limited cross -market expansion and exchange of technology  
 
Many essential technologies vital for facilitating the transition to low -carbon practices in Emerging Markets 
remain restricted to a single market . The current approach of independently developing technologies creates 
duplication of effort as many of these markets have created effective solutions . Consequently, there exists no 
global climate company that serves emerging markets.  
This siloed approach is due to limited market knowledge and availability of capital. Overcoming these barriers 
requires an integrated approach which can help companies think beyond home markets, reduce cost and 
increase adoption, creating positive outcomes for the customers, company, and climate ecosystem at large.  
Additionally, the current lack of partnerships between funds for knowledge exchange exacerbates this issue, 
hindering the efficient dissemination of innovative solutions. As a result, efforts are often duplicated, leading to 
inefficiencies and the suboptim al use of the already limited resources available.   This siloed approach partially 
results from experience at the intersection of having a global network and expertise along with investments in 
climate technology.  
 
d) Barrier 4:  Nascent climate ecosystems in emerging markets  
 
Currently, only a handful of emerging markets boast thriving climate ecosystems capable of fostering innovative solutions and attracting growth capital. Prosperete analysis shows only a handful of countries  have developed 
markets which can attract growth stage capital. These markets require the adoption of climate solutions to a 
viable threshold to demonstrate to budding entrepreneurs to develop solutions which can attract growth stage capital for scale.


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 24 
   
 To cataly se progress, efforts must focus on exporting successful models and collaborating with global funds to 
cultivate similar ecosystems elsewhere. This entails leveraging successful case studies and utilizing co-
investments with regional funds, facilitating know ledge transfer, and establishing conducive regulatory 
frameworks. By nurturing robust climate ecosystems in more emerging markets, Prosperete is able to unlock 
immense potential for scalable climate solutions, driving sustainable development and resilience worldwide.  
Due to existing gender norms in emerging markets, there is limited participation of women in development of climate solutions. The establishment of climate ecosystems in emerging markets presents a unique opportunity to foster gender equality outcomes for women. By ensuring women's active participation and leadership in climate initiatives, Prosperete 
can not only address environmental challenges but also empower women 
economically and socially, contributing to more inclusive and sustainable development pat hways.  
 
e) Risks:  Potential failure of existing climate investments, limited scale of companies and growth 
constrain ts in Emerging Markets  
 
Over the last six years, emerging markets have drawn in excess of  USD 4 billion in early -stage capital directed 
towards climate solutions. However, the sustainability and scalability of these investments are contingent upon the availability of growth capital. Failure to secure such capital jeopardizes the ability of inv estee companies to 
expand their operations effectively. Moreover, the absence of sufficient growth capital poses a significant risk to the maturation of the climate ecosystem, potentially leading to a depletion of funding resources over time.  
 Without access to growth capital, Prosperete has witnessed number of companies face plateauing revenue, 
leading to sub- optimal impact and growth returns. Emerging markets require scal ed solutions in order to 
overcome challenges posed by climate change.  Without adequate capital being attracted to Emerging Markets, 
key solutions to address climate change, which already exist, will remain limited to developed markets for the 
most part.  Climate Change has to be addressed globally and Prosperete’s goal is to mak e sure that climate 
solutions are expanded across Emerging Markets and scaled enough to attract capital from institutional 
investors. Without such capital the emerging markets stand may be exposed to several adverse consequences 
such as:  
1. Limited Mitigation Efforts: Emerging markets may struggle to invest in renewable energy projects, energy efficiency measures, and other initiatives aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions. This could result in higher levels of pollution and exacerbate c limate change.  
2. Vulnerability to Climate Impacts: Without adequate resources to adapt, emerging markets may be more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, such as extreme weather events, sea-
level rise, and 
disruptions to agriculture and water resources. This could lead to economic losses, displacement of 
populations, and increased poverty.  United Nations  estimates that the annual economic costs of natural 
disasters in Asia and the Pacific could reach $160 billion by 2030 if adaptation measures are not 
implemented.68 
3. Missed Economic Opportunities: Climate change presents opportunities for innovation and investment in green technologies and sustainable infrastructure. Without climate capital, emerging markets may miss out on these opportunities and fall behind in the gl obal transition to a low -carbon economy.  
4. Increased Dependency on Fossil Fuels: In the absence of alternative sources of funding, emerging markets may continue to rely on fossil fuels for energy generation and economic development. This could lock them into high- carbon pathways and make it more di fficult to transition to cleaner energy sources in 
the future.  
5. International Cooperation: Climate finance often involves support from developed countries and 
international organizations to help developing nations tackle climate change. A study by the London 
School of Economics (LSE) estimates that the financial impacts of climate change on emerging market economies could range from $400 billion to $1.2 trillion per year by 2100, depending on the severity of climate change and the effecti veness of adaptation measures.
69 
 
Overall, the lack of climate capital could hinder the ability of emerging markets to effectively address climate change, resulting in environmental degradation, social disruption, and economic setbacks . 
 
5. Prosperete Growth Fund address es the above- mentioned barriers and risks as follows : 
 
Through investment of growth capital in the scaling of climate businesses, Prosperete Growth Fund support s the rapid 
acceleration of supply of essential products and services to millions of people which is expected to in turn demonstrate the technological suitability of these products and commercial viability of these businesses.  The Fund will lead to 
identification and development of well selected companies that have developed and deployed climate and sustainability


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 25 
   
 solutions that can be applied across EMs to have impact at a global scale.  Prosperete’s sample pipeline demonstrates 
the company’s ability to achieve scale, generate financial returns, as well as serve multiple markets. Post the creation 
of the fund, further diligence on investments and selection of the best climate solutions, along with support for organization building and global operations, will  create positive outcomes from these investments.  
 Prosperete is also promoting a unique business model of working with partner funds in Emerging Markets.  By doing 
so, Prosperete contributes to creating an ecosystem for climate investments and increase capacity in evaluating and 
investing in climate mitigation and adaptation solutions across EMs. This will include evaluating investee companies of partner funds to see if the solutions they offer can be scaled to India/South and South- East Asia and other EMs. The 
similarities in the climate needs and solutions across these countries and regions suggest clear benefits of following a cross- border approach to scal ing.  
 Prosperete takes  a nuanced approach of differentiating its value- add approach and activities basis the needs of the 
target country. This unique model of partnerships across EMs will lead to proliferation of climate investing because of Prosperete’s regional partnerships and multiplication of large- scale climate investments across  EMs.   Prosperete has 
already identified several funds looking to establish such a partnership and is in the process of formalizing these partnerships for sharing of pipeline companies, knowledge exchange, and portfolio support.  
 
6. Prosperete Growth Fund aims to complement governmental initiatives by investing in strategic areas primed for private sector engagement, such as two and three- wheeler electric vehicles (EVs), battery manufacturing, and associated 
charging infrastructure. This investment is intended to facilitate the introduction of new technologies, validate innovative financing models aimed at enhancing affordability and accessibility to electric transportation. At scale, these solutions  
are projected to substantially redu
ce emissions from the transportation sector, which currently contributes to 
approximately a quarter of all energy -related CO2 emissions. Further, Prosperete Growth Fund seek s to invest in 
businesses that utilize innovative pay as you go models in energy transition. The fund will also invest in agricultural 
infrastructure and technologies that supports income generation and increases smallholder farmers adaptive capacity 
to the effects of climate change. Increasing access to these products will likely also empower small holder farmers . 
Prosperete Growth Fund also focuses on mitigation and adaptation outcomes through distributed renewable energy systems, low -carbon building materials, circular economy practices, and constructing resilient infrastructure, which 
enhance sustainable energy access and reduce emissions from urban development.  
 
7. By establishing  a USD 220 million fund, Prosperete will enable an estimated 9+ million tons of CO 2 savings (directly 
and indirectly) and help more than 3 million people adapt to climate change during the fund’s life. Prosperete will invest 
to help scale enterprises, attract commercial capital from institutional investors and drive transformative change. As these companies scale, they will (i) generate employment (ii) provide access to low -carbon and climate- resilience  
solutions in different emerging markets, and (iii) improve affordability of such solutions. The companies supported will 
continue to have additional impact  post Prosperete’s exit as well.  (iv) Prosperete’s model of working in partnership with 
other funds in the region will create co- investment opportunities, more awareness, knowledge sharing and cross 
fertilization across emerging markets to address climate change at an accelerated pace.
 
 
8. The following table summarizes the key barriers and how they are addressed through the theory of change (activities 
and outputs):  
Barrier  Output Area  Activities / Sub -activities that address the identified 
barrier  
Barrier 1:  Limited scale up 
capital and Risk-reward profile 
unattractive for private 
investors  Output 2: Growth Stage Investments 
and support for scaling of approx. 10 to 
12 portfolio companies  
 Activity 2: Growth Stage Investments  
Sub-Activity 2.1: Ongoing operations: Equity Fund 
administration and reporting, deal sourcing, due 
diligence  
Sub-Activity 2.2: Deployment of capital in 10 to 12 
Portfolio companies  
Sub-Activity 2.3: Post -Investment Engagement  
Sub-Activity 2.4: Exit investments, return capital and 
profits to investors, close fund  
Barrier 2:  Adoption barriers for 
climate solutions driven by high cost 
 Output 2: Growth Stage Investments 
and support for scaling of approx. 10 to 12 portfolio companies
 
Output 3: Technology transfer by 
companies through sharing of 
knowledge, exports, expansion of 
operations, or joint ventures  
 Activity 2: Growth Stage Investments  
Sub-Activity 2. 3: Post-Investment Engagement  
 Activity 3: Technology transfer   
Sub-Activity 3.1: Development of expansion plan for 
portfolio companies  
Sub-Activity: 3.2: Export to other markets through 
inputs and Prosperete network


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 26 
   
 Sub-Activity 3.3: Regional  funds collaboration (via 
partnerships or otherwise) for assistance and 
knowledge exchange  
Barrier 3:  Limited cross -market 
expansion and exchange of 
technology  Output 2: Growth Stage Investments 
and support for scaling for 10 to 12 
portfolio companies  
Output 3: Technology transfer by 
companies through exports, expansion of operations, or joint ventures
 
 Activity 2: Growth Stage Investments  
Sub-Activity 2.2: Deployment of capital in 10 to 12 
Portfolio  companies  
Sub-Activity 2. 3: Post-Investment Engagement  
 Activity 3: Technology transfer   
Sub-Activity 3.1: Development of expansion plan for 
portfolio companies  
Sub-Activity: 3.2: Export to other markets through 
inputs and Prosperete network  
Sub-Activity 3.
3: Regional  funds collaboration (via 
partnerships or otherwise) for assistance and 
knowledge exchange  
Barrier 4:  Nascent climate 
ecosystems in emerging 
markets  
 Output 4: Collaboration (via 
partnerships or otherwise) established 
with regional funds for assistance, 
knowledge exchange and co-
investments  
Output 5: Skills developed in climate 
ecosystem through mentorship 
sessions and publishing of best 
practices  
 Activity 3:  Technology transfer across EMs  
Sub-Activity 3.3: Regional  funds collaboration (via 
partnerships or otherwise) for assistance and 
knowledge exchange  
 Activity 4: Capacity Building  
Sub-Activity 4.1: Development of Action Plan and 
helping with growth  
Sub-Activity 4.2: Participation in Management / Board 
Meetings of portfolio companies  
Sub-Activity 4.3: Knowledge and best practices 
sessions  
Sub-Activity 4.4: Holding mentorship sessions for 
women in climate ecosystem and focus on women in 
pipeline   
 
9. Commercial investors globally are increasingly directing capital towards climate solutions. However, large investors 
typically require organizations to operate at a certain scale to deploy such capital. The perceived risks associated with investing in emer ging markets (EMs), coupled with adoption risks related to climate solutions, impede capital flows.  
 
Prosperete, through its investment at growth stage, will facilitate market development by leading growth stage 
investment rounds and leveraging its extensive network to attract co- investors in its investment rounds. Additionally, 
Prosperete focuses on scal ing climate solution companies to appeal to institutional investors, with support from the 
Green Climate Fund (GCF) serving as a crucial signal of viability and scalability in the climate sector, ultimately 
encouraging further investment from other stakeho lders.  
 Prosperete estimates  that the F und will be able to mobilize more than a USD 1 billion in climate financing from public 
and private financing. This  will be enabled through investments in rounds where Prosperete invests and further 
fundraises by the company Prosperete team will proactively help portfolio companies to have the right capital structure and have access to debt.  
 
10. The Fund activities intend to directly contribute to making wider options for low carbon productive use available and accessible to lower income people; ensuring companies have necessary liquidity and capital to scale and deliver low 
carbon business models  and meeting high standards in environmental and social risk management. In turn, these drive 
the following long- term outcomes:  
 
11. Outcome 1: 
 Reduced GHG emissions due to adoption of solutions in energy transition, low -emission 
transportation and urban environment  
The increased emissions from emerging markets could undermine global efforts to mitigate climate change, as they 
could grow their economies significant contributors to global emissions. This could make it more challenging to limit global warming to well below 2 degrees  Celsius, as agreed upon in the Paris Agreement .  
Most Emerging Markets have growing and young populations, and energy demand is expected to grow. To make sure that the growth in demand for energy is met from renewable and non- emitting sources, alternatives to fossil fuels at 
affordable costs and equivalent reliability and hours of service is imperative. Prosperete is focusing on companies that provide such solutions through multi -renewable energy sources, increasing energy productivity of existing solar and 
wind farms, battery and pump storage solutions t hat address intermittency of renewable energy and grid -based


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 27 
   
 solutions that improve the offtake of renewable energy. If EMs were to meet their increasing energy demands primarily 
through fossil fuels, there would likely be several significant impacts on the climate, such as:  
1. Greenhouse Gas Emissions: Increased reliance on fossil fuels for energy generation would lead to a 
significant rise in emissions, contributing to global warming and climate change.  
2. Air Pollution: Burning fossil fuels releases not only CO2 but also other pollutants such as sulphur  dioxide 
(SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and particulate matter. This can worsen air quality, leading to health problems and 
environmental degradation, including smog, acid rain, and respiratory diseases.  
4. Water Consumption: Fossil fuel extraction and power generation can be water -intensive processes, 
particularly in regions already facing water scarcity. This increased water consumption can strain freshwater resources, affecting ecosystems and communities dependent on them.  
5. Vulnerability to Climate Impacts: Continued reliance on fossil fuels perpetuates a high -carbon development 
pathway, making these countries more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.  
This presents an opportunity for an accelerated energy transition. These economies have already shown rapid deployment over the past decade as development of renewable energy technology such as solar has matured, but 
often there are barriers to adoption to renewable energy such as ability of the grid to adapt to increased variability, energy storage etc. Investments into solutions that enable energy transition and adoption of renewable energy are 
expected to lead to significant climate outcomes, such as  reduced energy intensity of industries leading to GHG 
emissions reduction and availability of reliable clean energy to households and businesses . 
Mobility and logistics constitute the distributed infrastructure vital for facilitating market transactions and driving economic growth.  in car ownership in EMs, issues such as traffic congestion, air pollution, infrastructure strain, 
pressure on fuel demand and energy security and environmental concerns arise.  Comparatively, in developed 
markets, where car ownership levels are already high, the focus is often on managing the negative impacts of 
automobile use, such as reducing emissions, promoting alternat ive transportation modes, and investing in sustainable 
urban planning. Policies and regulations related to vehicle emissions standards, fuel efficiency, congestion pricing, 
and public transportation infrastructure are more established in developed economies.  This disparity 
disproportionately affects poorer populations, leading to increased prices of essential goods and restricted mobility. Integrating advanced data and sensor technology and optimizing vehicle efficiency offer promising avenues to enhance service quality, extend coverage, and lower costs, thus alleviating these burdens.  
Moreover, higher upfront cost of electric vehicles often reduces affordability of underserved communities. Prosperete will invest in green financing solutions which helps such communities increase their income through such productive-use assets , very similar to how ICE 2 and 3- wheeler industry grew with the availability of targeted financing, that 
makes the product more affordable.  
Investing in clean technologies for urban environments is critical to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and improving air quality, which directly enhances public health and sustainability. Such investments drive the development of resilient infrastructure,  promote energy efficiency, and foster sustainable urban growth, ensuring cities can meet the challenges 
of climate change effectively. This is particularly important in emerging markets, which are witnessing a rapid pace of urbanization.  
 
Low-carbon infrastructure emits less carbon emissions  than traditional infrastructure and is also more resilient to the 
impacts of severe climate events. Climate- resilient infrastructure, on the other hand, can enhance the dependability of 
service delivery, extend the lifespan of assets, and safeguard invest ment returns.  Emerging markets are growing rap idly 
and are expected to account for majority of future construction activity in the world . To meet this demand for 
infrastructure and built environment sustainably, Prosperete would, through their portfolio companies, provide these 
countries an opportunity to adopt low -carbon practices  in new buildings . Prosperete will invest in sustainable building 
materials, not only mitigating emissions from hard to abate sector s such as cement, concrete and steel, but also enable 
creation of affordable housing and prefabrication to build with speed, acting as a mitigant and means to adapt agains t 
vulnerabil ities from climate change.  
 
Prosperete will invest in sustainable building materials, not only mitigating emissions from hard to abate sector but also enable creation of affordable housing, acting as a key mitigan t against vulnerabilities from climat e change. Built 
environment reduces climate vulnerability by providing a safe and stable environment that protects individuals and 
communities from extreme weather events such as storms, floods, and heatwaves.  Well-designed built forms and 
infrastructure can incorporate climate- resilient f
eatures such as insulation, ventilation, and durable construction 
materials, which help to minimize risks and damages during climate -related disasters. Further , access to affordable


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 28 
   
 housing and shelters  contributes to overall community resilience by ensuring people have a place to seek refuge and 
recover in the aftermath of such extreme events .  
 
Prosperete's portfolio companies will enhance infrastructure asset longevity and resilience by offering real -time data 
and analytics. This improves performance predictability and enables quick responses to climate change impacts across 
various sectors, enabling tailored interventions to mitigate climate risks effectively, thereby advancing adaptation efforts.  
These can be achieved through the portfolio companies employing principles of: circular economy, use of low carbon building materials, lower land and water footprint. Furthermore, the integration of AI in industrial processes enhances 
efficiency, leading to significant mitigation benefits. AI -driven predictive maintenance reduces equipment downtime and 
defects, optimizing resource utilization. Real -time monitoring and data analytics streamline operations, minimizing 
energy consumption and waste generation. Ultimately, AI fosters sustainable industrial practices, mitigating 
environmental impacts.  
 
12. Outcome 2:  Increased climate resilience for vulnerable populations, increased food and water security and 
enabling resilient infrastructure  
 
Enhancing the resilience of lower -income populations involves providing access to climate- friendly productive solutions, 
bolstering food security, and offering a wider array of reliable climate- resilient opportunities for employment, income 
generation, and economic advancement. An ancillary advantage of this heightened resilience is the expansion and 
encouragement  of work opportunities for both men and women.  As outlined in section B.1., emerging markets confront 
significant climate hazards such as heighten ed droughts, extreme rainfall, and exposure to severe heat waves, 
alongside increased weather variability. Investing in the specified energy and climate solutions is anticipated to fortify the resilience of the businesses served, enabling them to more effectively cater to low -income clientele amidst these 
challenges. Thus, it becomes essent ial to foster businesses that empower communities to diversify their incomes, 
whether through increasing affordability or promoting adaptation measures that enhance commu nity resilience. For 
example, the solar -powered water pump company can help reduce water stress and at the same time increase farmer 
income generation due to higher yields.  
 
13. Outcome 3: Increased availability of climate solutions across emerging markets through technology transfer  
 Prosperete is focused on creating advanced climate development ecosystems in emerging markets by exporting clean technologies and partnering with regional investment funds. Through collaboration with investors  and institutions, 
Prosperete is build ing a strong market pipeline, assess ing global scalability, and devis ing tailored expansion plans for 
portfolio companies in various countries.  
Technology transfer is about the sharing among stakeholders of knowledge, experience, products, solutions  and 
equipment for mitigating and adapting to climate change. It is a process of learning to understand, utilize and replicate technology, including the capacity to choose it, adapt it to local conditions and integrate it with indigenous technologies. This also includes export of products and services across different geographies. Technology transfer is essential for 
building resilient ecosystems and tac kling climate change. Sharing innovations in energy transition, low -emission 
transport, sustainable agriculture, and waste management will hasten the shift to low -carbon economies, lower costs, 
and promote best practices, driving economic growth and foster ing new climate- focused enterprises.  
 Our work has shown that there are multiple companies and solutions that can be replicated and deployed across emerging markets. However, investors need to see examples of successful companies and robust ecosystems in order to deploy more capital in such solutions across newer markets. To ensure technology transfer, Prosperete has set 
targets across:  
• Building a geographically diversified pipeline (certain % of pipeline from each participating country)  
• A minimum % of proposed investee companies to have technology transfer action plan agreed prior to the 
investment  
• Monitoring of execution of technology transfer plan by companies  
• Partnership with other funds for local expertise and sharing of pipeline  
 
14. Outcome 4: Strengthened ecosystem for climate innovations with knowledge exchange, skills development 
Few emerging markets currently possess thriving climate ecosystems. Developing these requires a tailored approach, ensuring the best solutions are scaled to optimize climate investments. Partnerships with institutions facilitates  
knowledge and investment flows, bridging gaps to accelerate climate action. This strategy will lower costs through economies of scale, expand market reach, and address climate challenges. As companies grow through technology transfer, local ecosystems wil l mature, boosting investor  confidence and creating a shared climate funding ecosystem 
across emerging markets, benefiting global communities .


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 29 
   
 Furthermore, Prosperete would work on gender outcomes to ensure that such ecosystems are most inclusive. This 
will ensure increased economic participation, safer working environment and accelerated climate action in these 
markets on a sustained basis.  
B.2 (b).  Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2  
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
cities , 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2  
Health, well -
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Reduced GHG 
emissions due to  
adoption  of 
solutions in energy 
transition, low -
emission 
transportation and 
urban environment  ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Increased climate 
resilience for 
vulnerable 
populations, 
increased food and 
water security and 
enabling resilient 
infrastructure  ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ 
Increased 
availability of 
climate solutions 
across emerging 
markets through 
technology transfer  ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ 
Strengthened 
ecosystem for 
climate innovations 
with knowledge 
exchange, skills 
development  ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ 
         
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Creation of jobs in 
climate sector  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Enhanced  gender 
inclusivity in climate 
ecosystem  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
Setting up and operating USD 220 million Investment Fund  
1. Prosperete is setting up a USD 220mn growth equity fund to promote SMEs and start -ups focused on climate mitigation 
and adaptation by leveraging technology  and business model innovation to provide solutions at scale.  
Prosperete’s market assessment over the last two years across select markets , shows a lack of growth equity that limits 
the ability of innovative start-ups and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) to achieve scale and create large scale 
impact.  
2. Prosperete Growth Fund will leverage private and institutional capital at the fund level for further investment into low -
carbon projects in Emerging Markets. The key output of the program is long- term investment of Equity capital in (1) 
Energy Transition, (2) Food and Water Security , (3) Low -emission transport, and (4) Urban Environment and Data


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 30 
   
 Systems projects with strong climate impact and innovation potential. These sectors correspond to the following GCF 
result areas : 
2.1 MRA – 1: Energy Generation and Access  
2.2 MRA – 2: Low Emission Transport  
2.3 MRA – 3: Buildings, Cities, industries, and appliances  
2.4 ARA – 1: Most vulnerable people and communities  
2.5 ARA – 2: Health, well -being, food and water security  
2.6 ARA – 3: Infrastructure and Built Environment  
3. Prosperete’s fund is targeted to address the missing middle of growth stage between early -stage capital and such late-
stage capital. Growth equity, along with Prosperete’s support for portfolio companies  for market expansion, will enable 
creation of large- scale global enterprises that can successfully crowd- in late -stage private capital to climate sectors . 
4. Prosperete Growth focus es on growth stage companies with ticket sizes of USD 5 million - USD 2 0 million and on its 
core expertise of scaling businesses  across different markets through its global experience and network . Prosperete 
will create positive outcomes by investing in and scaling mitigation and adaptation solutions that have achieved product 
market fit. The Fund will also invest in transitioning companies that have existing businesses and are looking to 
transition to greening their operations and reducing their carbon footprint, but face constraints in pivoting and scaling 
such solutions. The constraints include high risk perception towards relatively newer businesses, limited availability of capital, lack of understanding of global markets , affordability of climate solutions 
and talent pool for building at scale. These legacy businesses can utilise their expertise across different markets, complex supply chains, and customer understanding for efficient deployment of climate solutions.  
5. Prosperete has identified and evaluated founders whose companies 
offer climate solutions scale and expand their reach across emerging markets that are encountering similar challenges. Prosperete will catalyse  
private finance supported by concessional equity from GCF to invest in growth stage 
companies that address climate challenges in EMs effectively and improve the livelihoods of those affected by climate change.  
6. Without adequate growth capital, these solutions remain confined to small -scale operations, thereby inherently limiting 
their impact on mitigating climate change. One significant barrier to the adoption of such solutions, particularly in Emerging Markets, is the affordability factor. Many climate solutions come with initial investment costs that can 
be prohibitive for businesses and communities with limited resources.  To foster widespread adoption, it is 
essential to make these solutions more economically v iable and accessible. Prosperete will help climate solutions grow, 
reducing costs through economies of scale, and provide transition finance to make these solutions more accessible. This is expected to accelerate the deployment of affordable and scalable climate solutions, facilitate their integration 
into people’s daily lives, and promote sustainable development on a global scale.  
7. Prosperete would invest USD 5 million to USD 20 million (excluding co- investments) , giving  the Fund a significant 
minority stake to ensure that Prosperete can guide the investee/founders with strategic inputs and ensure adherence to environmental, social and governance standards. It is expected that the Fund will make 10- 12 such investments over 
the Fund’s life.  
8. The Prosperete Growth Fund's comprehensive sector mapping and expertise underscore the significant market 
opportunities within the target sectors. Within the fund's investment pipeline, the Prosperete team has curated an indicative advanced pipeline featur ing investment opportunities across our focal verticals where it can deploy money 
post availability of capital.  
9. The program is uniquely designed to address financial, technical, policy and knowledge gaps hindering the uptake of innovative technologies and business models required for the transition to low carbon and climate resilient pathways. The program is in line with NDCs as outlined in section B. 1. 
10. Prosperete’s Growth Fund is of ESS risk category  I-2. Prosperete primarily invest s in solutions with environmental 
or safety risks in category B or category C . However, given climate solutions’ link to physical assets, some solutions 
such as recycling, sustainable HVAC solutions, or battery manufacturing may have operation centres. Using the weakest link approach, the programme has been categorized in risk cate gory I-2. 
Investments from Prosperete Growth Fund: 
1. Prosperete’s investment criteria is multi -faceted to ensure both commercial and climate outcomes from its investments. 
The preliminary eligibility criteria utilized while identifying companies at screening stage is highlighted below:  
o Focus Areas: Green Projects  in the sectors/focus  areas of Prosperete which have carbon mitigation / adaptation 
impact . Sectors to include energy, energy efficiency, food and water security, mobility and transportation, urban 
environment and data systems. Prosperete applies the IFC exclusion list .


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 31 
   
 o Exposure norms: Single company investment capped at 20% of fund size and single sector exposure capped at 
40% of fund size.  
o Stage: Companies looking for scale- up capital to expand their climate- focused offerings  
o Any E&S Category A projects would not be eligible for financing  
2. Geographical Considerations: Prosperete invest s in companies wherein Prosperete investment is utilized substantially 
in in one or more of the focus countries where NOLs have been obtained i.e., Bangladesh, India, and Mauritius .  
3. Prosperete evaluates companies’ ability to enable technology transfer through export or expansion of company’s 
offerings. Possibility of such transfer and proposed expansion plan, if any, will be an input for growth projections.  
4. Prosperete further evaluates  a company’s climate thesis against possible technologies and sub- sectors as enlisted below 
and climate impact of investment as per  Eligibility Criteria.  
5. Technologies/sub -sectors:  Prosperete Growth Fund invest s in low -carbon productive business deploying climate 
technologies in the focus countries. The below list provides indicative set of sub- sectors where Prosperete may invest, 
these may be in companies solely designed for such purpose or existing players who are expanding their businesses 
into such products / solutions. Prosperete also consider s investments in solutions that accelerate adoption of these 
products / services. The Fund may add additional sectors basis development of solutions at growth stage and mitigation 
/ adaptation impact:  
Segment  / sub -sector  Description  
Energy  Transition  
Distributed renewables  (+ 
storage)  Solar  home  systems  for households  and commercial and industrial solar, including minigrids  
Energy  storage  (primarily  
battery  energy  storage 
systems)  Grid-connected storage  
Energy storage solutions for consumers and businesses,  specifically  those  that increase  the usability  of 
renewable  energy  solutions (e.g. home energy  storage)  
Battery recycling / 2nd life  
models  Recycling/upcycling of used Li -ion and other batteries for reuse  of component  materials  or repurposing  for 
2nd life batteries  
Smart  metering  Smart metering systems for grid -connected and off -grid distribution  networks,  to make power  grids  more  
capable  of efficiently  and reliably operating  with renewables  
Renewable  energy  
financing  Financing platforms and fintech solutions for renewable energy  companies  and projects,  leveraging  AI and 
credit  algorithms  for optimal  credit  risk management  
Modernization  of Grids 
and Software  Software platforms focused on energy sector, including  workforce  management  platforms,  procurement  
solutions,  marketplaces,  AI and data tools  - all to better performing energy supply chain; Integrated software  
and smart  device  systems  for remote monitoring and control of energy generation assets, and reduction  in 
energy  consumption  
Energy Supply Chain  Clean energy production equipment such as hydrogen electrolysers and solar panels  
New forms of clean energy  New forms of clean energy such as green hydrogen , new solar technologies  etc. 
Energy Efficiency  Monitoring and development of better processes for lower energy consumption or Use of efficient 
equipment and reduction in HVAC etc. services consumed for savings; Industrial Efficiency: Energy 
efficient equipment across HVAC, motors, pumps etc.  
Target improvements in energy efficiency must be at least 20 % against  a conservative baseline.  
Urban environment and data systems  
Infra Monitoring  Infrastructure monitoring and predictive maintenance solutions through digitization  
“Green”  manufacturing  Manufacturing processes and equipment that use less raw  material,  produce  less waste  and consume  less 
energy.  
Sustainable packaging 
and other materials  Alternatives to traditional packaging and other materials that  offer smaller carbon footprints (during 
production, transport, use or disposal) – e.g. bioplastics, multi -use plastics, recycled paper  and cardboard,  
etc. 
Low-carbon building 
material  Materials – such as concrete, recycled panels that  have lower carbon footprints (during production, 
transport, use or disposal)  than baseline  alternatives over lifetime  
Waste  management and 
circular economy  Solutions that avoid waste generation (e.g. composting,  recycling)  or reduce  the GHG  emissions from  
stored  waste (e.g. landfill  management),  including plastics  recycling  
Sanitation  Technologies and processes that reduce GHG emissions  associated with sewage management – e.g. 
variable- speed pumps,  energy  efficient stirring,  methane avoidance or capture,  etc. 
Waste  to energy  Pyrolysis  and other  energy  recovery  processes  that utilize  waste  conversion technologies to generate heat 
and electricity from  non-reusable and non-recyclable waste  materials  
Renewables -based 
ESCOs Renewable  power  for mobile  connectivity,  including  ESCO  models  for solar -powered  mobile  towers  
Low-emission transport  
EV Manufacturers or 
equipment suppliers  Electric  vehicles  and associated  supply chain to change user behaviour to use electric  alternatives  to fossil -
fuel


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 32 
   
 EV charging  Models  for roll-out and management  of EV charging  networks,  including fast -charge technology, batter swap 
models, and  software  platforms  for battery  network  optimization  
EV financing  Financing  solutions  for electric  vehicles  and fleet transition  to EVs,  such  as asset  finance,  pay as  you drive,  
etc. 
EV Fleets  Reduction of emissions through use of electric vehicles as commercial fleet vehicles  
Shared  mobility  Business  cases  around  shared  mobility  solutions  (commuter  buses,  last-mile solutions,  etc.).  
Smart  mobility  Route  planning;  apps  for minimising  fuel/energy  consumption  in transport  systems  and public/private fleet  
management  
Logistics  platforms  Solutions focused on reducing emissions in supply chain,  including optimization of logistics systems, 
reduction of food loss  in supply  chains  
Food and Water Security  
Farm Equipment:  Energy -efficient equipment to reduce emissions  
Smart Farming  Sustainable food production methods; Weather  monitoring facilitating climate informed advisory and risk 
management services  
Cold Chain  Enables food to last for longer and reduces food wastage  
Water Systems  Energy efficient / clean -energy powered water systems that reduce emissions, improve irrigation methods  
Waste -Water treatment  Improve health and water security through efficient treatment  
Key Outputs from Prosperete Growth Fund 
11. Output 1: Creation of Prosperete Growth Fund  
Creation of fund entities and achieving first close and final close. Prosperete targets to raise USD 22 0mn by final close. 
The establishment of the fund and related structure have been further described in section B.4.  
12. Output 2: Growth Stage Investments and support for scaling of approx. 10 to 12 portfolio companies  
Post setup of the fund and fundraise, Prosperete will be able to lead investment rounds into companies providing climate 
solutions. Prosperete will invest at  growth stage and transitioning companies focussed on providing mitigation and or 
adaptation solutions.  
By leading investment  rounds, Prosperete will be able to mobilize capital within that round itself (expected to be 1.5- 2x 
of Prosperete ’s investment ). Such growth stage investments will allow companies to grow their solutions beyond 
demonstrations and initial clients, developing capacity to serve institutional clients across different regions.  
13. Output 3:  Technology transfer by companies through sharing of knowledge, exports, expansion of 
operations, or joint ventures  
Working with portfolio companies, Prosperete support s them in expanding  to other emerging markets in need of climate 
solutions. Climate solutions that cater to multiple emerging markets have the potential to generate greater impact and 
are more likely to succeed due to their scalability and broader reach. By addressing common challenges across various regions, such solutions can leverage economies of scale, optimize resource utilization, and foster knowledge sharing, resulting in more efficient and effective implementation. Additionally, serving multiple markets enhances resilience to market -specific risks and facilitates the dissem ination of best practices, driving transformative change on a global scale.  
14. Output 4: Collaboration (via partnerships or otherwise) established with regional funds for assistance, 
knowledge exchange and co -investments  
Prosperete looks  to create an enabling ecosystem for climate solutions through leveraging investments from other 
funds, export of solutions to other markets, and sharing of best practices. Such an ecosystem will enable creation of climate solutions across different emerging markets, with capacity building across regional funds looking to invest in climate and proliferation of climate entrepreneurs on the back of success of climate solutions.  
15. Output 5: Skills developed in climate eco system through mentorship sessions and publishing of best 
practices  
Prosperete's commitment to knowledge sharing and ecosystem building within the climate tech sector plays a pivotal role in fostering innovation and accelerating the adoption of sustainable solutions. By facilitating the transfer of expertise, best practices, and lessons learned among entrepreneurs, researchers, and investors, Prosperete connects innovators with seasoned mentors and industry experts, thereby speeding up the development and commercialization of climate technologies. This ecosystem approach aims to break down silos, reduce duplication of efforts, and promote resource and insight sharing, ultimately strengthening the ecosystem.


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 33 
   
 Once an investment is made, Prosperete diligently monitors portfolio companies on climate and social impact aspects 
during the holding period, ensuring adherence to the principles of 'Responsible Investing.' Active monitoring is crucial to minimizing risks  
and capitalizing on opportunities to enhance investments through continuous improvements. 
Additionally, efforts to understand data tracking methods and build impact capacity are essential as the organization scales beyond its early stages. Supporting increased and measurable climate impact remains critical, often central to a portfolio company's thesis. GCF's institutional support and expertise in climate measurement provide invaluable benefits to portfolio companies, adding credibility to their impact results and bolstering investor confidence and interest. Through these efforts, Prosperete deepens the understanding of mitigation and adaptation impacts, promoting best practices in climate impact knowledge and data across its portfolio companies and markets. Furthermore, Prosperete mandates that all investee companies commit to gender diversity targets and actively seeks out companies with female founders and those with a higher representation of women in senior leadership roles.
 
Key Activities under Prosperete Growth Fund  
16. Activity 1:  Setting Up Equity  Fund 
Sub-Activity 1.1 and 1.3: Equity Fund formation  and Fundraising  Activities: Prosperete is establishing a 
$220M Growth Equity Fund. The fundraising process is ongoing and will continue over the coming months. 
Prosperete will look to have the final close within 30 months  from first close.  
The fund will utilize blended -finance structure to unlock private sector climate investment into emerging markets.  
The Fund  targets business  models that deploy low -carbon solutions in an inclusive and sustainable way and that 
enables people  to participate  in a greener  economy  and have a more sustainable growth path out  of poverty.  
Fund formation. Establishment  of the Fund entity  and all  partnership  terms have been agreed  
Fundraising . Engagement  with development  finance institutions,  institutional  investors,  and family  offices to 
achieve  final close  of the $220M Fund.  
Sub-Activity 1. 2: Team Buildout:  
The organization is  being built-out at both at senior and junior levels with strong values of trust, integrity, and 
collaboration. Prosperete is forming a multi- generational institution a team which will grow with the organization. The 
team is also supported in fund operations by team consi sting of finance experts  and CFO  having decades of 
experience working with private equity and venture funds.  
 
The team is also working with experienced E&S consultants to provide dedicated resources to Prosperete for E&S 
risk and climate impact evaluation, working with the investment team for effective assessment.  
Sub-Activity 1.4: Management over 10- year life;  
As fiduciary, the Investment Manager will oversee the fund deployment for a 5- year investment period, followed by 5 
years of portfolio monitoring. Prosperete will ensure prudent management, strategizing exits, and timely capital 
returns to investors, maint aining rigorous oversight to maximize returns and ensuring achievement of climate 
outcomes.  
17. Activity 2: Growth Stage Investments  
Sub-Activity 2.1: Ongoing operations: Equity Fund administration and reporting, deal sourcing, due diligence  
Prosperete Growth Fund strategically identifies investment opportunities, ensuring alignment with its impact and financial objectives. Leveraging partner networks, it gains proprietary access to established companies, fostering deeper understanding. Additionally, it collaborates with early -stage capital providers to track promising ventures 
and conducts sector analysis to identify lucrative investment avenues, nurturing potential winners closely.  
18. Prosperete Growth Fund will invest across both mitigation and adaptation solutions, and has identified four thematic verticals that represent the new landscape of low -carbon solutions:  
 
18.1 Energy Transition: Prosperete focuses on investing in energy access and power generation, aiming to overcome barriers like unreliable energy sources and financing issues for clean energy adoption. The Fund will deploy Distributed Energy Resource Systems (DERS) and modernize grids to increase renewable energy adoption, ensuring sustainable energy access and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. In energy efficiency, 
Prosperete Growth Fund intends to address challenges such as knowledge gaps and high upfront costs by


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 34 
   
 investing in monitoring, pay -as-you-go models, and industrial efficiency solutions, leading to reduced energy 
intensity and GHG emissions.  
18.2 Low Emissions Transport: enterprises operating within the rapidly evolving mobility and logistics sectors 
are witnessing significant transformations driven by innovative electric vehicle battery models and artificial intelligence technologies. These advancements are fostering rapid innovation within fragmented markets, paving the way for the development of climate- resilient  transportation systems  
18.3 Food and Water Security: Prosperete aims to invest in agriculture and food security by promoting 
sustainable farming techniques, aiming to increase productivity. Additionally, the Fund  plans to address water 
security by implementing energy -efficient water systems and improving waste- water treatment, aiming to 
enhance adaptive capacity and overall food and water security amidst looming challenges and growing global demand.  
18.4 Urban environment and data systems: Prosperete's investments target the development of sustainable urban infrastructure and carbon monitoring systems to mitigate barriers like inadequate waste treatment and 
emissions monitoring. By promoting low -
carbon building materials and renewable energy solutions, 
Prosperete aims to reduce GHG emissions, enhance urban resilience, and improve disaster preparedness, 
thus contributing to a sustainable future amidst increasing urbanization and climate risks.  
Equity  Investment via inves tment  decisions  to most  impactful,  fast growth companies . Prosperete follows a    
rigorous and structured investment process from sourcing through evaluation, due diligence and  transaction  
documentation. Climate diligence is incorporated at all stages as Prosperete evaluates pipeline companies . 
Prosperete Investment Process:  
 In selecting and diligencing companies in which to invest, Prosperete Growth Fund applies  a rigorous screening 
approach to assess eligibility. Alongside is the summary of investment and port folio process, with impact assessment 
integrated at every stage, and a highlight on the screening and assessment criteria.  
Prosperete’s investment process is guided by  its Investment and Portfolio Process  Policy. The  policy describes the 
eligibility criteria, and  elaborate how the Prosperete team evaluates and ensures positive climate impact and the 
approach to managing environmental, social and governance (ESG) risks and performance in its investments.  
Prosperete invest s in high -impact low carbon projects. Prosperete applies the IFC Exclusion List and has created a list 
of Excluded investment activities that the Prosperete will use to guide investment process. Furthermore, Prosperete does not invest in any Category A projects. Prosperete also screens the investments for factor such as operations in 
conflict area and risk to workers, in line with Prosperete ESMS. The Prosperete team uses  the exclusion list as a 
screening tool for investments.  
Screening  and Initial  diligence  
At this stage, Prosperete Growth Fund identifies  investment opportunities and select s them based on their ability to 
achieve and align with the stated impact and financial goals of the Fund . Prosperete uses the following approach to 
build a strong pipeline  of investee companies : 
19. Proprietary access to companies – Leverage experience of its Partners to get access to companies which are known 
to them for several years. Having known these companies for many years, gives them the ability to understand companies better. Several growth stage companies have approached the Prosperete team based on their global network, access to sources of debt capital, deep domain expertise and overall reputation as value adding investors.  
20. Work with eco- system – Prosperete uses  its eco -system of early -stage capital providers to keep track of young 
companies. Such ecosystem includes partnerships with capital providers, incubators, accelerators, and knowledge 
institutions. This is  used to build pipeline of attractive companies for investment as well as develop in- depth domain 
expertise  
21. Top-down sector work – Prosperete undertakes sector studies and identify attractive sub- sectors for investments. 
Prosperete then identif ies potential candidates  for investments , and progress with further diligence and analysis.  
Alignment and Impact Assessment of Companies: 
Following the initial assessment of companies during company meetings, each opportunity undergoes meticulous evaluation during pipeline meetings, initiation memos, and a comprehensive due diligence process. Through this rigorous diligence process, Prosperete aims to inform investment decision- making and pinpoint areas where it can 
enhance financial and impact management within the investee company.  
22. Screening and Initial diligence: Prosperete identif ies investment opportunities and select them based on their ability 
to achieve and align with the stated impact and financial goals of the fund.


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 35 
   
 23. Screening Against Eligibility Criteria: At the screening stage itself, Prosperete applies  its eligibility criteria to (i) apply 
the Exclusion List (ii) check alignment of the prospective opportunity with focus sectors  for potential sectors and sub-
sectors in which Prosperete could potentially invest), and (iii) check if the company’s solution can create meaningful 
mitigation and adaptation outcomes. An early assessment of viability of proposed business and potential inv estment 
returns is also undertaken. This work is led by Prosperete’s Climate Lead.  
As part of assessing a potential investment’s eligibility, Prosperete also assigns preliminary E&S assessment to a 
pipeline opportunity, with any E&S Category A projects not being  eligible for financing.  
24. Financial/Commercial assessment: Prosperete assesses the information provided by the company against the team's market knowledge and research. This includes  assessing the business model for aspects such as unit economics, 
management team experience, fit for the local market, potential for regional expansion, poverty and climate impact. The team also assess es the viability of the business based on strength of existing constraints / economic situation.  
25. Climate/Impact assessment: Impact assessment at Prosperete is guided by: Impact Policy, Impact Measurement and Management procedures, Responsible Investing Policy and the Environmental  and Social Management System. 
Assessment of the climate impacts of potential investments takes place during the ‘initial DD” and “Impact assessment” stages. Investment must demonstrate i) their potential to make a significant contribution to Prosperete’s two overarching climate targets: (1) avoiding / averting tonnes of CO2 during Fund life cycle and (2) strengthening resilience and adaptation for individuals.  
Prosperete assess es each firm against the following to assess their eligibility:  
25.1 Mitigation impacts: Aligned with the Prosperete methodology (leveraging global standards such as CDM methodology) to calculate emissions reduction impacts, potential investments are assessed for their mitigation potential. Financial projections are used together with the Prosperete mitigation calculation methodology to estimate potential future mitigation impacts. Investments are then categorized as having High, Medium or Low mitigation potential. Decisions to progress Is  based on the outcomes of this asses sment.  
25.2 Adaptation impacts: The Prosperete team conduct s an assessment of each investment opportunity’s potential 
for adaptation impacts, scoring across three criteria; direct adaptation benefits, maladaptation assessment, and broad adaptation benefits. This assists in assessing overall contribution/mission ali gnment with Prosperete’s 
adaptation targets. Prosperete also use its adaptation project selection tool to assess adaptation impacts.  
25.3 ESG audit: The ESG risks screening is  undertaken based on initial assessment of the potential portfolio 
company. Potential investments will be screened using information provided and categorized according to inherent risks factors affecting various E&S aspects with the following objectives: Minimize the negative impacts 
and E&S risks of its activities and, in addition, generate positive financial, social and environmental impacts, Act in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, Align with relevant i nternational standards and principles 
i.e., IFC Performance Standards. Prosperete has a comprehensive ESMS which includes, an ESG check -list 
and assessment tool to assess ESG factors  
26. Technology Transfer: Each investment is evaluated for its global scalability and replicability across other emerging 
markets. Such expansion can happen either through company setting up operations, export of solutions, or working with partner companies for effective and low -cost deployment of c limate solutions in other markets.  
27. Gender Lens and Gender Opportunity and alignment: Prosperete lays a deep emphasis on gender opportunity and expects to set a target that 30% of its investees at origination will meet the 2x criteria. As part of its due diligence, Prosperete confirms  that each investee meets IFC’s exclusion list which covers the 2x framework’s basic ESG criteria. 
Prosperete has made a clear commitment to investing with a gender lens. A key output in its Gender Action Plan is also to partner with Fund portfolio companies to i ncrease female workforce participation across their organizations, 
including in senior leadership. To this end, Prosperete agrees  a gender action plan with each portfolio company with 
clear timebound requirements and responsibilities. Each portfolio company will also include impact measurement and management measures that explicitly consider gender , diversity and inclusion .


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 36 
   
 28. Our approach involves identifying companies with the potential to emerge as climate industry leaders, focusing on those 
demonstrating market traction and scalability within their respective sectors, supported by robust product -market fit and 
proven technol ogical capabilities and their commitment to creating measurable impact in the countries they operate in. 
Emphasis is placed on partnering with management teams exhibiting 
maturity, ambition, and a clear vision for regional or global leadership.  
29. Our transactional methodology prioritizes disciplined valuation practices and meticulous deal execution.  
30. Prosperete is committed to nurturing portfolio companies towards scale and maturity. Drawing upon our team's extensive market knowledge, Prosperete will work with investee companies for organization building and demand creation. Prosperete actively 
engages  with companies at the board level for strategic alignment and 
growth. Creation of scaled companies will allow Prosperete to work 
with large scale commercial capital investors who actively seek to 
invest in such scaled organizations.  Most importantly the s caling up of 
climate solutions will create a positive impact in addressing climate 
mitigation and adaptation.  
Sub-Activity  2.1.1 : Company Meetings:  During the initial diligence 
phase, thorough assessments are conducted through extensive engagement with company management and scrutiny of the founder’s vision and strategic direction. Company’s thesis and business undergoes rigorous testing against the team’s market expertise and research findings. Companies demonstrating alignment with criteria encompassing unit economics, management proficiency, local market suitability, regional expansion potential, and impact on poverty and climate, proceed to subseq uent stages.  
Sub-Activity 2.1.2: Pipeline Discussions: These meetings include 
evaluation of fit with Fund’s investment mandate, climate assessment, attractiveness of the industry segment, competitive position of the target, scale of the opportunity, deal dynamics including reason to sell  and competition, potential exit options and 
any preliminary assessment of Prosperete angle.  
Sub-Activity 2.1.3: Initial Summary Memo:  Basis initial 
assessment, each investment is screened by Recommendation Committee, which takes into consideration the climate impact, management quality, financial and commercial assessment, ability to create gender outcomes before recommending any invest ment 
to Prosperete Fund Investment Committee. The recommendation committee also considers inputs from Head of Risk as well as ESG and Climate team during its decision making.  
Post approval from Recommendation Committee, t he Initial 
Summary Memo is presented to the Investment Committee. 
Comprising seasoned investment professionals with extensive expertise in private equity, development finance, and operations, Prosperete's Investment Committee meticulously evaluates opportunities at this pivotal stage.  
Sub-Activity 2.1.4: Deal Diligence. Following the Investment Committee approval based on the Preliminary 
Investment Memo, the team proceeds to full commercial diligence. Prosperete employs a comprehensive diligence process for each investment, encompassing evaluation of the founder and track record, manag ement assessment, 
industry and technology evaluation,  business analysis, and legal scrutiny, and climate impact validation. During 
such detailed deal diligence, a key evaluation criteria is ex -ante mitigati on or adaptation estimates .  
Basis the team’s diligence, the investment thesis is presented to the Head of Risk for  recommendations and 
suggestions to the Investment Committee. The Head of Risk considers several factors, including (but not limited 
to) portfolio construction , macro and currency risk , business risk et al. , including compliance with Prosperete


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 37 
   
 policies.  
Prosperete undertakes a comprehensive risk assessment of each investment:  
• Every investment and portfolio performance is  reviewed by the H ead of Risk , who shares  recommendations 
and suggestions with the Fund’s Investment Committee. This separation of roles between the Head of Risk 
and the Fund’s IC and Board ensures a comprehensive risk appraisal is undertaken of each investment.  
• The Prosperete Growth Fund implements a thorough due diligence procedure, encompassing comprehensive analyses of financial, legal, operational, market, competition, and ESG factors.  
• Any investments made by Prosperete are subject to full background check on key parties behind the investee company and their founders. These checks include checks on their history, checks on international database including UN Sanctions List, litigation hi story etc. In cases such checks throw a red flag typically 
Prosperete does  not deal with such entities unless a detailed investigation proves otherwise. Furthermore, 
Prosperete also has an AML officer to investigate such matters and keep a tab on all Prosperete activities in relation to money laundering and terrorist financing risks.  
• Prosperete undertakes in-depth ESG assessment of companies prior to making investments. Prosperete 
has a comprehensive ESMS which includes, an ESG check -list and assessment tool to assess ESG 
factors. Any high risk / cat A project is  not taken up by Prosperete. An E&S action plan is  agreed with the 
company and its implementation closely monitored. The team is also working with experienced E&S consultants to provide dedicated resources to Prosperete for E&S risk and climate impact evaluation, working with the investment team for effec tive assessment.  
The investment team prepares memos for the Investment Committee, adhering to Prosperete's policies and investor guidance. The IC  members also provide input on critical areas for further diligence.  This information is 
presented to the  IC at an interim meeting, where parameters for investment  terms are discussed and agreed in  
principle.  
Sub-Activity 2.2: Deployment of capital in 10 to 12 Portfolio  companies  
Prosperete will deploy capital in climate companies post approval from the Investment Committee, largely providing growth equity for primary capital raises.  Based on the approval from the Investment Committee, t he 
team negotiates terms with the  company to execute a term sheet. Terms are determined based upon the Fund 
team’s insight from a range  of local transactions and structured to manage the specific  risks and opportunities  of 
each investment. Upon execution, the team engages external advisors for legal and ESG due diligence.  Any 
findings from the external diligence are reflected in the transaction documents,  which include an ESG Action Plan 
and, where applicable, a 100- Day Operational Plan. The final terms  and diligence findings are presented to the 
IC for final  approval.  
The investment terms are formally  documented with external  counsel  advising.  Investment  documentation may 
include technology transfer  plan, impact,  gender,  and ESG provisions.  
Sub-Activity 2.3: Post -Investment Engagement  
Prosperete intends to  take a board seat and otherwise being actively involved in the oversight and management of 
its investments. The team’s deep experience with scaling enterprises is complement ary to investee management 
teams. In particular, the investment team’s  perspective on industry best practices and local context are sought out 
by entrepreneurs and co- investors alike, considering the unique challenges of building a fast -growing business in 
emerging markets. Prosperete adds  value to portfolio companies, including the followin g: 
Demand Creation  will require work across several aspects, including awareness building 
among customers and working with key customers, utilizing sector expertise to enable suitable policies and regulations etc. Vulnerable populations constitute the biggest users and beneficiaries of such products. To enable demand in this segment, it is important that relevant solutions (financial and otherwise) are available, and these solutions are affordable for them. Affordability, in turn, depends on making sure that companies have the right supply chain, appropriate economies of scale and appropriate capital costs. In addition, customers have low -risk appetite to transition from legacy systems to climate -friendly  solutions unless their 
requirements are met. Without growth equity, companies are often unable to integrate customer requirements into 
their climate solutions. Patient capital can support companies through the long -sales cycle and build required critical


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 38 
   
 mass to establish trust. There have been industries where such scaling up has been established such as solar and 
the 2 and 3- wheeler sectors in Asian markets.  
Investing in players in hard to abate sectors which are looking to decarbonize and become more resource efficient 
will further cataly se demand for climate solutions. As these existing companies seek to decarbonize, a chain reaction 
is expected from the demand for green products that they create and the work they do with their vendors to green their supply chains. Several SMEs, that are t
he biggest job creators in EMs, are embarking on reinventing 
themselves both for domestic and global markets to have a low er carbon footprint and improve resource efficiency. 
Prosperete will also invest in companies that provide financing for SMEs and start -ups to transition to net zero.  
Attracting anchor customers, developing critical scale, and availability of financing will create network effects for these solutions. After a company gains a significant share in one- market, Prosperete will seek to ensure that these 
globally competitive s olutions scale to other emerging markets as well.  
Periodic financial and impact reporting received from the portfolio companies  
Prosperete conducts regular portfolio reviews, with a maximum gap of 3 months between meetings. Each review entails a detailed examination of at least one company, covering performance versus projections, action plan follow -ups, exit strategies, and new st rategies. Information from these reviews informs quarterly and annual 
reports, including industry trends, investment summaries, impact assessments, and ESG improvements. Additionally, the team tracks news on portfolio companies and conducts impact deep div es to optimize climate and 
social impacts.  
Active monitoring is crucial to minimizing risks and capitalizing on opportunities to enhance investments through continuous improvements. Once invested, Prosperete works  closely with investee companies to monitor risks  
• Quarterly meetings with portfolio companies to closely monitor performance  
• Proactively identify any signs of financial or operational distress  
The Prosperete team will receive periodic financial and impact reporting from portfolio companies -  including cash 
flow, management reports, board reports and impact reach. The team will utilize this information to track the progress and company and suggest redressals, if any are required. The team will also track news on each of the 
portfolio companies.  
Portfolio support across financial management and capital raise  
The Prosperete team will seek to provide value addition and support to portfolio companies to help them 
professionalize, scale, and raise further equity capital and access appropriate debt financing for growth  
Sub-Activity 2.4: Exit investments, return capital and profits to investors, close fund  
At the heart of Prosperete's investment philosophy lies the objective of fostering the development of scalable climate 
enterprises with measurable impact, with the aim of achieving exit upon investment maturity, typically within a 4 to 6-year timeframe. The exit strategy encompasses various avenues, including company sales to strategic or financial 
buyers, initial public offerings  (IPOs), or management buyouts, as well as secondary sales of shares to later -stage 
investors may be pursued. Prosperete is commi tted to ensuring sustained positive impact post -exit by cultivating 
sustainable business models aligned with a robust policy and operations framework and actively seeking buyers who share a commitment to continuing scaling up of impact.  
Pursue Exits: As the fund progresses in its investment period, regular exit meeting will also be conducted.  The s ole 
purpose of this meeting will be to keep a tab on the preparedness of companies for potential exit, and ensuring both 
value and impact maximization  to make companies ready for a successful exit by the Fund. Each Company will be 
included in exit meetings after 2 years of its investment or indicated timeline for exit (if earlier).  
31. Activity 3:  Technology Transfer  
Expansion across EMs presents an opportunity for climate focused growth stage companies. Exporting to other markets 
can create impact at scale while contributing to their commercial success. During the diligence process, each 
opportunity is evaluated on current and potential application across home market and other EMs . While 
Prosperete is initially focus ed on companies with home markets in Bangladesh, India, and Mauritius , the management 
of the investee company is expected to have ability and scale- up plans for such expansion across Asia and Africa 
particularly in Prosperete’s focus countries i.e. Bangladesh, India , and Mauritius  as well as market such as Nigeria , 
Indonesia, and South Africa.


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 39 
   
 At the time of investment, Prosperete collaborates with each company to create an expansion plan, evaluating target 
countries and devising action plans. Prosperete provides expertise from regional funds and partners, facilitating 
interventions such as oper ations setup, exports, or partnerships, and supports companies with access to partner funds 
for development and execution.  
Prosperete also utilize s its network to help with the expansion of these companies as well as tie- up with regional 
financiers. Such partnerships enable local expertise and customer relations in  support of these companies.   
 
   
 
   
    Some of Prosperete’s pipeline companies are already deploying their products and services beyond their 
home markets.  Prosperete has played a proactive role helping their pipeline companies to grow beyond their original 
market to other EMs by providing access to networks, relationships, capital from partner funds and local financial institutions.  
Other EMs face similar challenges of limited affordability and low access to climate solutions. There have been several successful examples of solutions developed in Asian countries expanding to Africa such as 2 wheelers, battery solutions, and telecom. Su ch expansion enables technology transfer as well as enables access to low -cost solutions 
which are low carbon, increase climate resilience and ensure inclusive growth.  
Prosperete work s with its pipeline and investee companies to expand and setup operations in Africa. Such expansion 
will help the companies address larger markets / increase the Total Addressable Market (TAM) and at the same time increase availability of solutions for participating countries. South- South collaboration and distribution of solutions is 
central to Prosperete’s investment thesis towards climate action.  
Prosperete is working with multiple regional funds as partner funds to have ‘boots on the ground’ for companies expanding to other markets as well as act as co- investment partners. These funds look to partner with Prosperete as 
they understand the growing importance of technology for accelerated climate solutions (outside infrastructure and traditional VC) and look to develop expertise through these deals. Prosperete will evaluate investee companies of partner funds to see if the solutions they offer can be  scaled to its Target Countries. Prosperete will partner with local 
business houses and local debt financiers. Such partnerships and expansion of solutions would not only enable exchange of technologies from one region to another, but also develop local funding ecosystems which cataly se further 
climate finance.  
While partnering, Prosperete continually evaluates  the need for having its own team members in different regions 
basis the opportunities for deploying solutions that address climate mitigation and adaptation. As Prosperete’s investment in each targeted market grows, Prosperete will follow a measured approach, expanding to such markets alongside the growth of its portfolio companies. Over the medium term, Prosperete will have a  couple of colleagues 
based regionally to cover these countries, in addition to s trong regional partnerships.


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 40 
   
 Sub-Activity 3.1: Development of expansion plan for portfolio companies  
Sub-Activity 3.2: Export to other markets through inputs and Prosperete network  
Sub-Activity 3.3:  Regional funds collaboration (via partnerships or otherwise) for assistance and knowledge exchange 
32. Activity 4:  Capacity Building  
Sub-Activity 4.1: Development of Action Plan and organization building  
At the time of investment, Prosperete will work with each company to develop an expansion plan to evaluate potential 
countries for expansion and action plan for the same. Prosperete would provide expertise from regional funds and partners . 
For developing the Action Plan, Prosperete work s the company to identify areas to improve and suggested steps for 
the same. Such Action Plan would also include evaluation of company’s expansion plan beyond its home market. Prosperete intends to be a key part of the process while developing action plan and provide additional resources such as access to experts, regional financiers, and others to ensure there is buy -in from all stakeholders involved.   
Action Plan for investee companies would also detail the plan for climate impact monitoring and enhancement. Such 
plan would at the minimum encompass tracking the carbon footprint, and in some cases measures to enhance their climate impact. The Action plan could also cover action items for addressing ESG related concerns, if any. The formulation, implementation and monitoring of the Action Plan would be overseen by Prosperete’s ESG Officer along with the active involvement of the investment team.  
Organization Building and Team Buildout  
At the growth stage, a company requires capital as well as operating expertise to move beyond early -adopter customers 
and build an organization that can last for decades. Apart from continued product excellence, investee companies need to build pillars acr oss management, teams,  processes, systems, and capital  to be able to support the growth of its 
climate solution.  Another key component of this is to make sure that the companies work closely with their stakeholders 
including customers and suppliers. Building in a comprehensive Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) system into the operations and investments of the companies is a core part of the support that Prosperete will provide to its 
portfolio companies.  
As a company’s solution is scaled and provided to customers across multiple geographies, it is essential to ensure consistency and process replicability for smooth operations. Prosperete would help the company build these pillars and invest in the right talent and supply chain  to be able to fulfil the solution’s growth potential. Prosperete would help its 
portfolio companies in identifying gaps for hiring and finding suitable candidates. Another key component of 
Prosperete’s support is establishing appropri ate systems and processes to ensure execution and governance over the 
long-term. Through its investment, Prosperete will enable long- lasting enterprises, that serve large markets, and attract 
late-stage capital, creating impact over multiple decades. Assist companies with and help companies develop capacity 
in impact/ESG management through knowledge sessions, assistance with consultants  
Currently, there is limited understanding of links between climate mitigation and adaptation, and how to integrate practices into company operations to enhance impact further. Further work is also required to understand the methods of data tracking as well  as building impact capacity within the organization as it scales beyond early stages of operation. 
Providing support on increasing and measuring climate impact is critical as it is often central to a portfolio company’s purpose and objective . GCF’s institutional support and expertise on climate measurement will be highly valuable for 
the portfolio companies. GCF’s support would also add credibility to their impact results which will enhance investor confidence and interest. Prosperete’s effor ts would deepen understanding of mitigation and adaptation impact and 
promote best practices in climate impact knowledge and data across its portfolio companies and markets.  
At the fund level, Prosperete will undertake comprehensive reporting and impact assessment . Prosperete will also sign 
up to disclosure standards such as the UN Principles of Responsible Investing, and other leading multilateral agency frameworks. Prosperete invest s in companies with high standards of ESG . The ESG due diligence will be based on 
IFC Performance Standards and cover several ESG -related issues. Post -investment, the Prosperete team will work 
with investee companies to build their in- house ESG capacity.  
Sub-Activity 4.2: Participation in Management / Board Meetings of Portfolio Companies  
Prosperete, through substantial minority investments, will pursue board representation in portfolio companies, guided 
by its commitment to robust corporate governance and strategic guidance. Emphasizing adherence to best practices


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 41 
   
 in corporate governance, the team rigorously upholds these policies internally and advocates for their strict 
implementation within portfolio companies.  
Sub-Activity 4.3: Knowledge and best practices sessions  
Prosperete will assist in capacity building across different markets for climate investments, and measurement and 
reporting. This will foster ecosystem awareness by sharing best practices and promot ing diversity and inclusion 
initiatives.  
Prosperete will utilize research publications, knowledge transfer sessions to increase climate awareness across 
different sectors and emerging markets. Such activities are intended to create awareness across multiple stakeholders: 
entrepreneurs, regional investment funds, policy, and others. Such ecosystem activities are needed as only a few markets currently have the ability to create scale solutions. Through export of solutions and market making activities, Prosperete intends to accelerate development of solutions where it is not present and provide growth capital where 
such ecosystems are at nascent stage.  
Sub-Activity 4.4: Holding mentorship sessions for women in climate ecosystem and focus on women in 
pipeline  
The Prosperete team believes in promoting gender equality and its leadership has been participating in multiple programs. Prosperete will spearhead these initiatives as a fund by creating mentorship programs for women to develop skillset in climate and inv esting.  
Furthermore, Prosperete will require all its investee companies to sign up to gender diversity targets and adhere to the achievement of those targets. Prosperete will actively seek out companies with female founders and those with greater share of women in senior leadership. Inclusion of people from vulnerable sections in customer, supplier and employee 
base will be another added monitorable.  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
 
1. Prosperete has setup a fund in Mauritius, Prosperete Growth Fund I (the “ Fund” or “Prosperete Fund ”) incorporated 
as a company limited by shares and holding a global business license (“ GBL ”). The Fund is licensed  as a closed- ended 
fund (“ CEF”) by the Mauritius Financial Services Commission (“ FSC”). The Fund will be an Executing Entity.  
2. Pursuant to Mauritius law, the Fund requires an investment manager and, as such, Prosperete has  also established an 
investment manager Prosperete Investment Management Ltd. (“ Mauritius IM”), incorporated as a company limited by 
shares and holding a GBL. The Mauritius IM is licensed as a CIS Manager by FSC. This entity will be the Accredited 
Entity for GCF for the purposes of this programme . It will also be an Executing Entity.  
3. Prosperete Growth Advisors LLP is a limited liability partnership established and existing under the laws of India (“India 
LLP” or “Sub -Advisor ”). The India LLP is the sub- advisor to the Mauritius IM.  
4. GCF’s investment in the fund will be in the form of junior or pari -passu equity  and the shares will be issued and held in 
GCF’s name.  
 
Role of the AE and Flow of Funds  
 Prosperete Investment Management Ltd will execute the Subscription and Shareholders Agreements as described above on 
behalf of GCF. Since Prosperete Investment Management Ltd is also the investment manager of the Fund, it is well placed to 
ensure adoption and implementation of  GCF policies by the Fund and at the portfolio companies’ level , including by way of 
execution of necessary legal arrangements.   
 
Investment Manager  
 
The Mauritius IM manages the day -to-day operations of the Fund. The Mauritius IM will report to the investors in the Fund 
through quarterly and annual reports (including independent valuer’s valuation report and financial statements).  
 The Mauritius IM is supported in its work by the Sub- Advisor and the Mauritius Administrator. Pursuant to the sub- advisory 
agreement described above, the Mauritius IM benefit s from the Sub- Advisor’s extensive experience and track record in 
sourcing, diligence and recommending investment opportunities to it.


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 42 
   
 B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
1. Globally, most countries are focused on achieving their NDCs and addressing the needs of their citizens. In developed 
countries, ageing infrastructure, ageing populations and the need to revamp older more polluting assets creates more pressure to increase domestic green investments. In addition, many developed countries have created incentives to support the greening of their economies such as the Inflation Reduction Act in the US and support for energy transition across Europe. This has meant that Emerging Markets have to compete for funds to meet their climate commitments. 
Climate solutions have a long sales cycle and require time to scale in comparison to traditional venture investments, which increases the risk for commercial investors to invest in a climate fund. Emerging markets have investors willing to take the risk at early -stages of the development of technology  or other solutions  but do not have the larger capital to 
scale these solutions. Institutional capital is necessary for climate solutions to be present across multiple geographies 
and create large- scale impact.  
 
2. Prosperete has interest from several institutional investors who believe in the fund’s investment thesis but have low -
risk tolerance due to their capital profile. There is high- risk perception due to the dual perceived risks of emerging 
markets and adoption risks of climate solutions. To be effective, a growth stage climate fund needs to have a minimum viable size. Achieving this size is difficult without both concessional and commercial capital. Commercial capital typically resists investing in first time funds without risk protection mechanisms. Companies focused on climate solutions require 
longer holding periods whereas commercial investors typically prefer shorter periods. GCF’s concessionality will help bridge this  gap between risk appetite of commercial investors and their return expectations. Therefore, GCF’s Funding 
is critical to help create the foundation that, in turn, enables scaled and timely solutions that help address climate change in emerging economies.  
3. Challenging Macroeconomic Environment:  
a. In 2025, climate action is facing growing headwinds. Amid economic uncertainty, geopolitical instability, and rising 
populist sentiment in some parts of the world, there has been increasing pushback against ambitious climate agendas. Public discourse in se veral major economies has questioned the pace and cost of decarbonization, leading to delays 
in policy implementation and a more cautious investment environment. 
 
b. Under these conditions, many investors are prioritizing domestic challenges —such as aging infrastructure, energy 
security, and economic resilience—over cross -border climate investments. Developed markets, bolstered by 
government incentives and policy support, are seeing more capital flow into local green initiatives, often at the expense of international climate efforts. 
 
c. This reallocation of capital, combined with an overall reduction in the availability of climate finance, creates a double burden for emerging markets. These regions, which are both highly vulnerable to climate impacts and essential to global mitigation goals, are now facing a shortfall in urgently needed investment. While there is widespread recognition that emerging markets must be part of the solution to climate change, current financial trends risk leaving them behind at a critical moment.
 
d. GCF’s junior equity funding can truly be the catalyst that attracts capital to EMs to accelerate climate solutions due to its concessional nature and its ability to mitigate perceived and real risks of investing in Emerging Markets and in Climate. The presence of GCF would enable commercial investors to see lower risk as well as improve their returns thereby making EM Climate investments attractive to commercial and institutional investors. Once experienced Fund Managers such as Prosperete are able to demonstrate a combination of financial returns and climate impact, commercial capital will become more comfortable investing in EMs.  A similar trend has been observed in technology 
investments such as in Renewable Energy farms, which initially required blended finance from Development Finance institutions and subsequently were able to attract institutional capital.  The availability of concessional GCF capital will 
have the catalytic impact to help scale climate investments in EMs and improving access and affordability and 
resilience of agriculture, infrastructure and all basic services to vulnerable populations.
 
 
4. Need for Technology Transfer  
a. Prosperete’s innovative approach of have a multi -country approach to expansion of solutions and providing them 
assistance throughout the investment to be able to deploy their solutions across different emerging markets requires the support of GCF.  
b. Current climate investments in emerging markets have a country -specific focus and are therefore unable to exchange 
solutions, leading to development  of inefficient solutions which do not maximize impact as well as create limited 
markets for such solutions, leading to commercially undesirable outcomes.  
c. GCF, with its global mandate, can help Prosperete create a global emerging markets platform over the long- term which 
can provide capital and adequate support to mitigation and adaptation solutions suited for these markets.  
 
5. Need for Growth Investing Ecosystem:


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 43 
   
 a. As highlighted early, emerging markets lack sufficient growth stage capital, resul ting in only 9% of companies in EMs, 
in the climate space, successfully transition to Series B after seed funding, compared to the global average of 27% for 
similar companies.  The investing ecosystem, especially in emerging markets, is  going through one of its most severe 
funding winters, with funding for climate solutions companies at Series B to Series C stage falling by more than 50% in 2022- 2023 in India, SE Asia, Africa and MENA.  
b. In such a scenario, and given the urgency for viable climate solutions, GCF’s concessional support will provide a catalysing impact and attract private capital through the creation of a growth- stage fund such as Prosperete which 
would enable much needed funding and creation of the ecosystem for climate solutions across EMs.  
 
6. Signalling effect:  
a. The participation of the GCF in Prosperete Growth Fund holds significant value as it brings to the table unparalleled expertise in climate finance on a global scale. GCF's involvement enhances the project by providing essential guidance 
in establishing cli mate eligibility criteria and validating our methodology for assessing climate impact. Given GCF's 
influential role and widespread support, its endorsement is crucial, particularly as other Development Finance 
Institutions (DFIs) and investors increasingly  prioritize investments aligned assurances regarding climate neutrality in 
their portfolios. Within our impact thesis, emphasis on adaptation and resilience has grown paramount, and GCF emerges as a pivotal partner, offering invaluable thought leadership and resources as Prosperete develops  
methodologies to monitor and evaluate adaptation outcomes. Moreover, GCF's partnership reinforces our commitment 
to environmental and social best practices, reassuring investors of robust risk management policies and procedures.  
Prosperete has implemented several governance and policy enhancements as recommended by GCF and its advisors . 
This demonstrates Prosperete strong commitment to global best practices.  
b. GCF’s in -depth diligence, governance mechanisms, and strong credentials will prov ide a strong signal to these 
investors and family offices who wish to invest in climate funds but often lack resources or expertise for in- depth 
evaluation.  
c. Moreover, such capital will enable the Prosperete to mitigate private sector investors’ stance of not considering first -
time funds.  
d. GCF’s concessional investment would catalyse commercial investors and allow for large streams of capital to target the scaling of climate- positive solutions . GCF’s anchor investment will allow Prosperete to raise a fund of appropriate 
size by attracting investors to contribute and fill the missing middle for climate solutions.  
e. Prosperete has early interest from multiple investors, with potential contributions of more than ~USD 200 million, looking to invest in Prosperete Growth Fund subject to commitment from GCF.  
 
7. Concessionality:  
The Prosperete Growth Fund has a blended structure including a concessional layer of junior capital to crowd in 
commercial investors who perceive emerging markets and climate investments as high- risk.  
Private capital contributions to the Fund are essential to provide adequate growth capital to climate start -ups. A key part 
of Prosperete’s theory of change is to mobilize capital from large institutional investors, such as global asset management firms. 
Prosperete has interests from family offices and private institutional investors across USA, Europe, and India . 
However, during our conversations, these have noted that while they are interested in Prosperete’s investment thesis  
and recognize the expertise of the Prosperete team, they perceive expected returns from climate as low and risk 
perception as high. Further, historically, newly launched funds focussed on emerging areas have been able to raise capital from multilateral organisations only, leading to sub- optimal size. Comm ercial investors contribute to these 
strategies only at the stage of the second or third fund. GCF’s concessionality will provide a fillip to catalyse investment from such risk -averse investors and help bring in private capital to the climate sector  sooner  through the Prosperete 
Growth Fund, thereby allowing an optimum scale and capital mix to the Fund, and ultimately accelerating action on 
climate change from the first fund itself. Concessional capital from GCF will help bridge the gap between perceived 
returns from climate investments and the desired returns of commercial investors. 
Prosperete has assessed the relative 
size of the Junior and Senior Equity components based on direct feedback from potential investors as well as our internal 
fund modelling. In addition, Prosperete has  assessed structures successfully utilized by other fund managers to attract an 
appropriate blend of capital from the target investor base. As a result, the Junior Equity is sized at 25% of the total fund size and below 1.0X the Senior A component.  
The requested concessionality has additionality for the following attributes and reasons:  
 
a. GCF concessional equity investment of up to USD 50 million will be used as junior capital providing 
additional risk protection for investors.  The junior capital will act as concessional capital to improve the risk -
reward attributes by protecting the eligible investors in case of lower -than- expected returns.  
b. Sustainability investments require long tenor of 10 to 12 years whereas commercial investors prefer shorter 
investment periods of 5 to 7 years. First pay -out for commercial investors  would reduce their average duration 
and alleviate any tenor concerns.


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 44 
   
  
Prosperete request s up to $50 million Junior Equity commitment from GCF. The Junior Equity is designed with following  
features: 1) first loss protection (to manage downside risk)  and 2) a differential preferred return (to improve upside 
potential). The first loss protection absorbs any losses of the Prosperete Growth Fund in the event that the Fund does 
not achieve positive returns. Thereafter, each would proportionately  share in Fund excess returns of the Fund above 
the hurdle rate. The Junior Equity is intended to benefit only private investors in the Senior A tranche. Other capital 
providers are expected to participate in a separate, Senior B tranche which will be treated as pari -passu to fund 
distributions .  
The junior equity would mitigate downs ide risks for commercial and private investors, enabling Prosperete to raise a 
fund of viable size for growth equity investmen ts. The junior equity is expected to reduce the payback period for 
commercial investors by 1 to 2 years, further reducing the risk for these investors.  
Without the requested concessionality, Prosperete may not be able to able to raise a fund of sufficient size, thereby 
leaving the scarcity of growth capital for climate solutions unaddressed.  
Institutional backing from GCF, along with the Prosperete team’s strong investment track record and the fact that the investment team has worked together for more than fifteen years, will alleviate the concerns of such investors. Therefore, this investment  has strong additionality for the climate ecosystem in Emerging Markets. It also provides EM 
a fighting chance to urgently address climate mitigation and adaptation needs through accelerated solutions that leverage technology  or business models  to enhance affordability and access to such solutions.  We are also seeking 
Junior Equity investments from other investors to collaborate alongside GCF.  
GCF’s investment of USD 50mn will be used as junior capital providing risk protection to commercial and institutional 
investors; GCF’s investment could catalyse capital by alleviating private investors’ concerns around risk profile, tenor, first-time fund, and enabling co- financing at portfolio companies . GCF’s investment will provide critical signalling  
(described in paragraph 6 above)  to other potential co- financiers for the fund as well as enable Prosperete portfolio 
companies to attract private capital through verified evaluation of climate impact adhering to GCF standards and 
processes . Greater flows of private capital enabled by GCF’s funding are critical to accelerate climate action while 
pursuing economic growth for sustainable well -being of communities.  
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
1. As described in previous sections, Prosperete is a growth -equity investment fund focussed on investing in and scaling 
climate solutions across Emerging Markets. Having done extensive program development, funded by a very experienced team,  the Prosperete Growth Fund will be ready to start committing capital  to its investee companies,  right from the first 
close of the F und. Prosperete’s investment in these solutions would result in build out of several large- scale enterprises. 
Thereafter, Prosperete would bring in long term investors by selling  its stake  in its investee companies  to institutional 
investors who are looking to invest at scale and thereby return capital to investors in Prosperete.  
2. With the creation of scaled climate companies, vulnerable communities in emerging economies will be able to access 
affordable solutions which help them mitigate their carbon footprint and, in some cases, adapt better to climate crises. Scaled climate solutions  
will help create both direct and indirect employment for several people besides improving 
livelihoods for many. Expansion across emerging economies will make sure that people get these solutions faster and in a manner that takes care of local realities. T his w ill create a virtuous cycle of more private capital and effective solutions 
being developed for vulnerable communities in emerging economies.  
3. Return of Capital to Investors:  Each of the investments will typically be held for a period of 5 to 8 years. Post Year 2 of 
any investment, Prosperete will hold quarterly exit committee meetings to discuss the potential to exit the company and discuss key action items to add value to the company and the best method of obtaining optimum value from the exit. Typical exit options from investee companies include sale to a strategic buyer, sale to a financial buyer, a public listing, or share buyback by the company or a buyout by the sponsors. As Prosperete generates returns on its invested capital, it would distribute its capital to GCF and other investors.  Prosperete has  confidence that there will be exit opportunities 
across the focus  themes .  
a) Many firms are pursuing joint -ventures and acquisitions as part of their growth strategy, and are looking to acquire 
solutions that generate impact and have achieved certain scale  
b) The burgeoning interest in mergers and acquisitions (M&A) within the climate and renewable energy sectors is becoming more pronounced globally. This trend is gradually gaining traction in emerging markets as well, where strategic and commercial financial buyers are increasingly investing across various sectors, signal ling a growing 
convergence of interests and opportunities in these markets.  
c) Late- stage investors looking for large climate focussed companies to invest. Prosperete has spoken to multiple late 
stage investors looking to invest more than 200 million dollars + in each investment  
d) Increased availability of debt to finance working capital and CAPEX, which is expected to further  maximize equity 
investor returns. Increased debt availability (local currency) in the industry is  encouraging.  
e) Increasing appetite of public investors in climate, as highlighted by listing of companies such as IREDA  in India .


---
*Page 49*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total f inancing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi  + vii) Total amount Currency  
50 million USD ($)   
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  - - - - 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans  - - - - 
(iii) Equity  50 -  hurdle rate  + 
shared -return  
(iv) Guarantees  - -   
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants  - - 
  
(vi) Grants  - -   
(vii) Results -
based payments  - -   
(b) Co -
financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
170 million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
Discussions  
ongoing 
(foundations,  
family offices)  Equity 20 million USD ($)  - - - 
Discussions  
ongoing (DFIs)  Equity 80 million USD ($)  - - - 
Discussions  
ongoing (private 
institutions)  Equity 70 million USD ($)  - - - 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
220 million USD ($)   
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type of 
guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).  
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax exemptions and 
contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme (refer to the co-
financing policy) .  
Prosperete is in active conservations with multiple multilateral and private investors for 
investment in the Prosperete Growth Fund for a total of USD220 million, including GCF 
concessional investment of USD50 million. The prospective investors appreciate the deep 
expertise of the team and are keen to invest in climate solutions but would need the 
mitigation of EM risk through the participation of GCF.  
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component  Output  GCF financing  Co-financing


---
*Page 50*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
   
 Indicative 
cost 
million 
USD ($)  Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions 
Prosperete 
Growth Fund  1: Setting Up 
Equity Fund  2.2 0.5 Equity  1.7 Equity  See note 1 
below  
2: Growth 
Stage 
Investments  217.8  49.5  Equity  168.3  Equity  See note 1 
below  
3 and 
4:Technology 
Transfer and 
Capacity 
Building  0 Cost internalized by Investment Manager (Prosperete Investment 
Management Ltd.)  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  220 million  50 million  170 million  
 
(1) All Fund activities to be co-financed Pari-passu with all Fund investors, expected to include development 
finance institutions, private global philanthropy, family offices, pension funds, commercial asset managers, etc. 
 
Note: For illustrative purposes only. Actual budget by component is subject to change.  
 
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other 
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.  
 
In case of a multi- country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in annex 
17, if available.  
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒  No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding f inanc e technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒  No ☐ 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a brief  description of these activities and quantify the total 
requested GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent possible.  
Prosperete’s investment thesis is built upon ability of emerging markets to develop and interchange solutions 
for collective development , including through technology transfer. Prosperete will catalyse the development of 
climate ecosystems in emerging markets by employing a two- pronged strategy.  
Initially, by investing in developed solutions in target countries, Prosperete can establish a robust presence and cultivate partnerships with local stakeholders to develop and implement tailored climate solutions. L everaging 
the insights and experiences gained from 
this endeavor, Prosperete can export successful models and 
solutions to other emerging markets, facilitating knowledge transfer and fostering cross -border collaboration. 
As described in Activity 3 , transfer of technology amongst different emergi ng markets and subsequent 
development of ecosystems is central to Prosperete’s thesis.    
Concurrently, Prosperete can collaborate with regional funds to co- invest in targeted markets, thereby 
enhancing market -making capacity and bolstering  the adoption of climate solutions across diverse 
geographies. This approach not only amplifies Prosperete's impact but also contributes to the broader goal of accelerating climate action and sustainable development in emerging markets globally.


---
*Page 51*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 47 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
1. Overall Impact Targets:  Prosperete Growth Fund will identify and scale investments that offer low -carbon 
solutions, increase affordability, and help emerging markets pursue climate- friendly  growth. Through these 
solutions, approximately 3.2 million lives will build resilience to climate change directly and indirectly , and 9 
million tonnes of CO2eq will be averted. Through this intervention, emerging markets will be able to make the 
much needed leapfrog to climate- friendly solutions with wide adoption.  
 
2. Prosperete expects to achieve the following M itigation objectives:  
Through its investments in low -carbon solutions, avert 9 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) 
during the fund’s lifetime. Given the fund’s focus on scaling investee companies, these companies will continue to have mitigation impact post Prosperete’s exit. Through investments in solutions removing barriers for low -
carbon products such as electric vehicle equipment, clean- energy equipment, sustainable building material, and 
others, Prosperete will 
focus on using economies of scale to reduce the cost of these offering and enabling 
financing solutions so underserved communities can access these offerings (ARA 1).  
Prosperete's investment focus spans multiple sectors crucial for addressing climate change. Firstly, in the realm of energy, the emphasis is on promoting wider adoption of renewable energy sources like energy storage, smart grids, and rooftop installations  
to meet the burgeoning power demand in emerging markets, where an 80% 
increase is anticipated by 2030. Concurrently, Prosperete is actively exploring opportunities in low -emission 
transport, including electric vehicles and related infrastructure, to mitig ate carbon emissions while enhancing 
economic opportunities, particularly for last -mile workers. Lastly, in alignment with efforts to green operations 
and supply chains, Prosperete is evaluating investments in low -emission building materials and industrial  use 
cases, aiming to reduce emissions from challenging sectors such as buildings, cities, and industries. (MRA 1, MRA 2, MRA 3)  
 
3. Prosperete expects  to achieve the following Adaptation objectives:  
Prosperete will primarily reduce vulnerabilities of vulnerable populations by increasing access to affordable and 
productive offerings, with the targeting of benefitting 3 million+ lives directly and indirectly. For example, a large 
of section of society in emerging markets look to procure income- generating assets such as electric vehicles, 
but are often constrained due to high upfront cost and unavailability of financing at viable cost.  By enabling such 
solutions, Prosperete will be able to increase income of such popu lations while contri buting to mitigation 
outcomes. (ARA 1)  
Among Prosperete's pipeline companies, initiatives span agricultur al resilience, solar -powered water pumps , and 
modular wastewater treatment plants aimed at water conservation, as emerging markets face water duress under projected climate scenarios. Additionally, 
investments in cold chain infrastructure are anticipated to enhance 
farming predictability and prolong the shelf life of produce, thereby mitigating post -harvest losses. (ARA 2)  
Furthermore, Prosperete's portfolio companies are poised to enhance infrastructure asset resilience, providing real-time data and analytics to bolster performance predictability and monitor the impact of climate change on 
various sectors including infrastructure, agriculture, supply chains, and industrial operations. Access to such data is fundamental for designing effective interventions to adapt to climate change impacts.  (ARA3)  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
1. Recent S2G Ventures’ (a global climate tech investor) analysis shows that while developed market investors 
have raised USD 270bn for energy transition between 2017 and 2022 of that only USD 50bn (18%) was for growth stage capital
70. This funding gap problem at the growth stage, is much more severe in Emerging 
Markets. Capital flows are constrained by the dual risk of Emerging Markets and climate investments being considered “risky”. The early -stage investments being smaller in size and more widespread, investors tend to 
spread themselves across several small investments. At the growth stage, there is a need for deep diligence, 
selectivity, and the market test of customer preferences, scaled enough operations to show a path to 
profitability, and the need to serve emerging market consumers for whom affordability is a key constraint. At the growth stage, companies compete with mature industrialized sectors with incumbent technologies and products across several markets. To be able to compete, the climate solutions  have to be affordable, be scalable across 
markets, and achieve these while building their organizations and operational processes.


---
*Page 52*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 48 
   
 2. Prosperete is creating an integrated platform that can identify solutions in one market and then scale 
them across different EMs through technology transfer . Prosperete will enable globalization of climate 
solutions that will not only create impact at scale but also reduce costs further, enhancing affordability and 
creating a virtuous cycle.  Presence of growth capital will help enhance success of climate solutions  and create 
more avenues for later stage climate investments by large commercial investors. Inv estments in transitioning 
solutions will lead to faster adoption of climate technology and greening of supply chains.  
As these organisations scale, their climate impact will continue to grow and benefit society even after 
Prosperete’s exit. Today there are few companies offering climate solutions at scale that large private and institutional capital can invest in. Prosperete’s portfolio will become a pipeline for large funds to invest in and provide an exit for Prosperete’s  investment.  
3. Potential for scaling up and replication  
Scaling climate solutions across EMs will lead to opening- up of these markets for investors and attract additional 
global capital to accelerating climate solutions in EMs. Innovative technology exchange between the global south and adoption of best-in-class global technologies will be facilitated. Deployment of these solutions will 
create green supply chains and ecosystems of financiers and investors with expertise in climate solutions. Enablement of climate funding across countries where funds can deploy m oney with attractive risk adjusted 
returns will scale climate solutions across all continents.  
 
  
 
     
Building successful climate companies plays a pivotal role in catalysing broader climate action by serving as 
inspiring examples and demonstrating the economic viability of sustainable practices. Prosperete, with its technical expertise and network of grow th and late- stage investors, will enable creation of such enterprises, de-
risking the sector for commercial investors. Prosperete, along with its investee companies, will conduct 
knowledge sessions for building an ecosystem focussed on climate solutions, s preading best practices, 
accelerating innovation, and attracting more talent to the sector.  Investments by large investors (financial as 
well as strategic) and public listing of scaled Prosperete portfolio companies will create a strong signalling effect through public recognition, fostering investor confidence and driving capital allocation towa
rds impactful 
solutions. Additionally, positive media coverage raises public awareness and fosters consumer demand for sustainable products and services. This posit
ive reinforcement loop can inspire a new generation of 
entrepreneurs to launch their own climate- focused ventures, creating a domino effect that propels progress 
towards a more sustainable future.  
Success stories not only attract attention and investment to the green economy but also provide tangible evidence that innovative climate solutions can address pressing environmental challenges while generating financial returns and improving livelihoods.  
4. Potential for knowledge sharing and learning   
As portfolio companies scale and expand to other EMs, Prosperete ’s regional funds partner could look at co-
investment in such companies.  
Co-investment with Prosperete will help these funds underwrite deals and develop sector expertise in the 
sectors of electric mobility, green supply chains, energy transition, and data analytics for infrastructure. During the investment process, regional funds will also get access to Prosperete’s expert network to deepen their understanding of climate technologies. Furthermore, regional funds would provide local market understanding and support to expanding portfolio companies. Prosperete also evaluates  investee companies of partner funds 
to see if the solutions they offer can be scaled to other relevant EMs. The similarities in the climate needs and Emerging Markets Can Create Global Solutions  
There are several examples of emerging market companies building global solutions. Indian two- wheeler players 
used the large market in India to develop low -cost motorcycles for its population transitioning from legacy modes of 
transport. These players took  their two- wheeler expertise to Africa and garnered a 50%+ market share. They also 
setup manufacturing plants via tie- ups with local partners in several countries such as Kenya, Uganda, and Nigeria. 
Such partnerships have helped create regional manufacturi ng hubs, generating employment and entrepreneurial 
opportunities for 1 million+  people in EM. This global expansion has in- turn allowed further improvement in products 
and reduction in costs.  
As the electrification of 2 and 3- wheeler vehicles grows in India, the trend could also take off in Africa leading to 
lower vehicular emissions. The transfer of global energy and water efficient technologies creates an opportunity to 
conserve resources, enhance affordability of such technologies and benefit Emerging Markets just as much as Developed Markets.


---
*Page 53*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 49 
   
 solutions across these countries and regions suggest clear benefits from following a cross -border approach to 
scaling. This will create an ecosystem for climate investing across EMs.  
Through Prosperete Growth Fund, the team intends to share these learnings through webinars, publications, 
as well  as annual impact reports to stakeholders. Prosperete team continues to actively participate in public  
conferences and share our expertise with the community.  
5. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
Globally, commercial investors are increasingly allocating capital to climate solutions. The UN -Convened Net 
Zero Asset Owners Alliance now has investors with more than USD 11 trillion of capital71. However, large 
commercial investors seek organizations operating at a certain minimum scale to deploy this capital. The 
perception of dual risk of investing in EMs and the adoption risks of climate solutions restricts capital flows. This is then further constrained by the small scale of these companies. Through growth equity, Prosperete will be able to mitigate these barriers and crowd- in investments .  
Prosperete has been working on its pipeline of climate solutions for more than 2 years, identifying more than 150 investment opportunities in India alone, which have received early -
stage funding for climate action. 
Additionally, Prosperete has forged strong partnerships with partner funds across pivotal markets, facilitating co-investment opportunities in growth stage companies across emerging markets (EMs). 
 
Secondly, Prosperete prioritizes the Creation of Scaled Climate Solutions Deployment by emphasizing the scaling of portfolio companies to appeal to large institutional investors. Recognizing the current disinclination of commercial and institutional investors towards investing in climate solutions in Emerging Markets due to 
perceived limitations in scale and investment ticket size, Prosperete seeks to mitigate these concerns with the 
support of the GCF  through junior capital and its comprehensive approach a nd knowledge of the target sectors 
and target countries. By demonstrating the scalability and financial viability of green technologies, Prosperete aims to set a precedent for other investors to engage in the development of climate- focused solutions. 
 
Lastly, Prosperete recognizes the importance of Attracting Talent to drive the success and growth of potential 
investee companies. Beyond climate action, the achievements of these companies are poised to attract 
engineering and financial talent, fostering a broader ecosystem conducive to the creation of climate- focused 
and sustainable businesses. The influx of skilled talent is anticipated to play a pivotal role in enabling the scale -
up and success of these companies, further contributing to the advancement  of climate solutions across EMs.  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The need for green growth in Emerging Markets is paramount to address both environmental sustainability and 
economic development challenges. These regions are experiencing rapid population growth, urbanization, and 
industrialization, which, if not managed sustainably, could lead to very poor outcomes for the globe. Green growth initiatives offer a viable pathway to simultaneously address these challenges by fostering economic development while minimizing negative environmental impacts. Investing in scalable solutions that have climate action at the core not only 
reduces the carbon footprint but also creates jobs, enhances energy security, and promote resilience to climate change. Additionally, green growth can attract international investments, spur innovation, and position these Emerging Markets as leaders in the global transition to a more sustainable and resilient future.  
Through its growth fund, Prosperete directly 
contributes to UN’s Sustainability Development 
Goals  (SDGs)  6, 7, 8, 9, and 13. Prosperete will work 
towards these SDGs through its investments in 
water -use efficiency, clean energy, and other low -
carbon solutions. Prosperete will take SMEs and start -ups from Emerging Markets and help them scale globally, 
transitioning into global enterprises, leading to economic growth. Furthermore, through partnerships and growth of sustainable industries, Prosperete will also contribute to SDG 17, SDG 12, SDG 11, and SDG 5.  
Economic Co- Benefits:  Establishing large scale companies and export hubs forms a key pillar in sustained growth of 
economies. Prosperete will provide a substantial contribution to the economic development and sustainable growth in participating countries. The fund will enable business development and job creation in target countries as well as attract more talent towards establishing climate companies. Furthermore, the success of the fund will de- risk the climate sector 
in these economies to enable larger pools of institutional capital investments in local companies.  
Environmental Co- benefits:  Prosperete is focussed on generating environmental co- benefits across all its investments. 
The team follow s IFC Performance Standards for diligence and monitoring of investments, and transparently report to


---
*Page 54*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 50 
   
 GCF on all investments. All portfolio companies are required to monitor emissions and develop an impact action plan 
as well as follow ESG standards.  
Social Co -benefits:  Social objectives form a key part of Prosperete’s investment thesis. The F und is working with 
organisations such as Dasra (a non- profit that works on measurement and reporting of industrial working conditions) 
to develop a comprehensive plan to evaluate various aspects of portfolio companies such as rights of informal workers, 
gender equality and safety requirements. Further, by investing in increased affordability and easier access to solutions 
such as green transportation, Prosperete is creating increased livelihood and resilience for people at the base of the pyramid.   
Gender -sensitive development benefit:  Prosperete is founded and led by a woman, and its senior leadership is more 
than 50% female . Prosperete is focussed on achieving positive gender outcomes  and  applies an Intersectional Gender 
Lens and is Aligned with the 2x criteria.   
Ecosystem level: ensure increased access to funding for women led companies and engage in transformative activities to help counter regressive gender norms.  
Prosperete will monitor and ensure that it tracks and measures relevant data and reports on gender metrics.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The vulnerability of specific populations in Bangladesh, India  and Mauritius  to climate impacts necessitates innovative 
solutions from businesses specializing in climate and environmental technologies.  
The increasing urbanization and the vulnerability of infrastructure to climate hazards underscore the need for green building materials. Businesses can supply materials that reduce the urban heat island effect and improve the energy efficiency of buildings, catering to the growing demand for sustainable urban planning.  
Further, these countries have advocated for the needs in sustainable mobility creating a demand for cost and time-effective solutions in the EV landscape, to reduce their transportation- based GHG emissions and create green jobs. 
Scaling- up manufacturing of  EV batteries can reduce costs and make electric vehicles more accessible, fulfilling both 
the supply need for localized production and the demand for sustainable transportation solutions. Financing remains a significant barrier to the adoption of green technologies. Companies providing green financing can bridge the gap by offering loans, subsidies, or other financial products specifically designed to support the procurement and installation of EV infrastructure, thereby stimulating both the supply of capital and the demand for eco- friendly transport solutions. 
As a complement to electric vehicles, battery swapping stations can address any concerns related to range per charge of battery and reduce downtime for charging, particularly in urban areas where spa ce is a premium. This infrastructure 
supports the rapid deployment of EVs by meeting the growing demand for convenient and fast recharging solutions.  
Significant percentages of the population in these countries face inadequate access to improved drinking water and sanitation facilities. Businesses can invest in decentralized wastewater treatment technologies and water purification systems that require a lower land footprint, meeting the critical need for clean water and sanitation.  
Climate change significantly impacts agricultural outputs due to changes in rainfall patterns and increasing 
temperatures. For example, in Bangladesh, the irrigated area under wheat cultivation faces medium- high drought risk, 
and net trade deficits are expected to increase significantly by 2030. Businesses can offer AI -based climate solutions 
for agriculture, providing predictive analytics for weather and soil health, and introduce drought -resistant crop varieties 
to enhance food security. Moreover, for projected decrease in water availability and altered rainfall patterns, solar -
powered water pumps could provide a sustainable solution to irrigation needs, reducing reliance on inconsistent rainfall.  
On the supply side, enduring financial shortfalls in the region necessitate increased private investment characterized by a relatively higher tolerance for risk. This is to support innovative enterprises committed to the inclusive growth of Asia and Africa, particularly those that have shown promising results.  Summary of vulnerable population in the target 
countries  is provided below.  
Bangladesh72 • Coastal Zone: Sea level rise could displace nearly one million people from southern divisions by 2050 due to 
loss of shoreline, agriculture, and fishery yields.  
• High Climate Exposure Areas: More than 90 million Bangladeshis (about 56% of the population) live in high climate exposure areas that are affected by multiple hazards like cyclones, floods, and droughts.  
• River Flooding: By 2035 -2044, an additional 6- 12 million people could be affected by extreme floods, a 40% 
increase in population exposure to river flooding.  
• Drought -Affected Areas: Droughts of varying intensity affect three to four million hectares of arable land each 
year, influencing food security and livelihoods, particularly in the northwest regions like Rangpur and Rajshahi.


---
*Page 55*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 51 
   
 India73 • Marginal farmers, estimated to be around 150 -200 million people, who rely on rain -fed agriculture and are 
vulnerable to changes in precipitation patterns and water availability.  
• Coastal communities, particularly in states like Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, and West Bengal, who 
are at risk from cyclones, storm surges, and sea- level rise.  
• South Asia, including India, is expected to experience an estimated 17 to 36 million internal climate migrants by 2050, with many coming from communities dependent on rain -fed croplands for their livelihoods.  
• Additionally, without adaptation measures, extreme river floods are expected to affect an additional 13 to 34 million people by the 2040s, and coastal flooding is expected to affect an additional 5 to 18 million people by the 2070s to the end of the centur y. 
Mauritius  • Around 90 percent of Mauritius’ households are aware of climate change, and a great majority perceives it as a threat, including to food and water security  
• 17% of the coastline of Mauritius has eroded over the long -term (1967- 2012) which represent 13 km of 
coastline in Mauritius.  
• Mauritius is highly vulnerable to adverse impacts of climate change. According to the World Risk Report of 2018, Mauritius is ranked as the 16th country with the highest disaster risk and ranked 10th on the list of countries most exposed to natural hazards  
 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The Prosperete team has a long history of having worked in the target countries in policy dialogues and investments in 
energy and renewable sectors, ports, telecoms, roads, gas flaring, water and energy efficiency, financial services, 
among others.  
Prosperete has consulted with various  governments during the design of the program. Prosperete has received 
encouraging feedback and NOL from the Economic Relations Division, Ministry of Finance, Bangladesh.  
Additionally, Prosperete is exploring a potential partnership with IDCOL (Infrastructure Development Company Ltd.), a 
GCF -accredited entity, for pipeline development as well as local expertise for companies looking to expand to other 
emerging markets.  
Prosperete has broad- based support from the Government of India and its ministries (inc. Agricultural Ministry and 
Ministry of Finance). Subsequently, the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change , the NDA has  issued 
an NOL for the Prosperete program on 29th July 2024.   
Prosperete has setup  the Fund and the Investment Manager i n Mauritius and both entities are regulated by the  
Financial Services Commission, Mauritius.  Mauritius , widely considered a global investment destination by 
investors,  is key for Prosperete to catalyse climate finance for emerging market s. Given the country’s climate needs 
and its sophisticated financial and investment  ecosystem, Mauritius  is a key hub to mobiliz e climate finance for the 
Global South.  The government has taken significant steps , including creation of the Mauritius International Financial 
Centre (MIFC), which offers a conducive environment for green finance and sustainable investments. The government is actively working on introducing a sustainable finance framework
74. Prosperete has received an NOL from Ministry 
of Finance, Mauritius . Prosperete is working in close partnership with the Government of Mauritius to strengthen 
climate capacity across the island nation, through joint efforts in developing climate mitigation and adaptation programs, advancing global climate finance awareness,  and establishing green finance education initiatives, with the shared goal 
of positioning Mauritius as a leading regional hub for sustainable finance.  
Each of the Governments are enthusiastic about investments to accelerat e climate solutions. The governments are 
keen to improve reliable energy access, affordable clean mobility, resilient infrastructure, and other technology solutions for their people. Prosperete has presented its thesis to participating countries and initial  discussions indicate strong 
interest from governments and the private sector in collaborating closely, as described in the table below.  
The fact that Prosperete has developed these relationships through their work in key sectors in the target countries has further strengthened the relationship and the credibility of Prosperete in these target markets.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
1. Prosperete Growth fund is requesting Junior Equity infusion of USD 50mn from GCF. Enabled by GCF’s anchor 
investment, will be able to raise a fund of requisite size and attract institutional capital from other like- minded 
investors who wish to invest in cl imate but are currently hindered by perceived risks of investing in emerging 
markets and in  new areas such as climate solutions. We believe we can leverage GCF’s investments in a 3.4:1 
ratio, raising a USD 220mn fund basis the anchor investment of 50mn. In  turn, the Fund’s investments would 
further mobilize up to USD 1 billion.


---
*Page 56*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 52 
   
 2. Prosperete has garnered interest from numerous institutional investors who align with the Fund's investment 
thesis but exhibit a cautious approach due to their conservative capital profile and hesitation to back first-time 
funds. The prevailing high- risk perception stems from concerns regarding both the uncertainties associated with 
emerging markets and the adoption risks inherent in climate solutions. A significant challenge for a growth- stage 
climate fund is attaining a minimum viab le size, which is particularly daunting without a mix of concessional and 
commercial capital. Commercial investors typically hesitate to invest in first- time funds lacking risk protection 
mechanisms. The concessional support from GCF serves as a crucial bridge, facilitating the creation of a solid 
foundation that enables the implementation of scaled and timely solutions to combat climate change in emerging 
economies.  GCF would not be crowding out private capital, but rather catalysing investment by private capital 
managers seeking to achieve social impact and financial return.  
3. Prosperete seeks to generate positive financial and impact outcome for our investors and stakeholders. This 
desire promotes sustainable business models in the underlying investee companies, keeping a focus on strong 
product -market fit, and  appropriate pricing and credit policies, to ensure strong businesses achieve significant 
scale. In turn, it also builds the track record of impact funds to support future investment from return- seeking 
investors.  
4. Based on our proposed investment vehicle and the resulting reduction cost of $23.65 per tCO2eq, we believe 
this proposal to be competitive amongst other interventions that  have aimed to reduce CO2 emissions.  
5. EPA and other federal agencies use the social cost of carbon (SCC) to estimate the climate benefits of  
rulemakings. The SCC is an estimate of the economic damages associated with a small increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, conventionally one metric ton, each year. This dollar figure also represents the  value 
of damages avoided for a small emission reduction (i.e., the benefit of a CO2 reduction). The EPA  estimates the 
social cost of CO2 to be between $14 and $138.61
75 
6. Prosperete is  convinced our proposal presents a cost -effective approach to reducing CO2 emissions, 
accompanied by substantial mitigation and adaptation benefits for low -income customers by improving 
affordability of climate solutions and thus enabling them to become mainstreamed.  
7. Furthermore, the program is being designed in consultation with national stakeholders as well as commercial 
investors. There is very strong additionality that GCF will have by supporting one among a few growth stage 
Climate Funds focused on the EMs. Prosperete will wor k on a model of strong collaboration among the targeted 
countries and bringing best in class technologies to Emerging Markets; crowding in commercial capital into 
climate solutions for Emerging Markets that make basic services more accessible and affordable. Prosperete 
has a highly experienced team, with strong gender diversity and hands on experience / track record in scaling climate solutions across Emerging Markets.


---
*Page 57*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 53 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co- financing.   
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross -cutting proposals, select both.  
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will contribute 
(Description ) Description Rating  
Scale  There is a growing investment in 
climate  solutions, which is  
contributing to the development of 
carbon and climate resilient solutions . 
However, this development is currently 
limited to early -stage and the sector is  
still in its nascency  (compared to other  
sectors ), as solutions are often 
restricted to their home markets  Low Availability of capital across all stage of development of a 
climate solution, across different markets which hav e 
availability of climate solutions. This would result in creation of 
large viable businesses that offer low- carbon and climate 
resilient solutions, ultimately reducing GHG emissions and 
improving resilience of vulnerable communities  Prosperete Growth Fund aims to mobilize capital at growth 
stage to enable creation of scaled climate enterprises  
through technology transfer. Prosperete will help with the 
global expansion of these enterprises across different 
emerging markets, thus supporting the deployment of low -
carbon and climate resilient solutions  over the life and 
post.  
Such scale is expected to reduce the cost of solutions, in 
turn increasing affordability and access, as well as attract 
late-stage  commercial capital to climate solutions.  
Replicability  There are currently limited number of 
growth funds for climate solutions in 
emerging markets . Prosperete’s focus 
countries have more than 2 billion 
growth stage under- investments,  Low Influx of institutional capital into the sector from multiple 
providers, deploying the much- needed equity capital at scale 
for growth stage climate solutions in emerging markets. A 
vibrant market needs multiple  funds in vesting to support 
climate companies  adequately.  It is expected that the success of Prosperete and investee 
organisations will lead to a strong signalling effect for capital and talent that green technologies can scale and 
become large commercial enterprises. This is expected to 
catalyse further innovation in technologies and investments from other industry participants.  
Prosperete will also partner with  local funds across 
different markets and enable market making, creating more pools of capital across emerging markets.  
Sustainability  Investments into the climate sector 
and climate solutions are growing, however sustainable and profitable 
business models at large scale across 
various sub- sectors are yet to be 
established, especially in emerging markets  Low A share d climate landscape across emerging markets with the 
exchange of best technologies will create wide -scale 
adaptation and mitigation impact. Creation of an enabling 
environment where viable climate solutions are able to attract 
capital at all stages of their development and growth. Ensuring 
continuous access to financing for vital segments within the 
climate sector and climate solutions, particularly in areas with 
substantial potential for reducing greenhouse gas emissions The exit strategy entails selling investee companies to new 
or existing market participants, such as late- stage 
investors, who will sustain and expand the companies' impact. This divestment signifies market maturity and ensures continuity of intervention.


---
*Page 58*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 54 
  
  
  and enhancing climate resilience at both household and 
business levels.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1- 4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV) Baseline  Target4 
Assumptions  / Note  
Mid-term  Final5 
All Mitigation Areas  Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered As described below  0 2.3mn tCO2e  9.2mn tCO2e  Core 1 target is additive of 
emissions reduction targets from 
MRA1, MRA 2, and MRA 3.  
 
GHG emission reductions (direct 
and indirect) for MRA1, MRA 2, 
MRA 3 are calculated as the total 
emission reductions achieved by 
Prosperete portfolio companies to 
be invested in during the course of 
the programme.  
 
The emission profile  has been 
modelled based on pipeline 
company’s current operations and 
indicated sales growth. The 
estimate is a ‘best guess’ of 
climate  impact enabled by a set of 
investments in portfolio companies 
whose identities are not known in 
advance. The growth achieved by 
these companies is also an 
indet erminate  factor in advance.   
 
MRA1 Energy generation 
and access  
 Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  
KPI monitored through Annual 
ESG, Impact reporting, and 
regular portfolio company 
reported data  
Additional verification occurs 
through the implementation of 0 0.5mn tCO2e  2.2mn tCO2e  Prosperete will invest in solutions 
that help increase RE adoption through software services, energy 
storage, and distributed solar, and 
energy efficient equipment. The 
team would include only 
incremental  savings against grid 
factor from the mentioned 
solutions through defined 
 
4 Note: Assuming a 10-year Fund Life, mid-term point is estimated at 5 years after first close. Final targets as at 2035 (assuming two one- year extensions)  
5 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target 
value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number  of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.


---
*Page 59*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 55 
  
  
 the Impact measurement 
systems and ESMS  methodologies. These would 
include:  
 
AMS -I.F Renewable 
electricity generation for captive 
use and mini -grid; 
AM0091 Energy efficiency 
technologies and fuel switching in new and existing buildings  
AM0060 Power saving through 
replacement by energy efficient 
chillers  
AM0120 Energy -efficient 
refrigerators and air -conditioners  
AMS -I.B.: Mechanical energy for 
the user with or without electrical 
energy  
AMS -II.P.: Energy efficient pump-
set for agriculture use --- Version 
1.0- Small Scale  
Supplementary 1.1: Annual 
energy savings  0 30mn KWh  p.a.  60mn KWh p.a  Same as above  
MRA2 Low -emission 
transport  Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered KPI monitored through Annual 
ESG, Impact reporting, and 
regular portfolio company 
reported data 
 
Additional verification occurs 
through the implementation of 
the Impact measurement 
systems and ESMS  
0 0.9mn tCO2e  3.6mn tCO2e  Demand for low -carbon emitting 
transport alternatives is increasing 
in the delivery of sustainable 
transport systems across the 
continent Methodology: CDM 
approved methodologies for 
electric vehicle emissions 
reduction, including:  
AMS -III.C for Emission reductions 
by electric and hybrid vehicles;  
AMS -III.S.: Introduction of low -
emission vehicles/technologies to 
commercial vehicle fleets.  
MRA3 Buildings, cities, 
industries and appliances  
 Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered KPI monitored through Annual 
ESG, Impact reporting, and 
regular portfolio company 
reported data 
 0 0.9mn tCO2e  3.5mn tCO2e  Demand for low carbon - 
solutions is increasing across 
emerging markets


---
*Page 60*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 56 
  
  
 Additional verification occurs 
through the implementation of 
the Impact measurement 
systems and ESMS  Use of defined methodologies (if 
available), otherwise use of 
independently verified bottom -up 
estimates; Methodologies currently used for pipeline:  
 
Use of bottom -up estimates as 
there are no CDM/Verra 
methodologies aligning to Ultra  
High-Performance Concrete's LCA  
 
Savings based on energy 
efficiency using grid factor; Use of 
CDM methodology for methane 
recovery in wastewater treatment  
All adaptation result areas  Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  As described below  0 Total: 0.8 mn 
 
Indirect: 0.4mn 
Direct: 0. 4mn 
 
Male: 0.5mn 
Female: 0.3mn  Total: 3.2 mn 
 
Indirect: 1.5mn 
Direct: 1. 7mn 
 
Male: 1.9mn 
Female: 1.3mn  Core 2 target is additive of 
emissions reduction targets from 
ARA1, ARA 2, and ARA 3.  
 
Female beneficiaries expected to 
be 40% of total beneficiaries.  
 
Given the climate landscape of the 
target countries , there is a clear 
need for adaptation solutions, 
especially the ones that 
directly/indirectly impact the 
marginalized and vulnerable 
communities.  
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities  Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  KPI monitored through  Annual 
ESG, Impact  reporting, and 
regular  portfolio company  
reported data 
 Additional verification occurs 
through the implementation of 
the Impact measurement systems and ESMS  
 
Surveys carried out by third 
party evaluators to confirm the beneficiaries will be carried out 
periodically and during the 
mid-point and final evaluation.  Direct  
0 males  
0 females  
Indirect  
0 males  
0 females  20,000 0.1 million  The target countries  have 
repeatedly emphasized funding need to fulfil their adaptation needs. As such, there are no 
distorting subsidies or market 
barriers to entry in the target customer segment.  
Increased cost savings/wealth 
generation or by securing green 
jobs (eg EV infrastructure and operations linked jobs); or provide reliable climate change data to 
farming community;  Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting improved and/or new 
climate -resilient livelihood 
options  TBD 25,000 50,000


---
*Page 61*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 57 
  
  
 ARA2 Health, well -being, 
food and water security  Supplementary 2.5: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting innovations that 
stregthen climate change 
resilience  KPI monitored through  Annual 
ESG, Impact  reporting, and 
regular  portfolio company  
reported data 
 
Additional verification occurs 
through the implementation of 
the Impact measurement systems and ESMS  
Direct  
0 males  
0 females  
Indirect  
0 males  
0 females  0.6 million  2.2 million  No distorting subsidies or  market 
barriers are in in focus  countries  
Create health outcomes through 
resolving cold chain storage 
solutions for medicine, helping increase access to medicines 
through transportation and energy 
access  
Lastly, the portfolio company 
engaged in green financing of EVs 
has huge potential for indirect beneficiaries (or commuters) that 
face issues of last mile 
connectivity in the target emerging 
economies.  
For EVs, m any social issues, 
especially for women are 
associated with poor last -mile 
connectivity in these emerging 
economies.  
While these impacts are qualitative 
at this stage, Prosperete will 
ensure that the portfolio company 
develops a robust monitoring and 
evaluation framework to quantify 
these positive socio -economic 
impacts, once the programme is in 
the implementation stage.  
Supplementary 2.3: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
with more climate- resilient 
water security  
0 0.1 million  0.3 million  Investments in companies 
providing climate- smart, and clean 
and efficient energy -water nexus 
solutions to small holder farmers  
Additionally, increased penetration 
of products and companies  
targeting household climate 
resilience through productive use 
and income  diversifying  
alternatives.


---
*Page 62*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 58 
  
  
 ARA3 Intrastructure and 
built environment  Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  KPI monitored through  Annual 
ESG, Impact  reporting, and 
regular  portfolio company  
reported data 
 
Additional verification occurs 
through the implementation of 
the Impact measurement systems and ESMS  0 0.2 million  0.9 million  The portfolio companies to be 
funded have significant direct and indirect benefits to enhance 
climate resilience in the 2 EMs.  
 
There are indirect beneficiaries 
served through application of low -
carbon building material  towards 
affordable housing in urban areas of the target geographies . 
 
Investments in technologies creating sustainable urban 
solutions, such as reactor for 
waste -water treatment  
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the respective 
indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis -à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the project/programme will 
contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section.  
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for 
current state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 6: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to technology 
deployment, dissemination, 
development or transfer and 
innovation  Early -stage investments  have led to  
development of climate solutions at an 
early stage in some markets . However, 
these markets are unable to scale 
solutions due to confinement  in single 
market . At the same time, many 
emerging markets are unable to 
develop solutions and therefore unable 
access to affordable mitigation and 
adaptation solutions. There is a need for 
innovative financing along with an 
ecosystem approach to scale climate 
solutions and enable transfer from these 
solutions across emerging markets.  low Development of an 
ecosystem working across 
emerging markets to develop 
climate solutions suited for 
these markets and transfer 
such solutions across multiple 
emerging markets.  Prosperete Growth Fund seek s to identify 
investment opportunities that promote 
affordability of essential services, 
demonstrating that nations can leapfrog fossil -
fuels to green growth. Prosperete will also 
leverage key markets to export climate 
solutions to other emerging markets and 
accelerate the creation of climate ecosystems 
across different markets.  Multi -countries  
Core indicator 7: Degree to 
which GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transformation at GCF investments have led to  
development of solutions in multiple 
markets but these often plateau at 
early -stage . Despite the existence of 
regulatory and policy frameworks, many medium  Robust financial markets 
providing diverse products to 
facilitate capital investment 
across the sector, thereby 
fostering the adoption of low -Prosperete not only provide s growth financing 
to investee companies  across different sectors 
which enables their scaling but also promotes 
these companies to expand to multiple Multi -countries


---
*Page 63*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 59 
  
  
 the sectoral, local, or national 
level sub-sectors within the market still 
exhibit limited developmen t. There is a 
critical need for increased capital, 
particularly at growth stage , to facilitate 
large- scale investments that will 
advance overall market maturity.  carbon and climate -resilient 
solutions . This dynamic is 
expected to drive down costs 
and enhance the appeal of 
these solutions  relative to 
traditional fossil fuel 
alternatives.  markets and help develop low -carbon 
ecosystems there.  
Prosperete plans to collaborate with regional 
funds to co- invest in portfolio companies as 
they scale across emerging markets. This 
partnership aims to assist these funds in 
assessing deals and cultivating sector 
expertise climate sectors , with access to 
Prosperete's expert network enhancing their 
understanding  of climate technologies  
Core indicator 8: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to effective 
knowledge generation and 
learning processes, and use of 
good practices, methodologies 
and standards  The development of best practices and 
a diverse range of financing solutions 
within this sector is still ongoing. Many 
local financial institutions lack the 
capability to provide financing due to 
limited understanding perceived risks 
associated with factors like unproven 
technology, limited operating history, 
and inadequate data on residual value. 
While there are some newcomers 
targeting specific market segments or 
products, enhancing the capacity to 
offer a comprehensi ve range of 
financing solutions is crucial for scaling 
up the adoption of climate solutions  low Expertise in financing 
products and optimal 
practices across various sub-
sectors is being refined. 
Enhanced capacity among 
financial institutions to offer 
tailored financing solutions to 
companies and customers in 
climate, under favourable 
terms, is imperative. 
Additionally, financiers 
contribute insights and 
experiences to inform the 
formulation of policies and 
regulations within this sphere.  Prosperete will provide growth capital and help 
develop solutions for climate that currently do 
not exist. Furthermore, Prosperete work s with 
regional financiers in different markets to 
undertake capacity building for climate sectors. 
Prosperete management team also regularly 
participate s in forums of knowledge sharing to 
support regulations and policy in the space.  Multi -countries  
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV) Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Output 1: Creation of Prosperete 
Growth Fund  Creation of Prosperete Growth Fund Audited Fund financials  - USD 220mn  USD 220mn  Assumes willingness of investors to 
invest in Prosperete post GCF 
Contribution; Final target same as 
mid-term target as fundraise to be 
completed before mid -term.  
Number of companies in which 
Prosperete leads the investment round  Audited financial statement of companies  
 - 1 3 Assumes willingness of investors to 
invest subject to availability of lead 
investor  
Source: Audited financial 
statements


---
*Page 64*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 60 
  
  
 Transaction amount invested 
into portfolio companies  Audited Fund financials will 
validate disbursements made 
into the Companies.  - USD120mn USD 17 0mn Relates to funding provided to 
climate -focussed companies; 
Assumes availability of investment 
opportunities  
Output 2:  Growth Stage 
Investments and support for scaling of approx. 10 to 12 
portfolio companies  
 Number of companies  
and initiatives  
supported through equity 
investments  Investment Manager  
reports (Quarterly and  
Annual) - 8 8 Source: Investment Manager 
Reporting 
Volume of capital  
raised by portfolio  
companies from time  
of investment, inc. equity, 
debt, grant  Audited financial statement of 
companies  
 - 2x of Prosperete 
Investments  3x of 
Prosperete 
Investments  Assumes availability of investment 
opportunities within targeted 
sectors. Prosperete will support 
companies to raise further capital 
by supporting companies to be 
attractive to diverse investors.  
Assumes macro -economic in 
countries of focus.  
Assumes supportive policy and 
regulatory environment.  
Assumes that climate change and 
energy transition efforts remain 
critical to potential co- investors 
including DFI’s, and institutional 
investors.  
 
Data Sources: Self - 
reported Company data;  
Audited Company  
Financial statements.  
Reporting on investment performance and value 
addition in portfolio companies  Annual independent evaluations of fund performance. To be 
shared with investors by way of quarterly and annual reports.  n/a Quarterly and 
annual reports  Quarterly and 
annual reports  Investment manager will regularly 
prepare reports for investors covering fund performance and updates at the portfolio level. Data 
Sources: Self reported performance 
data from portfolio Companies; 
Financial statements.  
Successful exit as  indicative of 
positive IRR, demonstrating  
commercial viability of investment assets,  and 
maturation of  markets.  Investment Manager  
reports (Quarterly and  
Annual) n/a 0 8 The fund envisages to exit all its 
investments by the end of the life of the fund. Assumes continued 
deepening and growth of EM 
capital markets for climate; Source: 
Investment Manager Reporting  
Outcome 3: Increased 
availability of climate solutions 
across emerging markets 
through technology transfer  Number of companies 
expanding beyond home 
market  Audited financial statement of 
companies  
 - 1 3 Assistance from Prosperete 
identifying network to enable 
expansion; availability of customer 
in other markets  
Assumes supportive  
policy and regulatory  
environment.


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 61 
  
  
  
Ability of countries to export 
solutions from one market to 
another 
Data Sources: Self - 
reported Company data;  
Audited Company  
Financial statements.  
Output 3: Technology transfer by 
companies through sharing of 
knowledge, exports, expansion of 
operations, or joint ventures  Companies with expansion / 
technology transfer plan  Investment Manager reporting 
to GCF   TBD 5 7 Assumes ability of pipeline 
companies to expand beyond home 
market  
Number of companies demonstrating technology transfer  Audited financial statement of such companies  and 
management surveys  - 1 3 Demonstration of technology 
transfer includes knowledge 
transfer, demonstration of 
relevance of technology through exports, license revenue 
 Data Sources: Self - 
reported Company data;  
Audited Company  
Financial statements.  
Output 4:  Collaboration (via 
partnerships or otherwise) 
established with regional funds for 
assistance, knowledge exchange and co- investments  Number of partnerships with 
regional funds established Review of partnership agreements signed by fund  - 6 6 Interest of funds in emerging 
markets to develop expertise in 
climate  
Prosperete ability to develop 
and share market expertise  
Outcome 4: Strengthened 
ecosystem in EMs for creation of 
scaled climate companies  # of new climate -focussed 
startups created in target 
countries   - 50 in each country 
by Mid- term 150 in each 
country by Mid-
term  
Investors / Funds apart from 
Prosperete investing in 
climate -focussed companies   - 5 in each country  10 in each 
country   
 
Output 5: Skills developed in 
climate ecosystem through 
mentorship sessions and publishing of best practices  
 Number of portfolio companies 
reporting sustainability metrics  
in an improved manner  Investment Manager reporting 
to GCF  - 5 10 Capacity building within 
organization for following best 
practices on sustainability and 
execution of ESG plan  Number of climate and ESG 
action plans developed and 
(successfully) implemented  Investment Manager reporting 
to GCF  - 3 7 
Preparation of gender action 
plans for portfolio companies  Investment manager reporting 
to GCF  - 3 6 Prosperete ability to develop and 
share market expertise  
Continue to interest of women and 
men entrepreneurs to develop 
solutions in climate  
 Preparation of Action Plan for 
Companies  Investment manager reporting 
to GCF  - 4 8 
Number of female employees, 
management team members 
and board directors recruited, Company audited financials with 
verification  - 200 500


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 62 
  
  
 trained, and supported at 
portfolio companies  Data Source: investment Manager 
Reporting 
Number of markets  
studies and best  
practices papers  
published  Investment manager reporting 
to LPs basis public disclosure  - 5 8 
Number of mentorship 
sessions held  Investment manager reporting 
to LPs  - 10 20 
Project/programme co- benefit indicators  
Co-Benefit 1: Economic Co-
Benefit  of Creation of Jobs in 
Climate Sector  Direct and indirect  
work opportunities  
created at portfolio  
company level Periodic portfolio 
company data and  
independent verifications  - 500 1,500  Jobs created would heavily 
depend on business model of 
the selected portfolio companies.  
Baseline and targets will be established basis portfolio company selection and growth 
projections.  
Co-Benefit 2: Enhanced 
gender inclusivity in climate ecosystem  30% women workforce  Periodic  portfolio  
company data and  
independent verifications  - 10% 30% To be implemented through 
company -specific Gender 
Action Plans  
30% investment pipeline qualifies under the 2x Criteria  Fund internal tracking  - 30% 30% Prosperete woul d implement 
this target through internal 
review  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1: Setting Up 
Equity Fund  
 Prosperete Growth Fund is targeting to raise 
USD 220 million with the help of anchor 
contribution from GCF.  
The fund is  advised  by Prosperete , which 
screen s investments and diligence for 
financial and impact returns. The portfolio will 
be actively monitored till exit decisions.  • Sub-Activity 1.1: Equity Fund Formation  
• Sub-Activity 1.2: Team Buildout  
• Sub-Activity 1.3: Fundraising Activities  
• Sub-Activity 1.4: Management over 10-year 
life;  
 o Fund Entity Formation and signing binding agreements  
o Buildout of team towards first and final close  
o Achieving final close for Prosperete Growth Fund  
Activity 2: Growth 
Stage Investments  
 Prosperete will actively work with pipeline companies to enable scaling of climate 
solutions, through strategic input, 
organization building, connect with clients.  • Sub-Activity 2.1: Ongoing operations: Equity 
Fund administration and reporting, deal sourcing, due diligence  
• Sub-Activity 2.2: Deployment of capital in 10 
to 12 Portfolio  companies  
• Sub-Activity 2.3: Post -Investment 
Engagement  o Final IC Approval and Disbursement  
o Capital calls based on portfolio company requirements  
o Periodic impact reports prepared and distributed quarterly, 
with two independent evaluations (mid- term and final) also 
undertaken.  
o Presentation of Exit thesis to Investment Committee  
o Approval of Exit, Exit Process, and Distribution of Capital to 
Investors


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 63 
  
  
 • Sub-Activity 2.4: Exit investments, return 
capital and profits to investors, close fund  
 
Activity 3: Technology 
transfer  
  Expansion of solutions to other emerging markets through export and building 
partnerships with other funds for interchanging of solutions and expertise  • Sub-Activity 3.1: Development of expansion 
plan for portfolio companies  
• Sub-Activity 3.2: Export to other markets 
through inputs and Prosperete network  
• Sub-Activity 3.3:  Regional funds 
collaboration (via partnerships or otherwise) 
for assistance and knowledge exchange  
 o Formulation of expansion strategy beyond home markets  
o Sharing of portfolio company insights for enhanced understanding and knowledge of sector  along with periodic 
cadence  
o Investments from partner / other funds into Prosperete portfolio companies  
Activity 4:  Capacity 
Building  
 Activities across the ecosystem for sharing of 
best practices and increasing gender 
inclusivity  in climate sectors  • Sub-Activity 4.1: Development of Action 
Plan and organization building  
• Sub-Activity 4.2: Participation in 
Management / Board Meetings  of Portfolio 
Companies  
• Sub-Activity 4.3: Knowledge and best 
practices sessions  
• Sub-Activity 4.4: Holding mentorship 
sessions for women in climate ecosystem and focus on women in pipeline 
 o Formulation of Action Plan for portfolio companies  
o Particip ation in board meetings  
o Industry analysis basis portfolio companies, Prosperete 
sector expertise, industry advisors  
o Publication of reports and / or research pieces for public 
dissemination  
o Best practices and knowledge transfer sessions for portfolio 
companies and ecosystem  
o Mentorship sessions for women in climate sector  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Reporting schedule for GCF  
The following outlines the reporting schedule that Prosperete Growth Fund will follow for GCF:  
1. Fund quarterly and annual reporting  
2. Annual Performance Report  
3. Independent Interim Evaluation  Report  
4. Independent Final Evaluation Report  
5. ESG Reporting  
 
o Prosperete Growth Fund will provide  quarterly financial statements as well as undertake Annual Performance Review for GCF.  
o Given the nature of the programme, with Prosperete targeting impact through providing growth equity to climate positive enterprises, Prosperete will track the impact of 
these companies in its their focus geographies.  Prosperete will ensure best practices are followed in reporting to both its investors as well as its national stakeholders. 
Climate targets will be the responsibility of ESG and Climate Lead. The ESG and Climate officer will guide the investment team in assessing potential impact of a 
company and ongoing engagement. The ESG and Climate Lead will take ownership of measuring and recording climate impacts of investee companies.  
o To track that the Fund is achieving its mitigation and adaptation, the Prosperete team will work with each investee company and an external impact expert to develop 
and track several  indicators that will measure progress  at the fund and portfolio levels. The Fund will also initiate various surveys over  the course of the Fund’s life to 
evaluate improvements in climate resilience among beneficiaries, including improved income levels, income stability, access t o climate information systems, and other


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 64 
  
  
 metrics. The Fund will consolidate data for analysis and form insights at Fund level on a regular basis. This will help track  progress against set objectives and enable 
the Fund to provide timely feedback to investee companies where realignment in their business strategy is required.  
o For adaptation, direct and indirect beneficiaries will be assessed by the portfolio companies, who are required to report dat a to Prosperete  on a periodic  basis. Prosperete 
will help its portfolio companies to build requisite capacity for accurate measurement and cogent communication of its impact  on beneficiaries. Prosperete will conduct 
periodic surveys and audit to ensure accuracy of the data. As mentioned above, Prosperete will integrate reporting on impact and Action Plan into its investment’s  legal 
documents  for each investment . Such requirements will be enforced through possible representation of Prosperete on board of the companies, as well as binding 
covenants.  
o For Mitigation, Prosperete utilizes  globally recognized  methodologies such as CDM / Vera / Other methodologies to calculate GHG reduction outcome achieved by each 
of the companies . Such evaluation would be conducted by independent impact experts with disclosure to all Prosperete investors  and will be guided by Prosperete’s  
Monitoring Reporting and Verification (MRV) Plan . Such reporting will be done at two intervals:  
o Interim evaluation (end of investment period): During the Mid- term evaluation, Prosperete would have deployed its capital (excluding follow -on) but substantial 
development outcomes are not anticipated due to the portfolio's incomplete maturation. Consequently, the evaluation will primarily scrutinize the implementation of 
the investment strategy, encompassing metrics such as the number of portfolio companies invested by the Fund, GHG emissions reduction, capital mobilized in 
investment rounds, current countries of operation , total number impact to establish credible baseline.  
o Final Evaluation (end of fund life): For the final evaluations it is expected that the fund will have achieved maturity. The end of program evaluation of the Fund will comply with the GCF evaluation policy. An independent evaluation will track key performance indicators and results, as well as gender and other inclusion targets. 
Prosperete will conduct evaluations during exit discussions with the company and aggregate such information at the of fund li fe. 
o ESG Reporting  
o Prosperete will annually provide investors with a comprehensive report on the Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) per formance of both Prosperete and 
its investee companies. The Prosperete Growth Fund will diligently oversee ESG considerations in portfolio companies, encompassing the monitoring of ESG risk 
areas, tracking progress on the Action Plan, and assessing any business changes that may pose additional ESG risks.  Prosperete benefits from an in- house 
Climate and ESG expert who will guide the ES G officer to make sure that ESG considerations and capacity in portfolio companies is up to par with the Fund’s 
ESMS.  
o Annually, the Fund will commission an independent ESG review of each portfolio company conducted by an external expert. This review aims to evaluate the ESG 
performance of portfolio companies, pinpoint those encountering significant challenges in implementing ESG plans, highlight superior  performance, and identify 
emerging ESG risks linked to business models. The insights garnered will facilitate in- depth discussions among the investment team and the Investment Committee 
(IC) to determine optimal support strategies for portfolio companies.  Additionally, the Fund will conduct mid- term and completion date reviews of action plans to 
gauge progress in addressing ESG gaps identified during the diligence stage and to address any additional gaps or initiatives  required to fulfil action items.


---
*Page 69*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 65 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
Selected Risk Factor 1  – Fundraising Risk   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  High 
Description 
There is limited availability of capital for such growth fund s because of  high-risk perception due to the perceived dual risks of 
emerging markets and limited adoption of climate solutions.  Prosperete may not achieve such a sufficient size unless multiple 
commercial and development institutions that Prosperete is already engaging with, decide to invest in the Fund. These 
investors often look for a first -mover anchor contribution before providing binding commitments.  For Prosperete this risk gets 
accentuated with it being a first-time fund. 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
An anchor contribution from GCF in the form of Junior equity  would provide the necessary signal to other investors , alleviating 
fundraising risks to a large extent.  The diligence by GCF will provide a stamp of approval required by investors to consider an 
investment in a climate fund. Further , availability of junior capital will alleviate their perception of risk with downside protection.  
Prosperete is engaging with its investors (excluding GCF) to avail bridge financing but has received feedback that other 
investors will follow GCF lead. In the absence of bridge financing, Prosperete may only be able to do very small investments 
during the period of first close to final close, thereby limiting potential climate impact.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 - Risks arising from emerging solutions in climate  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description 
Prosperete Growth Fund will invest in growth stage companies. By definition, these businesses face risks relating to wider 
adoption of their product/solution, market dynamics, and competition from other players. These companies may fail or may 
take longer than anticipated to achieve scale and financially viable business models.  
 
Prosperete may not be able to achieve mitigation target of GHG 9.2mn tonnes avoided and adaptation target of 3.2mn lives 
made resilient  in case investee companies fail to scale up .  
 
Series B and Series C are sub- stages of the growth stage. The companies are transforming into mature companies that 
have demonstrated stronger market traction and business model validation. These companies typically seek larger 
investments to scale operati ons, expand into new markets, and drive further growth and innovation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Prosperete Growth Fund implements  a thorough due diligence procedures , encompassing comprehensive analyses of 
financial, operational, market,  competition,  and ESG factors. This meticulous process enables the F und to evaluate 
exceptional investment s, ultimately selecting companies  distinguished by robust management teams  which can scale their 
globally competitive climate solutions.  Once invested, Prosperete work s closely with investee companies to help them build 
organizations and grow their business.  
  
Selected Risk Factor 3  - Risks arising from business uncertainty  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description 
Prosperete Growth Fund seek s significant minority stakes with strong contractual rights. As such, Prosperete Growth Fund 
cannot control the management and activities of its portfolio companies.  This may result in having limited say in selecting the 
right strategy for the business or poor execution of the selected strategy.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
As described above in Risk Factor 2, Prosperete conduct s a thorough diligence of strategy and the management ability to 
execute the strategy. Once invested, Prosperete will have periodic meetings with management to discuss ongoing business 
and climate plans, and required pivots, if any.  Furthermore, Prosperete will not only provide investment capital but expects to


---
*Page 70*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 66 
   
 provide strategic advice and additional resources through such actions, identifying and working with co -investors, and 
providing access to local networks of experts and value- add partners . 
Selected Risk Factor 4 – Valuation and Investment Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Prosperete Growth Fund is focussed on making private investments, which creates limited liquidity options for exits.  These 
companies would be able to provide such liquidity options only after achieving scale. Furthermore, there is a higher risk of 
price discovery and valuation as a fund operating in private markets. Additionally, the investment presents macroeconomic risks if economies in which these companies operate, face headwinds, funding for climate solutions dries up, or there is 
reduction in valuation of investments, all creating risks for investment returns. This risk also includes currency risk, as portfolio 
investments will be operating in local market currencies v/s USD, exposing the Fund's investments in portfolio companies to 
fluctuations in exchange rates.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Prosperete Team has extensive experience of working with large institutional investors and expertise in what such investors look for while underwriting deals. The Team expects to maintain ongoing relationships with potential strategic 
acquirers of portfolio companies and growth stage investment firms to help improve exit opportunities for Fund investments.  
Prosperete will carefully monitor investments, including quarterly review of exit opportunities so that necessary action can be taken on given opportunities . 
 
In addition, the Fund may utilize alternative investment structures reflective of market conditions. Currency exposure arising 
due to company operations will be monitored closely. Part of this risk will be mitigated as Companies expand their business 
operations to overseas markets beyond their home country.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 – Availability of attractive investment opportunities  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
The Prosperete Growth Fund aims to invest in low -carbon businesses operating in target countries. However, the fund faces 
challenges in targeting strategic sectors and markets that are often in early stages, characterized by high technological and  
market risks.  The fund’s ability to find such pipeline is contingent upon companies being able to develop product market fit at 
early stage and move to growth stage. Risks include potential product failures or underperformance as well as market risks 
such as affordability.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Prosperete has been working in this space for more than 18 months and has been able to build a robust pipeline of attractive 
investment opportunities. In addition, Prosperete is engaged in deepening its understanding of relevant emerging 
technologies as well to make sure it can spot companies early and keep track of those as they become investible for 
Prosperete.  
Working across sectors and countries also helps mitigate this risk.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 – Risks coming from first time fund limited geographic spread  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Low 
Description  
Prosperete is perceived as a first time fund and has a wide geographic mandate. This may mean that the team is stretched 
and may not be able to have feet on the ground.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Prosperete team has worked together for 17 years and has been working on the Prosperete fund for more than a year. This 
helped brings stability to the team. Team’s extensive experience in sustainability sector is unparallel. Given that climate s ector 
itself is emerging set up of platforms like Prosperete are critical. Prosperete team is building up its team in a measured 
manner. Anchor investment from GCF in the form of junior capital along with extensive due diligence will help mitigate the 
risk of fund raise significantly. The fund will directly invest in Bangladesh, India, and Mauritius . These companies will be 
encouraged to invest across target countries along with partner funds including in Asia and Africa. This will allow multiplication 
of expertise and on ground presence. As Prosperete expands it will boost its presence across markets and open up its direct 
investments in other markets as well.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 – E&S risks coming from activities of portfolio companies


---
*Page 71*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 67 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Low 
Description  
Prosperete is investing in companies with medium to low ESG risk. There might be issues arising relating to customer safety, 
employment conditions etc that will need to be closely monitored.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Prosperete conducts  an in- depth ESG assessment of companies prior to making investments. Any high risk / cat A project 
are not taken up by Prosperete. An ESM action plan will be agreed with the company and its implementation will be closely 
monitored. Prosperete assessment include s potential impact on Indigenous People, and Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, and 
Harassment (SEAH) practices etc. Separately, Prosperete also has gender policy and action plan to make sure portfolio 
companies enhance gender employment in target countries.


---
*Page 72*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 68 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
 
1. As a Financial Intermediary (GCF category I -2) Prosperete will disclose information on each of its potential 
investees prior to making a decision to invest.  
# IFC Performance Standard  Risk Level in Companies  Risk in Supply Chain  
1 Environmental and Social Risk Management  Medium  Medium  
2 Labor and Working Conditions  Medium  Medium  
3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention  Medium  Medium  
4 Community Health, Safety, and Security  Medium  Medium  
5 Land Acquisition/ Involuntary Resettlement  Low Low 
6 Biodiversity and Natural Resources  Low Low 
7 Indigenous Peoples  Low Low 
8 Cultural Heritage  Low Low 
9 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure  Low Low 
10 Climate change Resilience and Adaptation  Low Low 
 
2. It is Prosperete’s endeavor  to meet the highest standards of corporate stewardship by investing responsibly 
and engaging with communities where Prosperete works and invests. ‘Responsible Investing’ is a key guiding 
philosophy for Prosperete. Prosperete recognizes that ESG aspects ar e among the key influencers of the value 
and long- term performance of any company. Prosperete is committed to the implementation of ESG policies 
within its own organization and also organizations that it partners with and invests in.  
3. Prosperete follow s a comprehensive ESMS which ensures that all its operations are in strict compliance with 
globally accepted best practices on ESG related matters. Prosperete reckons that ESG aspects are also important determinants to the value of any company, and hence has integrated ESG aspects into the v arious 
stages of its investment process.  
4. Prosperete invest s in low -carbon mitigation and adaptation solutions, which  are not expected to have material 
climate risks, but rather to contribute to climate mitigation and adaptation. Investee companies will be 
encouraged to monitor and manage their exposure to physical and transition risks of climate change, including in their supply chains.  
5. Indigenous people are not likely to be directly affected through the activities of investee companies. Prosperete  
monitors exposure to and impacts on indigenous peoples in its prescribed ESG due diligence, operations  and 
annual review.  
6. Community health, safety, and security, and the environment may be impacted by use and disposal of electric vehicle technologies,  HVAC systems,  distributed solar etc. Prosperete will monitor and encourage best 
practices for managing e- waste disposal, responsible sourcing of materials for manufacturing, and employee 
wellbeing.  
7. Prosperete will continue to strengthen its monitoring and ESG management in the supply chain of its investee 
companies . A particular consideration is forced labor and child labor in the whole value chain and in the target 
countries. Prosperete will continue to monitor human rights risk assessment, policies, and implementation.  
8. Job creation is a key impact created as companies scale operations and increase their workforce and contractor 
networks. There is  a continued focus on ensuring sound labor practices.  
9. Any investment is undertaken only if it  does not pose any significant risks to the project or the IPs etc.  
10. Prosperete’s  annual report to Limited Partners will include its ESG practices and detailed ESG and impact 
performance of its investee companies.  
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
 
Prosperete is committed to gender mainstreaming and enhancement of gender equality outcomes across its 
investments and operations.  Prosperete has adopted a Gender Policy which serve s as a governance framework for 
gender integration into Prosperete’s investment decision- making process. The Gender Policy addresses gender 
integration in Prosperete’s approaches, procedures, investment,  and portfolio decision- making, as well as its internal 
functioning.  
In order to arrive at a comprehensive gender assessment to understand the roles, rights, needs, and opportunities of women and men across target countries and focus areas, the team undertook desktop research, obtained feedback 
from stakeholder consultation s and collated learnings from the experiences of its senior leadership. The team also


---
*Page 73*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 69 
   
 reviewed gender -lens investing frameworks, such as the 2X Challenge, which supports increased funding for women 
across the investment value chain, specifically promoting female entrepreneurship, leadership, employment. 
Additionally, the team examined exist ing literature, including by other investing organizations to understand the unique 
gender challenges within the energy industry, with a particular focus on climate solutions.  
 Based on this gender assessment, Prosperete has created a Gender Action Plan set ting out specific actions to be 
implemented at the Fund level , portfolio company level and ecosystem level by Prosperete during the F und’s life.  
Prosperete will monitor and achieve the following gender outcomes: 
• Output 1: Building  the first women -led, growth stage climate focused fund in India  
o 50% women workforce across the Fund/the Advisor/Sub- Advisor ; and  
o Applying the gender lens in investment decision- making and portfolio management. Supporting activities 
to include:  
- Working closely with WinPE and other similar forums to build and maintain relationships with women 
entrepreneurs  
- Mentor a diverse team with high female representation  
- 30% investment pipeline  qualifies  under the 2x Criteria  
• Output 2: Partner with Fund portfolio companies to increase female workforce participation across their 
organizations, including in senior leadership  
o Development of Gender Action Plans for each portfolio company. The GAPs will be formulated basis 
assessment at the time of investment due diligence.  
o Supporting portfolio companies in attracting, retaining and supporting a gender diverse workforce.  
- Implementation of non- discrimination as part of HR policies  
- Implementation of all gender -related legal and regulatory Mechanisms, including in respect of SEAH 
/ sexual harassment policies  
- Conducting 1 annual training on gender sensitization  
- Adoption of at least 1 policy associated with building gender inclusive workplace that goes beyond legal and regulatory requirements  
• Output 3: Ecosystem level  intervention to enable increased access to venture capital financing for 
women -owned/ women- led startups  
o Supporting capacity building for female founders building technology solutions for climate; Creating 
avenues to help women founders access  domain knowledge, mentorship and networks  
• Output 4: 
Transformative activities to help overcome gender norms  
o Identify key regressive gender norms in each market, work with stakeholders in creating awareness and workshops to help in transforming gender norms  
 
The Fund will support portfolio companies in enhancing their gender inclusion and diversity practices, driving greater 
women’s economic empowerment outcomes through their business activities. This will be achieved through the 
development of Gender Action Plans for each investment, which will include measures to support increased female leadership in management and governance structures. Additionally, the team assist s companies in developing policies 
and procedures to prevent SEAH and to provide gender -sensi tive and survivor -centred incident responses. This will 
include formulating a SEAH polic y that, among other things,  emphasizes 
providing  a safe and trusted environment for 
those affected by SEAH to step forward to report incidents and concerns , protection for those affected as well as 
whistleblowers and/or witnesses, and appropriate measures against any form of retaliation. Implementation will also be 
monitored by Prosperete’s board representative on the portfolio company’s board.  
 
The Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan are provided in Annex 8.  
 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
Prosperete has multiple governing bodies to oversee the operations of the F und.  
The Investment Manager (IM) prepares investment memos for consideration of the IC  with the help of and inputs from 
Sub-Advisor . The IC oversees the diligence and make sure that investments are made on terms approved by the IC.  
After investment approval, the primary responsibility of the IM is to monitor portfolio performance against the targets 
established during the investment phase, encompassing financial, climate, SDG, and ESS impacts. The IM’s team will 
monitor  investments , sit on boards of individual portfolio companies and maintain direct communication with company 
management through site visits and regular interactions .


---
*Page 74*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 70 
   
 The IM team will work closely with portfolio companies, helping with organization strategize, build out etc. The team will 
receiv e detailed management reports with relevant metrics on a regular basis. Monthly meetings will be held to discuss 
portfolio updates and progress, identify potential risks, review financial performance, and assess overall governance. 
Strategies and next steps will be agreed upon and implemented by the respective teams. Additionally, a comprehensive quarterly review of each portfolio company will be conducted both at the company as well as at IC level.  
Portfolio performance will be monitored through the following:  
• Monthly reporting from portfolio companies  
• Periodic board meetings and ongoing communication with management to enhance company value  
• Periodic Site visits  
• Engaging with other co- investors  
• Feedback from key stakeholders  
• Monitoring news flow for the sector and the company  
• Ensuring compliance with relevant agreements  
• Monitoring compliances  
• Performance reviews by the investment team against both commercial and impact -related targets  
Based on this monitoring process, the IM will submit the following reports:  
• Quarterly reports on Fund performance, including individual company performance 
• Annual audited statements  
• Annual ESS report  
• Annual climate and sustainability impact report  
 
The IM adheres to fiduciary duties according to PE industry best practices, reporting on Fund performance quarterly 
and annually to the LPAC and  LPs. Independent service providers audit annual financial statements to ensure 
transparency and control of fund flows. Impact reporting is conducted annually, Environmental and Social Governance Review is carried out in accordance with Prosperete ESMS and IFC Performance Standards .
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and 
programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the 
document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.  
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure policy,  and 
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 75*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 71 
   
  
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☒ Others: Indigenous Peoples (IP) Management Framewor k 
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 23  Climate Hazards and Country Scenario


---
*Page 76*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
   
 Annexure 23: Climate Hazards and Country Scenario  
Climate 
hazard  Baseline Country Context  Future Country Context  
Bangladesh  India  Mauritius  Bangladesh  India  Mauritius  
Excessive 
rainfall/Heavy 
precipitation 
and flooding  Recent heavy precipitation 
events in Bangladesh have 
caused significant disruptions, 
particularly in the agricultural 
sector. Flooding has damaged 
crops and soil, leading to 
reduced agricultural 
productivity and disruptions in 
the supply chain. Urban slums 
in cities like Dhaka have faced 
severe waterlogging and 
flooding due to inadequate 
drainage systems, resulting in 
health hazards from 
waterborne diseases and 
damage to poorly constructed 
infrastructure. Healthcare 
facilities have also been 
strained by an influx of patients 
and access issues due to 
flooded roads. Additionally, the 
electricity supply has been 
frequently disrupted, impacting 
both urban and rural areas. 
Regions typically impacted by 
heavy precipitation include 
Chattogram, Cox’s Bazar, 
Bandarban, Rangamati, and 
Feni (Chattogram Division); 
Chittagong, Bandarban, 
Rangamati, Sources: EM -DAT 
Database, (PLOS) (World Bank) 
(SpringerLink).  In India, heavy rainfall and 
subsequent flooding have had 
widespread impacts across 
several states, including Bihar, 
West Bengal, and Assam. The 
agricultural sector has seen 
significant crop damage and 
soil erosion, leading to a 
reduction in productivity a nd 
disruptions in the supply chain. 
Urban areas like Mumbai and 
Kolkata have experienced 
intense rainfall, resulting in 
severe waterlogging, damage to 
infrastructure, and increased 
health risks. The power grid has 
also been affected, with 
flooding causing damage to 
power lines and substations, 
leading to widespread power 
outages. These disruptions 
highlight the vulnerability of 
India’s infrastructure and the 
need for robust disaster 
management strategies. Since 
2019, flash floods have caused 
435 deaths and affected 
1,767,661 people, resulting in 
financial damage of 
1,502,081,000 USD. Sources: 
EM-DAT Database, (Mongabay-
India) (SpringerLink) (Down To 
Earth).  Increased urbanization in flood -
prone regions has heightened 
flood risks and posed challenges 
for building resilience against 
recurring floods. Notably, in 
2013, the capital, Port Louis, 
experienced flash floods that led 
to the deaths of 11 people.  
flooding accounts for 20%.  of 
average annual losses for all 
hazards. (ReliefWeb, 2024)  Rainfall is expected to become 
more variable, with increases in 
the intensity and frequency of 
heavy rainfall events. This 
variability poses a risk to water 
management, agriculture, and 
urban planning. As per IPCC WGI 
Interactive Atlas, the projections 
for riverine and pluvial floods have 
medium and high confidence of 
increase, respectively. 
Furthermore, projected change in 
annual exceedance probability of 
largest 1 -day precipitation of a 50 -
year event for SSP 5 -8.5 for 2050 
the "median change factor for 
occurrence/ year" is 2.07 times 
from baseline.  Future climate scenarios for 
India involve increased 
intensity of extreme weather 
events and significant 
variations in rainfall patterns. 
The uncertainty in rainfall 
projections remains high, 
though an increase in the 
intensity of extreme rainfall 
events i s likely. Rainfall 
projections vary, with some 
models suggesting up to a 10% 
increase in monsoon 
precipitation by the end of the 
century under high -emission 
scenarios. As per IPCC WGI 
Interactive Atlas, the 
projections for riverine and 
pluvial floods have medium 
and high confidence of 
increase, respectively. 
Furthermore, projected change 
in annual exceedance 
probability of largest 1 -day 
precipitation of a 50- year event 
for SSP 5 -8.5 for 2050 the 
"median change factor for 
occurrence/ year" is 2 times 
from ba seline.  As global temperatures continue to 
rise, the frequency and intensity of 
heavy rainfall events are projected to 
increase. This, combined with rising 
sea levels, will exacerbate flash 
flooding in Mauritius. The island's 
mountainous terrain and limited 
draina ge systems make it particularly 
vulnerable to such events. Sea -level 
rise will increase coastal erosion and 
inundation, further disrupting drainage 
patterns and increasing the risk of 
flooding . 
Drought or 
increasing 
water 
scarcity/stress  Bangladesh is currently facing 
a challenging drought situation, 
exacerbated by climate change 
and unsustainable water 
management practices. Recent 
studies indicate that the 
country's water resources are 
under severe strain, with a 
notable decrease in annua l 
rainfall rates by approximately 
10% over the past two 
decades. Bangladesh is highly Droughts in India have affected 
18,750,000 people since 2019. 
Furthermore, drought impacts 
buildings by causing the soil to 
dry and shrink, leading to 
foundation settling and 
cracking. This is particularly 
evident in regions with clayey 
soils. The lack of moisture also 
increases the risk of fires, which 
can damage buildings and 
infrastructure (Nature, 2023). The island's seasonal water 
scarcity is exacerbated by the 
uneven distribution of rainfall 
throughout the year, particularly 
during the dry months of October 
to December. This shortage of 
water resources poses a 
significant challenge to meeting 
the increas ing demand for water. 
Additionally, prolonged dry spells 
have emerged as a major Climate projections indicate that 
Bangladesh will experience 
increased temperatures and more 
erratic rainfall patterns, which will 
intensify drought conditions. By 
2050, the frequency and duration 
of droughts are expected to 
increase, leading to severe wat er 
shortages. The Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
projects a rise in temperature of 
up to 2.6°C by the 2060s, which Future projections indicate that 
climate change will intensify 
water stress in India. By mid -
century, the flow of major rivers 
like the Indus, Ganges, and 
Brahmaputra could decrease 
by 8 -20% due to reduced snow 
and glacier melt, further 
exacerbating water shortages. 
The frequency and intensity of 
droughts are expected to 
increase, leading to more According to the UN report SIDS in 
Numbers, Mauritius is projected to 
become a water stressed country by 
2025 and its agricultural production 
may decline by as much as 30% .


---
*Page 77*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
   
 Annexure 23: Climate Hazards and Country Scenario  
Climate 
hazard  Baseline Country Context  Future Country Context  
Bangladesh  India  Mauritius  Bangladesh  India  Mauritius  
susceptible to water stress and 
drought conditions due to its 
geographical and climatic 
characteristics. The country’s 
dependence on monsoonal 
rainfall makes it particularly 
vulnerable to variability in 
precipitation. Approximately 
30% of the population is  
affected by droughts, 
especially in the northwestern 
regions. These droughts lead to 
significant reductions in crop 
yields and water availability for 
both domestic and agricultural 
use. Additionally, groundwater 
depletion is a growing concern, 
further exacerbating water 
scarcity in drought -prone 
areas. Sources: (World Bank, 
2021) (SpringerLink) 
(Mongabay).  Approximately 180 million 
people in India currently face 
chronic water scarcity, and this 
number is projected to grow 
due to decreasing water 
availability and increasing 
demand. The country's heavy 
reliance on monsoonal rainfall, 
which is becoming increasi ngly 
erratic, exacerbates these 
challenges. Many regions, 
particularly in northern and 
central India, already face high 
levels of water stress, 
impacting both rural and urban 
populations. Additionally, 
around 60% of India’s 
cultivated area is rain -fed, 
mak ing it highly susceptible to 
variations in rainfall patterns. 
This dependency on 
unpredictable monsoon rains 
leads to frequent droughts, 
which severely affect crop 
yields and rural livelihoods 
(World Bank, 2021).  constraint for the food sector in 
Mauritius. will exacerbate evapotranspiration 
rates and reduce water 
availability. This will particularly 
impact agricultural productivity, 
with significant declines in yields 
for staple crops like rice and 
wheat, thereby threatening food 
security.  severe and prolonged periods 
of water scarcity. Rainfall 
patterns are projected to 
become more erratic, with 
some models suggesting up to 
a 10% increase in monsoon 
precipitation by the end of the 
century under high -emission 
scenarios. However, this 
increas e will likely be 
accompanied by more extreme 
weather events, including 
severe droughts interspersed 
with intense rainfall, leading to 
greater unpredictability in 
water availability.  
Heat waves  Bangladesh has experienced a 
significant warming trend with 
a temperature increase of 
about 0.5°C since the early 
20th century. The frequency 
and intensity of hot days and 
warm nights have increased 
throughout the country (World 
Bank, 2021). Bangladesh has  
faced unprecedented heat 
waves, with a severe event in 
April breaking a 76 -year record. 
Temperatures soared to over 
40°C, significantly impacting 
public health and agriculture. 
During these heat waves, heat -
related illnesses such as heat 
stroke and dehydr ation surged, 
particularly among vulnerable India is increasingly 
experiencing severe heat 
waves, with significant impacts 
on public health and mortality. 
A comprehensive study 
covering 2008 -2019 across ten 
cities, including Delhi, Mumbai, 
and Chennai, showed a 14.7% 
increase in daily mortality 
duri ng heatwaves 
(temperatures above the 97th 
percentile for two consecutive 
days). This translates to 
approximately 1116 deaths 
annually attributed to heat 
waves. The study observed that 
higher intensity and longer 
duration heat waves led to 
stronger associat ions with Climate change -induced heat 
waves are posing a substantial 
threat to Mauritius' agriculture. 
The island's tropical climate, 
historically characterized by high 
temperatures, is experiencing a 
further intensification. This rise 
in temperatures can lead to cr op 
stress, diminished yields, and 
alterations in plant growth 
cycles. Furthermore, heat waves 
can accelerate water 
evaporation and soil moisture 
depletion, making it more 
challenging to sustain healthy 
crops.  Future climate projections 
indicate a further increase in 
temperatures, ranging from 1.4°C 
to 2.6°C by the 2060s under 
different scenarios. These 
changes are expected to 
exacerbate the heat island effect 
in urban areas and increase the 
demand for cooling ( World Bank, 
2021).  Future projections indicate that 
India will see a significant 
increase in the frequency, 
intensity, duration, and area 
affected by heat waves. By mid -
century, the frequency of heat 
waves is expected to increase 
by a factor of 2.5 compared to 
the 1976 -2005 average. The 
number of summer heat wave 
events is projected to rise to 
about 2.5 per season by 2040-
2069 and approximately 3.0 per 
season by 2070 -2099. 
Additionally, the average 
duration of summer heat waves 
is anticipated to extend to 
about 15 days by mid -century 
and 18 days by the end of the The percentage of hot days   is 
projected to increase substantially 
from about 15% of all observed days 
on average in 1981 –2010 (10% in 
1961– 1990). Under a high emissions 
scenario, almost 100% of days on 
average are defined as ‘hot’ by the 
end -of-century. If emissions decrease 
rapidly , about 65% of days on average 
are ‘hot’. Note that the models tend to 
overestimate the observed increase in 
hot days (by about 4% on average for 
1981– 2010). Similar increases are 
seen in hot nights .76(ClimaHealth)


---
*Page 78*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
   
 Annexure 23: Climate Hazards and Country Scenario  
Climate 
hazard  Baseline Country Context  Future Country Context  
Bangladesh  India  Mauritius  Bangladesh  India  Mauritius  
populations. Crop yields 
dropped by up to 30%, 
threatening food security and 
the livelihoods of farmers. 
Urban areas, especially 
densely populated cities, 
experienced exacerbated heat 
due to the urban heat island 
effect, increasing energy 
demands for cooli ng by 15% 
(Down to Earth, 2024) 
(Environmental Challenges, 
2024).  mortality. Cities like Hyderabad 
and Pune had the highest 
average number of heat waves 
per year, at 4.0 and 4.3 
respectively  (Environment 
International, 2024). Recent 
years have seen extreme heat 
events in 2016, 2018, 2019, and 
2023 (Business Standard, 
2024). Since 2019, over 400 
deaths have been reported due 
to heat waves, and from 1992 to 
2015 the death toll ~24000 
(EM -DAT Da tabase).  century under the IPCC 
RCP4.5/SSP2 emission 
scenario. These projections 
underscore the need for 
targeted policies and early 
warning systems to mitigate the 
severe health and socio -
economic impacts of 
increasing heat wave events  
(Indian Institute of Tropical 
Meteorology)  
Tropical 
cyclone  Tropical cyclones have been 
particularly devastating, with 
Cyclone 'Fani' resulting in 39 
deaths and affecting 10,045 
people. Cyclone 'Bulbul' 
caused 40 deaths and 
impacted 251,506 individuals, 
with financial damage of 
6,622,000 USD. Cyclone 
'Amphan' led to  26 deaths and 
affected 2 .6mn people, 
resulting in significant financial 
damage of 1,696,149,000 USD. 
Cyclone 'Yaas' caused 3 deaths 
and affected 1,300,000 people. 
Tropical storm 'Sitrang' 
resulted in 35 deaths and 
impacted 1 mn individuals. 
Cyclone 'Mocha'  led to 3 
deaths and affected 750,012 
people. Tropical cyclone 
'Hamoon' caused 3 deaths and 
affected 1,500,000 people (EM -
DAT Database).  Cyclone 'Fani' led to 50 deaths 
and affected 20,000,000 
people, with financial damage 
of 2,071,934,000 USD. Cyclone 
'Bulbul' resulted in 12 deaths 
and affected 5,000 individuals. 
Cyclone 'Amphan' was 
particularly devastating, 
causing 90 deaths, affecting 
4,960,000 people, and leading 
to financial damage of 
13,193,985,000 USD. Cyclone 
'Tauktae' led to 174 deaths and 
affected 200,000 people, with 
financial damage of 
8,315,164,000 USD. Cyclone 
'Yaas' caused 9 deaths and 
affected 14,400,000 people 
(EM- DAT Dabas e).  Tropical cyclones account for 
approximately 80% of the 
island’s annual direct losses 
from extreme weather events in 
an average year, amounting to 
approximately $91 million in 
direct losses . In 2018, flooding, 
and high winds resulting from 
Tropical Cyclone Berguitta 
passing just south of Mauritius 
left 6,800 homes without 
power,  destroyed approximately 
80 percent of crops on the 
island, and left two people dead. 
In January 2024, Tropical 
Cyclo ne Belal passed south and 
west of Mauritius and brought 
sustained winds of 105 miles per 
hour, torrential rain, and storm 
surge, leading to one casualty 
and 8,400 people without power 
in the capital of Port Louis.77 In Bangladesh, which is highly 
vulnerable to tropical cyclones, 
projections suggest an increase in 
both the frequency and intensity of 
these events. The warming of the 
Bay of Bengal is expected to 
enhance the conditions favorable 
for cyclone formation, lea ding to 
more frequent and powerful 
cyclones impacting the region. 
This will exacerbate the already 
significant risk of flooding, storm 
surges, and wind damage (United 
Nations, 2024)  The frequency of severe 
cyclones is projected to 
increase by 10% by 2100 
(World Bank, 2021). In India, 
studies show that the 
frequency of intense cyclones 
in the Bay of Bengal and the 
Arabian Sea is expected to rise, 
with models predicting a 
significant increase in the 
number of severe cyclones 
making landfall along the 
Indian coast. This is attributed 
to warming sea surface 
temperatures and changes in 
atmospheric conditions that 
favor cyclone formation 
(Climate Dynamics, 2021)  It is anticipated that the total number 
of tropical cyclones may decrease 
towards the end of the century. 
However, it is likely that human -
induced warming will make cyclones 
more intense (an increase in wind 
speed of 2 –11% for a mid -range 
scenario (i.e. RCP4.5 ) or about 5% for 
2ºC global warming). Projections 
suggest that the most intense events 
(category 4 and 5) will become more 
frequent (although these projections 
are particularly sensitive to the spatial 
resolution of the models). It is also 
likely that  average precipitation rates 
within 100 km of the storm center will 
increase – by a maximum of about 
10% per degree of warming .78 
Sea Level Rise  Bangladesh is highly vulnerable 
to sea level rise due to its low -
lying topography and dense 
population. The current rate of 
sea level rise in the Bay of 
Bengal is approximately 3 mm 
per year. Coastal erosion, India’s coastline, stretching 
over 7,500 km, is experiencing 
varying rates of sea level rise, 
with the average around 3 mm 
per year. Key cities like 
Mumbai, Chennai, and Kolkata 
are particularly vulnerable to The tourism sector accounts for 
around 20 percent of the 
economy and employs up to 22 
percent of its workforce faces 
risks from sea level rise, loss of 
coral reefs, marine heatwaves, 
and tropical cyclones.  By 2050, sea levels in Bangladesh 
could rise by approximately 0.5 
meters. By 2100, the rise could 
reach between 0.7 to 1.5 meters, 
depending on emission scenarios. 
Significant land loss, 
displacement of millions of By 2050, sea levels along 
India’s coastline could rise by 
0.4 to 0.6 meters. By 2100, the 
sea level rise could be between 
0.8 to 1.2 meters, based on 
different climate models. Major 
impacts include displacement  Sea level rise (SLR) of approximately 8 
mm per year, which floods coastal 
communities and cause saltwater 
intrusion in Mauritius’ freshwater 
aquifers. The United Nations (UN) 
forecasts that freshwater will be 
stressed by 2025.  According to IPCC


---
*Page 79*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
   
 Annexure 23: Climate Hazards and Country Scenario  
Climate 
hazard  Baseline Country Context  Future Country Context  
Bangladesh  India  Mauritius  Bangladesh  India  Mauritius  
saltwater intrusion, and 
increased frequency of storm 
surges are already impacting 
the region (IPCC AR 6)  rising sea levels. Coastal 
erosion and increased 
frequency of extreme weather 
events are noticeable effects 
(IPCC AR 6) The major impacts of sea -level 
rise in Mauritius are land loss, 
erosion of beaches, damage to 
coastal infrastructure, 
degradation of coral reefs and 
loss of wetlands. (IPCC) people, and loss of agricultural 
land are expected. The IPCC 
projects severe impacts on food 
security and livelihoods, 
particularly in the coastal regions 
(IPCC AR 6) of coastal communities, loss of 
infrastructure, increased 
flooding, and damage to 
ecosystems such as 
mangroves and coral reefs. 
Significant economic losses 
are anticipated, especially in 
the tourism, fishing, and 
agriculture sectors (IPCC AR 6)  assessment, sea level is expected to 
rise between 15 to 95 cm with a best 
estimate of 50 cm by the year 
2100.  (IPCC)


---
*Page 80*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
   
  
 
 
1 Climate Change- induced Sea -Level Rise Direct Threat to Millions around World, Secretary -General Tells Security 
Council  
2 Water Scarcity  
3 Mauritius Biennial report -  2021  
4 Mauritius Meteorological Services: Climate Change 
5 BCG: The Sustainability Imperative in Emerging Markets  
6 CEEW: Reach for the Sun  
7 IFC: Supporting Climate Business Opportunities in Emerging Markets  
8 EDGAR - Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research  
9 India Environmental Portal  
10 IEA: Mauritius  
11 Prosperete Feasibility Study, basis Tracxn data  
12 IEA: Innovation needs in the Sustainable Development Scenario  
13 Impacts of Climate Change in Southeast Asia and Adaptation Measures in the Region  
14 Water pollution in Bangladesh and its impact on public health  
15 Temperature and rainfall extremes change under current and future global warming levels across Indian climate 
zones  
16 World Bank: Gearing up for India’s Rapid Urban Transformation  
17 Hindustan Times: Climate -focused policies are key to building resilient infrastructure  
18 NITI Aayog: Composite Water Management Index  
19 ISSS Bulletin  
20 PIB: Effect of Climate Change on Agriculture  
21 IMF: Addressing Climate Change In Mauritius: Financing And Reform Options  
22 UNFCC: First Biennial Update Report -  Republic of Mauritius  
23 SADRI: Drought Resilience Profiles | Mauritius  
24 ReliefWeb - Disaster Management & Climate Change Handbook -  Mauritius (June 2024)  
25 Bangladesh NDC (August 2021)  
26 World Bank: Bangladesh Country Climate and Development Report  
27 EDGAR - Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research  
28 IMF: A Framework for Climate Change Mitigation in India  
29 Grant Thornton: Achieving 500 GW of renewable energy capacity by 2030  
30 CPI: Transforming India’s Climate Finance through Sector -Specific Financial Institutions  
31 How India can tackle climate change and win the EV race 
32 IEA: Global Energy Review: CO2 Emissions in 2021 Global emissions rebound sharply to highest ever level  
33 UNDP: Developing a Comprehensive Strategy for Waste- to-Resource Transformation in Mauritius  
34 Our World in Data: Nigeria  
35 CPI: Nigeria Climate Finance Landscape 2022  
36 WHO: Nigeria strengthens capacity to address impact of climate change on health  
37 70% of Nigerians consume contaminated water  
38 UNICEF: 25 million Nigerians at high risk of food insecurity in 2023   
39 Climate Risk Country Profile: Indonesia (2021): The World Bank Group  
40 Reuters: Indonesia launches $20 billion renewable energy investment plan  
41 Chapter 3: Indonesia  
42 UN: Advancing Indonesia’s Food Systems Transformation: A Stocktaking Moment  
43 CPI: South Africa Climate Finance Landscape 2023  
44 Scoping the nexus between climate change and water -security realities in rural South Africa  
45 CEEW: Reach for the Sun  
46 Enerdata: Energy Intensity  
47 IEA: Energy Intensity  
48 UNEP - Transport  
49 BBVA: Economic Watch  
50 WEF: Why smallholder farmers are central to new food security interventions  
51 Access to water in developing countries  
52 WRI: IPCC 1.5° Report: We Need to Build and Live Differently in Cities  
53 IEA: Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction 2019


---
*Page 81*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
   
  
54 WMO: State of Climate Services  
55 BCG: The Sustainability Imperative in Emerging Markets  
56 UNFCCC  
57 IMF: Emerging Economies Need Much More Private Financing for Climate Transition  
58 IMF: Emerging Economies Need Much More Private Financing for Climate Transition  
59 AFDB: Country Focus Report 2023   
60 SEI: Climate Finance for Indian Ocean Islands  
61 IPCC AR6: Vulnerability –  Summary for Policymakers  
62 UNDRR: Vulnerability  
63 The Rockefeller Foundation and The/Nudge Institute Unveil Climate Change’s Impact on Smallholder Farmers in 
India, Paving the Way for Resilient Solutions  
64 How does climate change risk affect energy poverty?  
65 Chapter 8: Poverty, Livelihoods and Sustainable Development  
66 Project Finance: Rising Solar Insurance Premiums and Shrinking Coverage  
67 IEA: World Energy Investment 2022  
68 Disasters could cost Asia -Pacific region $160 billion per year by 2030, UN warns  
69 LSE: Finance for climate action Scaling up investment for climate and development  
70 MIT: Climate tech is back —and this time, it can’t afford to fail  
71 UN: Net-Zero Asset Owner Alliance raises expectations for members’ real economy impact with updated Protocol  
72 Climate Risk Country Profile: Bangladesh (2021): The World Bank Group.  
73 Climate Risk Country Profile: India (2021): The World Bank Group.  
74 MIFC: Mauritius IFC Takes a Sustainable Leap with Inaugural Green Bond Listing  
75 https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016 -12/documents/social_cost_of_carbon_fact_sheet.pdf  
76 ClimaHealth: WHO / UNFCCC Climate & Health Profile 2021  
77 Stimson: CORVI: Assessing Priority Climate Risks in Mauritius  
78 United Nations: HEALTH & CLIMATE CHANGE COUNTRY PROFILE 2021 Small Island Developing States Initiative


---
*Page 82*
---

No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 86*
---

 
ESS disclosure report form for projects or programmes  submitted under the  
Project -specific Assessment Approach (PSAA) Pilot  
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project or programme title  Prosperete Growth Fund  
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Name of Entity  Prosperete Investment Management L td 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project  or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme  Republic of India, People's Republic of Bangladesh  and 
Republic of Mauritius 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on entity’s 
website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on entity’s 
website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management  System  (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on entity’s 
website  Friday , May 23, 2025  
Language(s) of disclosure  English , French, Hindi, and Bengali  
Explanation on language  These are the official languages of the target countries.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1JB12rHedk75kph_Q_AfN
pIzIIZy -pJVp/view?usp=sharing   
 
French:  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1S76AzrefGKzKsT0fZefjR
1-5kMgE9SSG/view?usp=sharing   
 Hindi:  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1hT5cStBbJyyrdrmR06Nc
BM3oA -Ak22vG/view?usp=sharing


---
*Page 87*
---

Bengali:  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/18PfZABfhgcZYoVmpN5Z
88ERBTTt5aVZn/view  
 
Other link(s)  https://www.prosperete.com/contactus  
 
Remarks  An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category  
I-2 project is contained in the Environmental  and Social 
Management System  and ESG Policy . 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), I ndigenous Peoples Planning  
Framework  (IPPF) (if applicable)  
Description of report  Framework for Indigenous People s 
Date of disclosure  on entity’s 
website  Friday, May 23, 2025  
Language(s) of disclosure  English , French, Hindi , and Bengali  
Explanation on language  These are the official languages of the target countries.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1c3GxHqLRJ0Ps7vo9Schw
lN5crBx8GHll/view?usp=sharing   
 
French:  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1tLZOlgQqQjxJBYGI_k7k8
15iULCyMFdz/view?usp=sharing   
 
Hindi:  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1MdN5PS3WEgsTdZKrGA
0GAPzYSjl6uS4m/view?usp=sharing   
 Bengali:  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1j06QuIlPlw7ZyyOj6QOAf
Agw5KaPTj0F/view    
Other link(s)  https://www.prosperete.com/contactus   
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, May 23, 2025  
Place  The ESMS is also available at the Prosperete office s located 
at:  
 
1. Mauritius:  
7th Floor, Happy World House 37, Sir William Newton Street, Port Louis 11328, Mauritius  
 
2. India:  
1st Floor, D -29, Anand Niketan, New Delhi 110021, India  
  
Nationally Designated Authorities (NDAs) locations:  
 
Bangladesh  
Economic Relations Division (ERD), Ministry of Finance  
Block No. 8, Room No. 3 & 4, Shere-e- Bangla Nagar, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh


---
*Page 88*
---

India  
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change  
Indira Paryavaran Bhavan, Jor Bagh Road, New Delhi -
110003, New Delhi, India  
 
Mauritius 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development  
Government Centre, Port Louis, Mauritius  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of entity’s Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, October 27, 2025  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the entity stated above.  
  
________


---
*Page 89*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 89 
 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of the Project- Specific A ssessment 
Approach (PSAA) Applicant for FP264


---
*Page 90*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 90 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of the PSAA Applicant  
1. This report describes the updated assessment of Prosperete Investment Management 
Ltd (the “ Applicant ” or “ PIML ”) against  the GCF accreditation standards as applicable to 
Project -Specific Assessment Approach ( PSAA)  applicants. Documents reviewed during the 
assessment process are summarized in A nnex 1 .  
2. The Applicant’s funding proposal, including the PSAA Entity  Assessment finalized in 
November 2024  (medium capacity rating) , was submitted to the GCF Board for consideration at 
its forty -first meeting (B.41) . Subsequently , it was withdrawn by the Applicant  in order to 
“further engage with the Secretariat on the feedback received from the stakeholders with the 
possibility of resubmission for consideration of the Board at a subsequent Board meeting ” 
(GCF/B.41/02/Add.12/Rev.02 : Consideration of funding proposals – Addendum XII Funding 
proposal package for FP264 | Green Climate Fund ).  
3. Since then , the Applicant has engaged with the Secretariat to address feedback received 
from stakeholders . In May 2025, the Applicant  submitted documents  to compl ement the 
Secretariat’s Entity Assessment of the Applicant which was completed in  November 2024  for 
B.41 submission . With this, among other things,  the Applicant addressed the  conditions that had 
previously been  proposed in the Secretariat’s Entity Assessment of November 2024.  
4. The result  of this updated Entity Assessment and the Secretariat’s recommendations for 
PSAA accreditation are presented below . 
Overall capacity  Medium capacity  
The Applicant  has in place a robust financial management system, sound 
governance structures, and a comprehensive suite of policies aligned with 
GCF requirements and industry best practices. This includes an internal 
control framework, risk management systems, and meas ures to prevent 
money laundering, terrorism financing, fraud, and corruption. Policies 
addressing environmental, social, and gender -related risks and impacts 
are also in place.  
The Applicant has engaged globally recognized third -party internal and 
external auditors. It is supported by a highly experienced team with a 
proven track record in managing similar investments  which demonstrat es 
its readiness and capacity to implement the project effectively.  
Submitted documentation confirms the Applicant 's institutional capacity, 
functional governance bodies, and investment appraisal processes, 
including due diligence  related to safeguards . These elements have been 
assessed as satisfactory to support the implementation  of the entity’s 
policies and procedures.  
The Applicant  has met all 13 areas  of accreditation conditions proposed  
by the Secretariat  in its November 2024 Entity Assessment, underscoring 
its commitment to operational excellence and adherence to best practices. 
As project implementation progresses, the Secretariat will continue to 
monitor the fund rigorously, in line with the commercial covenants 
outlined in the Ter m Sheet.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 91 
 
 
Based on current systems, policies, procedures and staffing, there is a low 
risk of any adverse impact on the entity’s ability to execute the project as 
designed.  
Fiduciary functions   Basic fiduciary standards  
Specialized fiduciary standard for project management  
Specialized fiduciary standard for blending for equity  
Maximum 
environmental and 
social risk category   Medium risk (I -2)  
Conditions  No conditions  
5. The Secretariat has augmented its capacity by using external experts in undertaking the 
Applicant ’s Entity  Assessment review.  
I. Applicant  Entity  Assessment summary report  
1.1 Introduction and institutional assessment  
1.1.1.  Basic information about the project and the Applicant   
6. The Applicant , PIML , is a Mauritius -based  company holding a Mauritius  global business  
licen ce and a collective investment scheme manager licen ce (see more company details in 
section  1.5 below) . The organi zational set -up related to the management of the funds include 
two other companies in addition to PIML. The second entity, called Prosperete Growth Fund I 
(“PGF ”) is a Mauritius -based company holding a Mauritius global business licen ce and 
authorized to act  as a closed -end fund . PGF  will be the underlying equity fund which will invest 
in portfolio companies in the host countries . The third entity, Prosperete Growth Advisors LLP 
(“PGA ”), is an India -based company which  will act as investment sub-advis er to PIML to support 
PGF ’s investment  activities.  
7.  The initial proposal identified PGA as the Applicant for PSAA accreditation, while PIML 
was named as the executing enti ty. After receiving input from the Secretariat on the 
requirements of the PSAA accreditation, the Applicant determined that PIML was more suitable 
to act as the a ccredited entity rather than PGA. Subsequently, a proposal was resubmitted by 
PIML as the Applicant for PSAA accreditation, with PGA as the e xecuting entity in investment 
sub-advisory capacity.  PIML and PGA are affiliates as both are owned and controlled by the 
same princip als and operated under the same framework  of policies. A ll three  entities  (PIML, 
PGF and PGA ) share the same suite of policies that have been developed to be specifically 
aligned with the GCF policy framework. These policies have been formally adopted and operationalized  by the respective board s of each PIML , PGF and PGA . 
8. GCF’s planned investment in the project is USD 50 million as equity . PGF  has a total 
target size of USD 220 million. PGF ’s expected lifetime of 10  to 14 years. Investments in the 
portfolio companies will be made in accordance with the agreed eligibility criteria.  
1.2 Methodology   
1.2.1.  Overview of the p rocess


---
*Page 92*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 92 
 
 
9. The Applicant’s  Entity  Assessment was conducted in parallel with the due diligence on 
the funding proposal . During the process , two Entity A ssessment review s were completed . The 
first assessment was completed  on 21 November  2024 , and the second  on 20 May 2025 . The 
Entity  Assessments were supported by  an External Review  Team (ERT)  and went through t wo 
rounds of Climate Investment Committee  meetings . Overall, it took over 17 months from the 
initial PSAA questionnaire submission on evaluating the project and entity, including team, 
policies,  and processes.  
1.2.2.  First Entity Assessment  for submission to B .41 
10. ERT assessed  the Applicant's policies, procedures, and track records against GCF 
accreditation  standards.  It assessed the entity  information and  major governance frameworks  
and/or  bodies,  evaluating  their compatibility with the GCF requirements and validat ing the 
information via interviews with  Prosperete team members. Altogether, through the review 
procedures, the ERT  conducted seven interviews including all five key staff members in 
different combinations,  and reviewed documents submitted as evidence of operational, 
governance and management capacity.  
11. The first  Entity Assessment was  completed on 21 November 2024 . In it, the ERT  
identified 13 area s for improvement  in meeting the GCF accreditation standards and 
recommended relevant conditions to address  them .   
12. Consistent  with the ERT assessment, to address the 13 area s identified , the Secretariat 
proposed  that the following  processes and controls of the Applicants were to  be reviewed once 
they are operationalized , for which  respective conditions were to  be included in the funded 
activity agreement to  address them : 
(i) Functional governing bodies;  
(ii) Functional and effective annual planning and budgeting;  
(iii) Functional external audit;  
(iv) Well performing finance systems, finance functions and finance controls;  
(v) Operational risk monitoring and reporting system;  
(vi) Functional ethics committee and system;  
(vii) Procurement;  
(viii) Updating the C onflict of Interests ( COI) Policy;  
(ix) Functional COI system and process;  
(x) Functional whistle -blowing , investigation and fraud detection;   
(xi) Functional investment origination process including reporting systems;  
(xii) Functional environmental and social management system ; and  
(xiii) Fully operational investment and environmental, social and governance  teams.   
1.2.3.  Second  Entity Assessment  for submission to B.42  and B.43  
13. After withdrawal at B.41, the Applicant  submitted document s and provided information 
to the Secretariat in order to demonstrate progress in putting in place operational processes, 
controls and governance  mechanisms that comply with the accreditation conditions proposed  
by the Secretariat in its first Entity Assessment .


---
*Page 93*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 93 
 
 
14. The Secretariat engaged ERT to re -assess the Applicant  based on the submitted 
documents and provided  information . The second  Entity Assessment was  completed on 20 May 
2025.  
15. The ERT confirmed that the documents submitted and information provided by the 
Applicant are sufficient to demonstrate that the 13 gaps in  meeting the GCF  accreditation 
standards identified in the first  Entity Assessment  have been adequately filled. Hence, ERT 
recommended that the conditions that had previously been proposed be  removed.  
16. Based on the ERT re -assessment findings, the Secretariat has confirmed that the 13 
areas for improvement  identified previously , as set out in paragraph 12 items (i ) through (xiii) 
above , have been filled by the Applicant and, therefore, there is no longer a need for conditions 
to be included in the funded activity agreement in order  to address them . 
17. Detailed description of evidence and updates that have been  provided by the Applicant 
and confirmed by the ERT and Secretariat  and comparison against the first Entity Assessment  
recommendations  are set out in A nnex 1.  
1.2.4.  Assessment methodology  
18. The Applicant was assessed in accordance with the GCF policies and standards to the 
extent applicable to accreditation below : 
(a) “Updated Strategic Plan for the Green Climate Fund 2024 -2027” (B.36/13) ; 
(b) “Matters related to the accreditation framework” regarding the accreditation process 
(decisions B.24/13 and B.26/01);  
(c) “Guiding Framework and Procedures for Accrediting National, Regional and International Implementing Entities and Intermediaries, Including the Fund’s Fiduciary 
Principles and Standards and Environmental and Social Safeguards” (decision B.07/02);  
(d) “Policy on Prohibited Practices” (decision B.22/19);  
(e) “Anti -Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Policy” (AML/CFT 
Policy) (decision B.18/10);  
(f) “Policy on the Protection of Whistle -blowers and Witnesses” (decision B.BM -2018/21);  
(g) “Environmental and Social Management System: Environmental and Social Policy” (decision B.19/10);  
(h) “Comprehensive Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund” (decision B.12/35) regarding the disclosure of environmental and social (E&S) information;  
(i) “Updated Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan 2020 –2023” (decision B.24/12) ; 
(j) “Revised Environmental and Social Policy” (decision B.BM -2021/18);  
(k) “Evaluation Policy” (decision B.BM 2021/07); and  
(l) “Updates to the Accreditation  Framework” (decision B.31/06).  
1.3 Contribution to the mandate of GCF  
19. The funding proposal describes the Applicant’s contribution to energy generation and 
access; low -emission transport; buildings, cities, industries and appliances; most vulnerable 
people and communities; health and well- being ; and food and water security ; as well as 
infrastructure and built environment GCF result s area s. The Applicant  intends to use GCF 
funding to foster private sector investment. It intends to participate in equity and equity -like


---
*Page 94*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 94 
 
 
investment deals of private companies operating in target countries and possibly expanding to 
countries in s ub-Saharan Africa.  
1.4 Track record and implementation of similar projects  
20. The Applicant ’s team  is assessed to have ample track record of similar projects and asset 
classes. While t he Applicant is a first -time equity fund, the team has extensive experience in 
similar funds and projects , which were reviewed and considered sufficient by the Secretariat . 
The referenced investments are similar in size, types of financing structures and instruments, 
status of development, E &S risk levels, E &S standards triggered, outcomes , and monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E)  processes expected. The track record includes direct equity investments, loan 
investments and investments into funds.  
21. The principals , as key persons in their previous roles , have managed invest ments  in 
several climate change- related projects and companies, mainly in solar energy, power grid, 
wind energy, hydro energy, logistics, infra structure  and others. The track record covers over 
twenty  investments valued at over USD 1 billion in similar asset classes with similar financial 
instruments as intended in the suggested project.  
22. Based on the team ’s track record, the Applicant can be expected to add value in 
developing projects for countries of operations and address climate priorities in t arget  
countries. The pipeline presented by the Applicant fits with the GCF portfolio -level goals.  
23. In respect of the track record, a third -party report  prepared by one of the Big Four 
international audit firms  and provided by  the Applicant , was reviewed to assess the track 
record of the two principals , verifying  their similar roles with their former employers. The 
external experts  interviewed key informants from the A pplicant, covering areas such as  general 
management, legal compliance, financial administration, procurement, project management, 
E&S and g ender , as well as transparency and accountability i ssues.  
1.5 Legal status, registration, permits and licen ces 
24. The c onstitution of PIML was adopted on 22  July 2024  and the certificate of 
incorporation was issued by the Corporate and Business Registration Department  at Port Louis, 
Mauritius (“CBRD ”), on 22 October 2024 . PIML holds a Mauritius global business licen ce and a 
collective investment scheme (CIS) manager licen ce, both issued  by the Financial Services 
Commission of Mauritius ( “FSC”) on 24 October 2024 .  
25. The constitution of PG F was adopted on 23 July 2024 and the certificate of incorporation 
was issued by CBRD  on 21 October 2024 . PGF holds a Mauritius global business licen ce issued 
by the FSC  on 24 October 2024 . PGF is authorized to act  as a closed -end fund . 
26. PGA was  set up  in India  on 31 October 2023  as a limited liability partnership  under the 
2008 Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2 008 . 
II. Accreditation assessme nt  
2.1 Basic fiduciary standards  
2.1.1.  Key administrative and financial capacities


---
*Page 95*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 95 
 
 
27. The key governing bodies include the Board of PIML , Advisory Committee  of PGF , Board 
of PGF and investment committee  of PGF . The key governing bodies and their functions  are 
summari zed below:  
(a) Board of PIML  – review investment manager operations, reporting, audits and oversight ;  
(b) Advisory Committee  of PGF  – investor supervisory committee to review fund operations 
and approve any deviations ; 
(c) Board of PGF  – review fund operations  and audits , and oversee fund operations ; and 
(d) Investment committee of PGF – approve investments, monitor portfolio, ensure 
alignment with strategy of investments . 
28. The second Entity A ssessment found that,  except for the Advisory Committee of PGF  
which is to be formed at initial closing of the PGF and which will consist of investor 
representatives (including a GCF representative if appointed), other  key governing bodies have 
appointed members who are investment professionals with relevant background s and track 
records. The Board s of PGF and PIML each consist s of independent external members.  
29. PGF  and PIML  have also established Ethics Committee, i nvestigation function s and a 
Risk Committee reporting to the Boards of PGF and PIML .  
30. The Applicant  has documented strategic direction as well as plans for target setting and 
reporting. The description of the objective -setting process has not been done in a documented 
manner, but further aspects related to setting objective s will be defined and endorsed by the 
investors through the PGF  Advisory Committee . Based on the size of the first close, the 
Applicant will also complete its annual planning and budgeting. The Applicant  has show n 
capacity for the management, reporting and monitoring of goals.   
31. The Applicant has policies that apply to PIML , PGF and PGA. The responsibility of  
adherence to GCF policies is with PIML.  
32. PGF also has finance  and operations  team consisting of Chief  Financial Officer ( CFO ), 
Managing Partner, financial operations staff and Head of  Compliance , which will supplement 
and oversee the work of the Administrator . One of the international corporate and fiduciary 
service providers  has been appointed to be the Administrator . Financial statements will be 
prepared periodically and in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards.   
33. The PIML and PGF are regulated by FSC  in Mauritius, which is a jurisdiction compliant 
with the Financial Action Task Force. The Applicant has provided a document o n fund 
operations and finance that outlin es processes for financial transactions. The Applicant  has legal 
and operational capacity to receive international payments from GCF. The bank account for 
receiving payments to PGF  has been  set up in Mauritius and is controlled by PIML. The 
operationalization of the disbursements systems should be followed up during implementation.  
34. There is no separate audit committee for the entities. Responsibility for the oversight of 
the PML and PGF  are with the respective Boards.  
35. An international accounting firm  has been  appointed to be the internal auditor  of PIML 
and PGF. The internal a udit function will operate in accordance with the audit plan pr epar ed by 
the internal auditor , in line with  the Internal Audit Policy and t erms  of reference , which have 
been  developed according to industry best practices. The first audit  report will be finali zed at 
the end of 2025 . 
36. As a private sector entity, the A pplicant is not subject to external audits carried out by a 
national audit institution. One of the Big Four  international accounting firm s is appointed to be 
the external au ditor of PIML and PGF. The external audit function will operate in accordance 
with the External Audit Policy and t erms  of reference. The first audit report will be finaliz ed at


---
*Page 96*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 96 
 
 
the end of 2025 . The external auditor will provide annual management letters observing audit 
and control frameworks.   
37. The Applicant’s internal controls are based on the following documents  that are applied 
to PIML, PGF and PGA: Governance Architecture and Operations Manual, Compliance 
Management Policy, Accounting and Financial Policy Manual, a Framework for Key Fund 
Transactions with  a control  matrix. The se documents  define the internal control procedures in 
the core financial management  of PIML , PGF and PGA . The A pplicant does not use fiscal agents 
or trustees in their operations.  
38. The Applicant's governance architecture establishes multiple lines of defence  through 
maker -checker controls, independent governing bodies, Head of Risk, risk  and environmental, 
social and governance ( ESG ) functions, operational efficiency, and external and internal audits 
by reputable firms. Based on this  organizational structure , the duties are segregated. In 
addition, all functions will have involvement from teams from different departments.  
39. The compliance and control functions are supported by the  Administrator , which 
supports in adherence to the local laws of Mauritius through reporting and accounting of the 
company. The implementation of the control framework is also supported by the CFO and the finance  and operations  team. The Applicant has provided  sufficient evidence that it uses best -in-
class accounting management software and has the necessary controls related to financial 
management .  
40. The Applicant  manages  its risks according to its Risk Management Framework and 
Policy that details the risks and procedures. A risk ma trix for fund operati ons, which defines 
potential risks and mitigation measures,  has been prepared. A Head of Risk is in place and 
oversee s the  risk function  and the implementation of policies and processes. The Head of Risk 
also oversees  the operations of the PIML, ensures that  audits are conducted when needed and 
that action plan s are implemented . A Risk Committee has been established which rep orts to the 
Board. It comprise s the Head of Risk and CFO.  Staff is and  will be trained annually on risk 
management. The Applicant has demonstrated that the risk monitoring and management 
framework works as intended.  
41. The Applicant has a procurement policy  which  applies to employees, consultants, 
officer s or agents who are directly or indirectly involved in procurements. The p olicy highlights 
principles of efficient and effective procurement and impartiality, transparency and accountability. The policy includes scope, roles, responsibilities, thresholds, authorizations and 
code of conduct applied to the vendors. It also include s a short list of possible vendors for 
foreseen procurements. These vendors would be subject to  a due diligen ce process 
implemented by the CFO and the finance  and operations  team. As a private entity,  Applicant  is 
not required to have a procurement committee or independent panel to evaluate proposals and  
will handle the procurement internally.  
42. For the underlying  equity fund, the Applicant does not need to disclose procurement 
activities. Procurement processes are subject to internal audit . The Applicant has provided 
evidence of application of the procurement policy. The memorandum of one procurement  
activity  that has formally gone through  the procurement process  was reviewed and  confirmed 
satisfactory by Secretariat.  
43. The assessment  finds that the A pplicant has shown sufficient  evidence for established 
and operational administrative and financial systems, capacities and human resources to 
manage the funds. The A pplicant has adequate general and financial management capacity. The 
assessment notes  that relevant team members tasked with applying these policies have the 
relevant experience.  
2.1.2.  Transparency and accountability


---
*Page 97*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 97 
 
 
44. The Applicant has a Code of Conduct which is applicable to all employees and vendors. 
Confirmation that staff members are obligated to sign the Code of Conduct confirmation 
template has been provided . Staff are also required to undergo annual  ethics training . An Ethics 
Committee has been established to function in line with the t erms  of reference. The 
organization has demonstrated conduct of an annual  training . 
45. The Applicant has procedures for COI  under the Policy for Conflict of Interests , which  
outlines examples of COI and m itigation measures. The A pplicant has additional  supporting 
policies such as the Code of Conduct , Whistle -blower  Policy and Anti -Corruption Policy  and has 
submitted evidence that it has received annual COI declarations from  employees and board 
members. For any decision -making, members and employees are expected to recuse themselves 
when any conflict of interests arises. The Ethics Committee oversees and enforces the 
implementation of the  COI policy . Where there is non -compliance, sanctions may follow.  
46. The Applicant has demonstrated evidence of zero tolerance for fraud, financial 
mismanagement and other forms of malpractice. Key manuals include the Code of Conduct, 
Anti -Bribery and Anti -Corruption Policy and Anti -Money Laundering (AML) Policy. The 
definition of fraudulent activities is the same as that of GCF. The A pplicant’s fraud detection is 
stipulated in the Compliance Policy and in the AML policy. The Head of Risk, supported by CFO 
and finance team , play  an important role in detecting fraudulent activities in the investee 
companies through monitoring controls ex  ante and during the active investment period.  
47. The Applicant also has a Whistle -blower  Policy and has a publicly available mechanism 
for raising complaints. The assessment observes  that the website of the Applicant  also includes 
a publicly available Grievance Policy and has an email address for complaints. I nformation 
regarding the grievance mechanism is available  to the  public on the Prosperete website. The 
email is received and handled first by the Ethics Committee managed by the Head of 
Compliance. The Applicant has expressed zero tolerance for retaliation in its policies.  
48. The Ethics Committee oversees the investigations ’ function. According to the policy, the 
committee is responsible for determining when an investigation should be ini tiated. The Board 
can also decide to launch an investigation independently. Investigations are then outsourced to 
a third -party service provider who can provide impartial investigations support. The service 
provider has not been contracted yet but will be procur ed depending on the issue being 
investigated. The Whistle -blower  Policy stipulates that GCF and the A dvisory Committee of PGF , 
where GCF would be present as well, will receive information on the complain ts and ongoing 
grievance processes quarterly and annually. The system has not  yet received  any reports 
(internal or external)  of wrongdoings .  
49. The Applicant  has an Anti -Money Laundering P olicy, that is based on the Mauritius FSC 
code for prevention of money laundering and financing of terrorism. Mauritius FSC expects that 
the companies operational in Mauritius with financial licen ces adhere to this code. Two staff are 
appointed  to AML and c ompliance matters. Their operations are also supervised through 
international information exchange with other supervisory authorities. Based on the track record, and evidence provided on the proposed investors , pipeline companies and key 
personnel, the Applicant  has demonstrated capacity to deliver customer due diligence and 
assess AML risks when applying their own policy.  
50. The assessment finds that the Applicant  has prepared policies on ethical and conflict of 
interest matters , as well as policies and functions related to the prohibited practices. The 
whistle -blowing systems, fraud detection and investigation’s  function have also been assessed 
to the degree possible. The Applicant  follows an anti -money laundering and countering the 
financ ing of terrorism  regime through their own policies , scrutinized under the FSC regulation.  
The FSC regulation of Mauritius follows Financial Action Task Force recommendations and is 
compliant  with the recommendations.


---
*Page 98*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 98 
 
 
2.2 Specialized fiduciary standards  
2.2.1.  Project management  
51. The individuals and experts retained  by the Applicant  demonstrate a track record and 
experience in project management, with expertise in assessing project feasibility and viability 
against set criteria, and monitoring project performance during the development and 
operational stages. The Applicant  has created an Investment and Portfolio Process Policy for a 
three -stage process in appraising projects and developed processes to select the best projects 
for the appraisal review. The final decision -making power s are with the investment committee , 
which  has three members, including  one of  the founder s of the companies, an ESG officer and 
one independent member. The operationalization of the investment process has been 
demonstrated to the Secretariat .  
52. The Applicant  plans to use a wide range of external service providers for the assessment 
of investee projects. According to the Investment and Portfolio Process Policy the deal diligence 
will be decided on a case -by-case basis and will be led by the investment manager of the case. 
The investment team that originated the investee projects will also act as the portfolio 
managers for them .  
53. The oversight and control functions for managing the investment process from 
origination to exit are defined appropriately. The  several segregated steps of control  are put in 
place . The  controls shared between the investments team and the compliance team, and the 
reporting lines are all clear. The Applicant  has designed ex  ante  site visits for the due diligence 
process, as well as checkpoints with the investees every six months for risk management. The 
Applicant  also considers AML , a know -your -customer  (KYC) process  and fraud in its initial 
background check of the potential investees before investigating the opportunity further , 
according to its policy.  
54. The Applicant has capacity for financial reporting and planning.  
55. The Applicant’s  team members have a track record of monitoring  portfolio risks . Their 
track record includes monitoring risks, and evaluating projects aligned with best practices of the industry. Also, the track record monitoring includes quarterly performance reviews, follow - 
up of key performance indicators  and budgets, and continuous risk mapping. The ESG officer is 
responsible for the M&E function  and timely and appropriate M&E  processes.  The 
operationalization of m ost part s of the processes and systems related to M&E will be followed 
up by the Secretariat during the implementation stage.  
56. Key documents guiding the M&E activities are the measurement  and evaluation  and the 
monitoring  and evalu ation plan s which outline the methodology, frequency, independence, 
external/internal, scope and disclosure of the evaluation and verification results. The 
documents highlight good capacity and best practices in M&E, including risk monitoring. The 
Applicant  plans to publish its impact reports. The track record of the team supports a 
knowledgeable and open evaluation approach. The operationalization of the M&E  will be 
followed up  by the Secretariat during the implementation stage . 
57. The assessment finds that the Applicant , based on its current personnel  and policies, has  
the appropriate experience and ability  to implement effective project management including 
planning, managing, monitoring, verifying and evaluating the projects. While the Applicant  as an 
entity has limited  institutional track record for fund  management,  it has the policies and the 
personnel to undertake the programme and has demonstrated to the Secretariat  evidence of 
undertaking key programme activities.  
2.2.2.  Grant award and/or funding allocation mechanisms


---
*Page 99*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 99 
 
 
58. The Applicant did not apply for accreditation for the grant award and/or funding 
allocation mechanisms specialized fiduciary standard.  
2.2.3.  On-lending and/or blending for loans and equity  
59. The Applicant has a well- planned system with defined roles in analysing, reviewing, 
recommending and decision -making for investments. The Applicant’s  investment process for 
equity involves thorough due diligence to evaluate potential investees' business models, market 
potential, and financial health. Reviewed by the Head of Risk and approved by the investment committee, this ensures that investments ar e aligned with the mission and risk appetite of PGF.  
Post -investment, the A pplicant will provide strategic support to foster growth and 
sustainability, ensuring the investments drive impactful outcomes aligned with the goals.  
60. The Applicant’s business model and investment procedures allow it to process funds 
from organizations such as GCF and blend these with its funds and equity capital from its 
investors. Therefore, it can apply the specialized fiduciary standards for blending and equities. 
The Applicant’s  financing is derived  from  various sources of other funders, private and public.  
61. The Applicant’s team is experienced in routinely handling the relations with  funders , 
based on their extensive experience in direct equity investing. The Applicant has good 
experience through its current staff on managing due diligence processes from sourcing to 
investment decisions. As the Applicant does not take any loans, and there is no other 
requirement  for it to maintain a  credit rating , this is not required  from external parties.  
62. Investees are analysed  based on a specific process, summarized in the Investment and 
Portfolio Process Policy and supporting documents. The investment cycle process generally follows international best practices from deal sourcing to alignment and impact assessment, to 
pipeline  discussion, to deal due diligence. The due diligence process includes several steps and 
assessments. After sourcing, screening and discussions on the recommendations committee, the 
Applicant undertakes  legal, environmental, social and governa nce, and financial due diligence 
processes that lead to preparation of the project recommendation . In the next phase, the Head 
of Risk reviews the proposed investments and gives their  recommendation  to the investment 
committee. The final  step is discussion in the investment committee, which might still require 
additional work from the investment team. The documentation and investment disbursemen t 
follow approval by the investment committee, after which the project is transferred to active 
portfolio management.  The Applicant  has demonstrated comprehensive  and thorough process 
and investment analysis  capability, including on know -your -customer , legal, environmental, 
social and governa nce, and financial aspects of investments.    
63. The Applicant  manag es the risks related to the investments guided by their Investment 
Policies, Risk Management Policies and Procedures Manual, and a risk metrics document.  
64. In the investment origination and portfolio management process, risks are managed 
according to the “ three lines of defence”  principle as stipulated in the Governance Architecture 
and Operations Manual. At the first level, the investment team manages risks by adhering to risk 
management and investment policies. The second line of defence is represented by the Head of 
Compliance, who not only oversees compliance but also participates in the in -house 
recommendation committee to ensure that investment proposals  are compliant. Additionally, an 
independent investment committee in PGF, advised by a separate Head of Risk and a Risk Committee housed in PIML, provides further oversight. The third line of defence  comprises both 
external and internal audit  functions, which operate independent ly of the operational 
management of the company and under the advice  of the PGF b oard. These auditors ensure 
objective assessment and adherence to established risk management protocols according to their terms of reference. The repor ting lines for risk management in the investment origination 
and portfolio management process are clear and adhere to best industry practices.


---
*Page 100*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 100 
 
 
65. The Applicant  plans to release information on the investments as defined in their 
Measurement and Evaluation Policy and Environmental  and Social  Safeguards  (ESS) Policy, 
excluding information that is under the non- disclosure agreement  with investee companies.  
66. The Applicant has a constitution al document that defines the company name , 
governance structure, share structure, management policies, risk management, compliance and 
regulations, financial policies, conflict of interest policies, investment criteria, investor relations, 
dispute resolution  and amendment procedures. The constitution al document  is based on the 
laws and regulations of Mauritius.  
67. Besides the constitution al document , the other key policy defining the portfolio 
management is the Investment and Portfolio Process and Policy. Based on the policy, PIML is 
planning to manage the portfolio through their investment team based on the value creation 
plan developed during the investment process. This includes identified steps of growing and 
exiting the company in an orderly fashion.  
68. The financial team and contracts with the external providers show that PIML has 
designed an appropriate financial risk management framework . 
69. The assessment finds that  for the different financial instruments used, the advisory staff 
has a track record of previously managed funds,  and the team has the capacity to establish and 
manage investments and channel and track the funds. The team and its contracted parties have 
the capacity to manage the treasury and the financial risk. Financial systems, including payment 
systems, reporting systems and approval systems,  are operational.  
2.3 Environmental and social safeguards  
70. The Applicant  has an environmental and social management system ( ESMS ) and ESG 
Policy that describes the processes of E&S risk management and safeguarding. The policy 
describes the relationship between the ESG team, investment team (deal team) and the investee 
companies and the reporting requirements on ESG topics. The Applicant  has an experienced 
ESG and Climate Chair , who is a member of the investment c ommittee, and has stated that it is 
in the process of identifying and hiring an additional ESG officer . An external specialized 
consultancy company,  which has worked on other  GCF projects,  is also supporting in 
management of the ESMS.  
71. The ESMS and ESG Policy is a comprehensive manual of risk identification, management 
and mitigation. The track record of the staff of the A pplicant is appropriate considering the 
planned fund and  covers the  relevant geographies and asset classes. The process  being followed  
by the A pplicant  adhere s to the international rules and standards, including the GCF interim 
environmental  and social standards  for risk identification and screening. The evidence provided 
includes personnel track record of performing  E&S assessments of several projects  from 
previous professional experiences . This evidence indicates that the A pplicant’s team has the 
capacity and knowledge to operate a transparent risk management system for E&S.  
72. The Applicant has specific guidance on the ESMS for its future portfolio. C hecklists for 
analysing  and identifying an ESMS for the portfolio companies have been provided in the form 
of templates but also  leav e open the possibility for external ESG Audits. The investment team 
oversees the management and integration of ESG in the investment and portfolio management 
processes with the support of the ESG officer. T he Applicant  has demonstrated the ESMS has 
been  operationalized,  and the assessment finds that its cap acity is adequate.  
73. The assessment  finds that the Applicant’s E&S management program me meets the GCF 
revised Environmental and Social Policy applicable to accreditation and GCF interim ESS 
standards for maximum E&S risk C ategory I- 2 projects/program mes with respect to


---
*Page 101*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 101 
 
 
International Finance Corporation Performance Standards  (PS) 1–8. Moreover, the A pplicant 
has capacity to adhere to the PS7 and GCF’s supplementary Indigenous People’s P olicy.  
74. The investment team of the Applicant , together with the ESG o fficer, will oversee the 
monitoring of the E&S reporting and risks. During implementation, it is crucial to follow up on 
E&S  operationalization, to ensure that the tracking and monitoring systems are being put into 
practice according to the Applicant’s guidelines.  
75. The Applicant  has a complaints channel as described previously. The same channel is in 
use for all E&S grievances. These complaints are ultimately received by the A pplicant’s Ethics 
Committee. In the case of E&S grievances, the A pplicant has stated that it will co -opt its ESG 
officer in handling the complaint(s). It is possible to submit complaints and grievances via the 
Prosperete website; the Grievance Redress Mechanism  Policy, ESMS , ESG Policy, and polic y on 
sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment  are available online.   
76. The Applicant’s  E&S operational framework includes policy elements on the 
requirements for stakeholder consultations and E&S information disclosure in line with the GCF 
Information Disclosure Policy requirements for E&S risk C ategory I- 2. 
77. The assessment  finds that the Applicant  has an adequate environmental and social 
policy, following international best practice. It is operat ing on a risk -based approach by 
mapping, screening, categorizing and managing E &S risks. The Applicant’s team has capacity 
and understanding on PS 7, stakeholder engagement processes and consultations, and has the 
systems and capacity to meet PS 7 on Indigenous Peoples. The A pplicant has an E&S  
management program me that aims to ensure that the related risks are managed properly and in 
a timely  way . The monitoring and review are expected to be carried out  through appropriate 
systems and tracked in proprietary software. As stated in the fiduciary section, the A pplicant 
has the capacity to manage grievances and external communications according to GCF 
standards  and are planning  for additional human resources to monitor, follow up and manage 
E&S risks.  
2.4 Gender  
78. The Applicant, as a company, does not possess a track record of gender assessments, but 
it has a stand -alone gender policy framework , which  is aligned with the GCF’s Gender Policy,  
and is planning to use this in its operations. The Applicant ’s staff have  track records in 
integrating and using gender goals in equity investments as shown in their curricul a vitae and 
the presented track record document. Gender is integrated into the Applicant ’s ESG approach 
and is covered in most parts in the ESG P olicy in add ition to the gender policy. The Gender 
Action Plan shows how gender will be taken into account in screening, origination and portfolio 
management phases of the investment cycle. The Applicant  applies  the 2X challenge criteria and 
report against them. The Applicant  has also provided a country and context -specific gender 
assessment document that highlights the roles, rights, needs, and opportunities of women and 
men across target countries and focus areas.  
79. The Applicant ’s ESG officer has been named as the gender focal point , responsible for 
managing the policy and supporting the investment teams in gender assessments and in 
portfolio management follow -ups. The Applicant  noted in interviews that it intends to hire a 
gender officer later , if necessary.  
80. The Applicant  has a stand -alone Policy on Prevention of Sexual Harassment at the 
Workplace that applies to the staff of the entities, vendors and investee companies. The policy outlines reporting procedures and processes. Moreover, the policy recognizes local laws related to reporting requirements.


---
*Page 102*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 102 
 
 
81. The Applicant ’s Gender Policy is further supplemented by its Gender Action Plan, which 
sets the groundwork for the organization’s approach to monitoring and reporting its impacts 
across multiple output areas. As the fund begins to deploy capital, the  monitoring of gender -
specific policies will be followed up.  
82. The assessment  finds that the Applicant  has an adequate Gender Policy, in line with the 
GCF Gender Policy. The Applicant  integrate s gender  into its overall ESMS, with specific 
monitoring and reporting indicators outlined in its Gender Action Plan. Country - specific gender  
assessments demonstrate the Applicant ’s acknowledgement of the different gender contexts in 
its target geographies. The team’s track record demonstrates experience and capacity in gender considerations with equity investments. While  the Applicant  does not have a staff member 
dedicated to gender  aspects, the Applicant ’s current staff possesses the competency to monitor 
gender  considerations and risks and incorporate them within their investment work.  
III. Conclusions and recommendations  
3.1 Conclusions  
83. Following the assessment, the Applicant  has demonstrated its current capacity through 
policies, and systems and procedures.  T he Applicant ’s team  has the track record to support GCF 
in implementing its updated Strategic Plan 2024 –2027 in:  
(a) The project that the Applicant  has submitted to GCF within the scope of PSAA 
accreditation; and  
(b) Enhancing private sector participation by fostering private sector investment in climate change mitigation and adaptation projects using financial instruments such as equity.  
84. The Applicant  has demonstrated that it has a medium capacity to implement the 
proposed project , the “Prosperete Growth Fund” , and manage the GCF -funded activities in 
alignment with the relevant GCF policies. While  the Applicant  has limited  institutional track 
record on managing a full cycle of a similar fund, the Applicant  has demonstrated that it has put 
in place operational control framework s, investment processes and governance mechanisms , 
including ESMS system s, to undertake the  project . In addition, t he Applicant ’s track record also 
benefits from the extensive experience of its principals,  individual staff and independent 
members. The Secretariat therefore concludes that ; 
(a) The Applicant  meets the requirements of the GCF basic fiduciary standards, the GCF 
Policy on the Protection of Whistle -blowers and Witnesses, the GCF Policy on Prohibited 
Practices, the GCF AML/CFT Policy, and the specialized fiduciary standard for project 
management, for blending equity to the extent applicable to PSAA and the funding 
proposal ; 
(b) The Applicant  meets the GCF revised Environmental and Social Policy, the GCF interim 
ESS standards and the GCF Information Disclosure Policy on disclosure of E&S 
information in relation to the medium E&S risk C ategory I -2 and to the extent applicable 
to PSAA and the funding proposal ; and  
(c) The Applicant  has demonstrated that it has policy, procedures and competencies in 
order to implement its gender policy consistent with the updated GCF Gender Policy to 
the extent applicable to PSAA and the funding proposal.  
3.2 Recommendations on project -specific accreditation  
85. Accreditation type : PSAA


---
*Page 103*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 103 
 
 
86. Fiduciary functions  
(a) Basic fiduciary standards; and  
(b) Specialized fiduciary standard for project management, blending equity . 
87. Maximum environmental and social risk category:  Medium risk ( Category  I-2). 
88. Conditions:  
(a) No conditions.  
89. As described above, in its first Entity A ssessment the Secretariat proposed certain 
conditions for the Applicant.  Since then, as reflected in this second Entity Assessment and A nnex  
1 hereof, the Applicant has successfully demonstrated , to the Secretariat’s satisfaction , that it 
has put in place sufficient processes and controls, such that the previously proposed conditions 
are no longer required.  
90. Given that this will be  a first -time equity fund  project implemented by the Applicant , the 
Secretariat will r igorously monitor these processes and controls during implementation  of the 
project  to ensure that they are functional and operational.


---
*Page 104*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 104 
 
 
 
Annex 1 
This Annex describes 13 areas for improvement in me eting the GCF accreditation standards identified in the first Entity Assessment (November 
2024) and evidence submitted by the Applicant  during the second Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  which has led to the clearance of previously 
proposed conditions  
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
1.      Functioning 
governing bodies  
(2.1.1(a))  Cleared  1.1. Governance body charter and board 
and committee minutes to approve all 
policies submitted to GCF. These key 
governing bodies present their functioning, which includes, inter alia and 
as applicable, completing the appointment 
of members, conducting preliminary 
assessments, reviewing of fund operations, 
approval of fund decisions, and overseeing 
reports and audits.   The Applicant provided  minutes 
and/or evidence of meetings from each body for adoption of its  charter, 
reviewed and confirmed as 
satisfactory by the Secretariat and 
External Review Team (ERT). The 
evidence includes:  
Board of PIML   
Risk Committee of PIML  
Board of PGF  
Investment Committee  of PGF  
Board of PGA  
Recommendation Committee of PGA  After the initial  closing 
and once Advisory 
Committee is constituted, 
the Applicant will submit to GCF  minutes of the first 
meeting of the Advisory 
Committee . Included in 
the Term Sheet as a condition precedent to 
second Disbursement


---
*Page 105*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 105 
 
 
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
2.      Functional 
and effective 
annual planning 
and budgeting  
(2.1.2(g))  Cleared  2.1. Prosperete to provid e the track record 
of the whole cycle in planning, approving, 
and using business plan/ financial budgets 
transparently.  With the submitted finance -related 
policy documents  and the interviews , 
Secretariat and ERT concluded that the Applicant has the capacity for 
whole cycle planning, budgeting etc.  The Applicant  will submit 
minutes of PGF Board 
meeting which approves the annual plan and 
budget of first two years , 
and the c onfirmation from 
PIML  of the budget use 
approved by PGF Board. 
Included as a covenant in 
the Term Sheet. 
3.      Functional 
internal and 
external  audit  
(2.1.3 -B, 2.1.3- C) Cleared  3.1. Evidence of  appointing the third -party 
internal auditor  to be  provided. Secretariat and ERT reviewed the 
signed and accepted e ngagement 
letter for the internationally 
recognized and reputable third -party 
auditor , which includes audit plan 
that outlines the priorities of the 
function and is consistent with PGF’s 
goals . The Applicant  will submit 
to the Secretariat extracts  
of minutes of PGF board meetings which review 
internal audit report.  
Included as a covenant in 
the Term Sheet. 3.2. Internal audit report toto be  reviewed 
by PGF board . 
3.3. Evidence of the  appointment of third -
party  external auditor  to be  provided. Secretariat and ERT reviewed the 
signed and accepted engagement The Applicant  will submit 
to the Secretariat extracts


---
*Page 106*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 106 
 
 
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
3.4. External audit report toto be  reviewed 
by PGF board . letter for the internationally 
recognized and reputable  third -party 
external auditor.  of minutes of  PGF  board 
meetings which review 
external audit report. 
Included as covenant in the Term Sheet. 
4.       Functional 
ethics committee and system  
(1.2.1(c))  Cleared  4.1.  Ethics Committee to be constituted  
and is functional.  Secretariat and ERT reviewed the 
certificate from Board of the Applicant that  Ethics Committee has 
been constituted and confirmed that the Committee is functional with the 
already identified committee 
members.  None  
5.      Well -
performing 
finance systems, 
finance functions 
and finance 
controls  Cleared  5.1. Confirmation of opening of the bank 
account including separate GCF Account.  Bank accounts opening including a 
separate GCF account by the PIML 
have been confirmed by Secretariat 
and ERT .  None  
5.2. Procured third -party  financial system s 
for fund operations to be  in place.  Certification of deployment and 
operation of the third -party financial 
systems are confirmed to be in 
compliance with the internal control None


---
*Page 107*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 107 
 
 
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
(2.1.2(e), 2.1.2(f), 
3.3.8(a))  policy and financial governance 
framework of PIML and PGF.  
5.3. Finance functions and controls to be  
well checked by internal and external 
auditors. Terms of reference and engagement 
letter between PIML (as PGF’s 
Investment Manager) and auditors 
were reviewed and confirmed that 
the scope of audit cover s the key 
points of finance functions and 
controls.  None  
5.4. KYC, AML/FCT reports are being 
reviewed for co -financiers and investors . Secretariat and ERT have reviewed 
the certificate from  the Administrator 
confirming status of KYC checks  Secretariat will 
periodically request and 
check reports for 
compliance with 
KYC/ AML/CFT  
requirements. Included as 
a covenant in the Term 
Sheet.   
6.      Operational 
risk monitoring Cleared   6.1. Operational risk to be  regularly 
monitored by Risk Committee .  Certified true copy of the first two 
discussion minutes between the 
investment sub advi ser’s team and 
the head of risk and members of the None


---
*Page 108*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 108 
 
 
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
and reporting 
system  
(2.1.4(i), 3.1.3(a), 
3.3.9(a))  Risk Committee for evaluation of 
investment opportunities have been 
reviewed and the process in place is 
confirmed satisfactory.  
6.2. In the regular investment process, ESG 
officer, risk officer and ethics committee 
related staff to be  involved  to check the 
operational risk monitoring.  Certification of appointments of the 
ESG Chair and Head of Risk has been confirmed. The role and key responsibilities of both are outlined 
in the document.  
Detailed E&S Screening Discussion Minutes (Dec 2024 and Jan 2025) on 
two potential investments have been reviewed and confirmed satisfactory. 
One was identified no red flags; the 
other one was held off its investment 
decision due to E&S concerns.  None


---
*Page 109*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 109 
 
 
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
7.      Procurement  
(2.1.4(j), 2.1.5(a), 
2.1.5(b), 2.1.5(c), 2.1.5(d))  Cleared  7.1. Procurement policy 
established;  Implementation of policies to  
be reviewed by auditors.  Establishment and update of the 
procurement policy was confirmed by Secretariat and ERT. Implementation 
of the policy will be regularly checked by auditors and any findings will be 
monitored by Secretariat.  None  
7.2. Pre-approved vendor list to be  
updated at least annually. Approval of vendors shall be based on a 
comprehensive review of quality and 
pricing.  Update of pre -approved vendor list as 
an annex of procurement policy has been reviewed. The regular update of 
the pre -approved vendor list 
adherent to the procurement policy will be checked and monitored by 
Secretariat.  None  
7.3. Evidence of implementing 
procurement procedures according to the 
Policy to be provided. Secretariat and ERT reviewed one 
procurement document that has gone through procurement procedures 
according to the Procurement Policy. 
It has been concluded that the procedure is in place.  None


---
*Page 110*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 110 
 
 
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
8.      Updated the 
COI policy  
(2.2.2(a))  Cleare d 8.1. The Policy on Conflict of Interest to 
have  clear description of review and 
resolution procedures, and further 
guidance on disciplinary measures. 
Description of the mechanism to be  in 
place in the policy to effectively review the declarations.
 The C OI policy has been confirmed 
updated , with a new section  
“Violations and Resolutions” added to 
the C OI policy .  None  
9.      Functional 
COI system and process  
(2.2.1(b))  Cleared  9.1. Implementation of policy to be 
established through staff declaration and reporting of conflict  Certification of signed declarations 
regarding the Conflict of Interest from the employees of Applicant has been 
reviewed and found  satisfactory.  None  
9.2. An annual training process to walk 
through all the processes and policies 
related to the Code of Conduct to be in 
place . Confirmation of an annual training for 
personnel on the Applicant ’s Code of 
Conduct, including the Policy on Conflict of Interest  has been provided, 
and the actual training was conducted and confirmed.  None  
10.  Functional 
whistleblowing, Cleared  10.1. Ethics Committee toto be  set up and 
receives reports to be  made under the 
Whistle -blower Policy.  Ethics Committee has been confirmed  
constituted.  None


---
*Page 111*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 111 
 
 
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
investigation and 
fraud detection  
(2.2.3(c), 2.2.4(b), 
2.2.4(c), 2.2.4(d), 
4.5(a), 4.5(c))  10.2. Any reporting of whistle -blowing, 
ethics violations, misconducts and/or any 
kind of malpractice or prohibited practices 
to be  taken with proper consideration and 
process, which includes protecting whistle -blowers and reporting individuals.  No reporting has been issued until 
the time of the second Entity 
Assessment. Any findings will be 
processed according to Prosperete ’s 
Whistle -blower P olicy , which 
requires the Applicant to present all 
reports , investigations and taken 
actions to the Secretariat.  None  
10.3. The same Policy on Anti -Bribery and 
Anti -Corruption to be  applied to all 
Portfolio Companies.  On an annual basis, the 
Secretariat will review the 
copy of annual certificate 
of compliance from portfolio companies as per 
Policy on Anti -Bribery and 
Anti -Corruption . Included 
as a covenant in the Term 
Sheet. 
11.  Functional 
investment origination process including Cleared  11.1.  Investment origination setup to refer 
to inbound and outbound communication by investment team, endorsed by the relevant committee with meeting minutes  Secretariat and ERT reviewed and 
found satisfactory the pipeline report of Q1 2025 providing an overview of the status on 24 companies currently 
in the pipeline.  None


---
*Page 112*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 112 
 
 
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
reporting 
systems  
(3.3.2(a), 3.3.5(a), 
3.3.7(a))  
 Detailed Recommendation Committee 
minutes have been shared considering pipeline companies, 
some of which were recommended 
for Investment and Risk Committee . 
The process of check and balance during the investment origination is 
confirmed satisfactory.  
11.2. Portfolio management procedures to 
be in place to analyse the equity portfolio’s 
valuation and robustness.  Based on the evidence provided, 
Secretariat and ERT have concluded that governance mechanisms bodies 
and investment / portfolio 
management procedures are in place.  Secretariat will regularly 
receive and review the portfolio management 
outcomes.  Included as a 
covenant in the Term Sheet. 
12.  Functional 
ESMS 
(3.3.6(a), 4.2(a), 
4.2(c), 4.3(a), 
4.3(c), 4.3(d), 
4.3(e), 4.3(f), Cleared  12.1. ESMS and associated tools for E&S 
screening and risk assessment to be  in 
place. ESAP to be  prepared for portfolio 
companies that identifies and assesses ES risks and impacts and corresponding 
action plans to mitigate)  Secretariat and ERT reviewed the 
ESDD process, which is aligned with GCF requirements and covering 
assessment of ESMS, applicability of E&S laws, screening against IFC PS, 
ESAP with identified gaps, None


---
*Page 113*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 113 
 
 
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
4.4(a), 4.5(a), 
4.5(b))  recommendations and monitoring 
indicators.  
12.2. ES disclosure, disclosure feedback 
and redress mechanism to be  put in place 
for the general public to access 
information about beneficiaries and result 
of projects and programmes  The ES disclosure of sub -projects will 
follow the standard disclosure process according to Information 
Disclosure Policy and R evised 
Environmental and S ocial  Policy  of 
GCF .  None  
13.  Fully 
operational investment and 
ESG Teams  
(3.4.1, 3.4.2, 4.6(a), 
4.6(c))  Cleared  
 13.1.  Hiring of risk officer and ESG officer 
dedicated to the climate have both expertise and relevant experience in the 
field , with relevant gender expertise, to 
beef up the capacity of the operational team.  Secretariat and ERT confirmed that 
the Risk Officer and ESG Chair have 
been hired and involved in the 
investment process  Once ESG officer  is hired, 
the Applicant will submit 
relevant  evidence.  
Included in the Term 
Sheet as a condition 
precedent to FAA effectiveness .


---
*Page 114*
---

 
 
GCF/B .43/02/Add. 29 
Page 114 
 
 
Areas for 
improvement  in 
meeting GCF 
Accreditation 
Standard s 
identified in  the 
first Entity 
Assessment 
(November 2024 ) Current 
Status  Actions  proposed in  the first  Entity 
Assessment  (November 2024 ) to clear 
the identified gaps , to be reflected as 
conditions in the funded activity 
agreement  Details  confirmed in the s econd  
Entity Assessment  (May 2025)  that 
led to the clearance of the 
previously proposed conditions   Follow -up actions by the 
Secretariat during 
implementation  phase   
13.2. The PGF to have  fully operational 
teams  Secretariat and ERT have confirmed 
through provided evidence that the 
Applicant has operational teams in 
place  After the Final Clos e, the 
Applicant  will submit to 
the Secretariat a staff 
chart . Included as a 
covenant in the Term Sheet.


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B. 43/02/Add. 29 
Page 115 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP264 
Proposal name:  Prosper ete Growth Fund  
Accredited entity:  Prosperete Investment Management Ltd ( project -specific 
assessment approach ) 
Countr y(ies): Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Mauritius  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Overview   
1. The Prosperete Growth Fund (Prosperete  or PGF ) is a USD 220 million equity initiative 
designed to advance climate mitigation and adaptation solutions across emerging markets. 
Prosperete’s mission is to invest in businesses that provide innovative climate solutions, with 
the dual objectives of scaling these enterprises and facilitating technology transfer throughout 
emerging markets. By achieving these goals, PGF aims to accelerate the ad option of effective 
climate solutions and attract significant private capital to support such interventions.  
2. PGF primarily targets late -venture and early -growth companies, offering investment 
sizes ranging from USD 5 million to USD 20 million. Its initial geographic focus includes 
Bangladesh, India, Indonesia and Mauritius, with plans to expand into broader African and 
Asian markets. Currently, Prosperete’s pipeline encompasses over one hundred  companies with 
a combined deal value approaching USD 1 billion.  
3. Prosperete has been submitted to the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) 
under GCF ’s project -specific assessment approach  (PSAA). The PSAA enables  the GCF 
Secretariat to concurrently evaluate the project sponsor’s implementation capacity and the 
proposal’s suitability for GCF financing. The iTAP review assumes that the Secretariat 
assessment of the capabilities  of the sponsor  meets the necessary standards for evaluating this 
program me. 
4. PGF will operate as a Mauritius -based closed -end fund, with GCF committing up to 
USD  50 million in first -loss junior equity. The fund incorporates robust protective measures for 
GCF, including:  
(a) A maximum 1:1 junior -to-senior equity ratio ; 
(b) Co-financing requirements to ensure private sector leverage;  
(c) A mandatory co -financing ratio of at least 3:1, ensuring that GCF’s exposure remains 
capped at 25  per cent  of the total fund size ; and 
(d) Tranched GCF contributions against milestones.  
5. PGF will be managed by Prosperete Investment Management Limited (Prosperete IM), 
which serves as the a ccredited entity (AE) for GCF and the lead entity for this program me. 
Prosperete IM will engage Prosperete Growth Advisors LLP in India as a subadvis er. Together 
with the Prosperete Growth  Fund, t hese entities will function as  executing entities, operating 
under shared policies, procedures, management systems, and personnel.


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B. 43/02/Add. 29 
Page 116 
 
 
6. Prosperete’s investment strategy focuses on identifying growth -stage businesses with 
scalable climate technologies. By collaborating with local accelerators, institutions and earlier -
stage funds, Prosperete  aims to:  
(a) Support climate startups across target markets;  
(b) Screen for high -potential businesses with technologies suitable for scaling and transfer ; 
(c) Leverage partnerships to amplify impact and create synergies across its focus regions.  
7. The PGF’s overarching objective is to channel investment into scalable climate solutions, 
promoting technology transfer and widespread adoption. By fostering the proliferation and 
exchange of advanced technologies, PGF seeks to contribute to a connected cl imate funding 
ecosystem across emerging markets, accelerating national development and delivering tangible benefits to local communities.  
8. Investments will be screened for their potential to achieve significant climate mitigation 
and adaptation impacts. At least 80  per cent  of investee companies are expected to develop 
concrete plans for technology transfer beyond their home countries.  
9. The fund has identified  the following  four key thematic verticals  for investment:  
(a) Energy transition: Supporting energy storage, distributed systems, and grid 
modernization to advance  the adoption of  renewable energy ; 
(b) Low -emission transport: Focusing on battery technology, equipment manufacturing, 
and charging/swapping ecosystems;  
(c) Food and water s ecurity: Promoting sustainable agriculture, advanced farming 
technologies, and energy -efficient water systems, thereby aiming to bolster productivity 
and resilience in these sectors ; 
(d) Urban environment and d ata systems: Developing sustainable urban infrastructure and 
climate information systems to enhance disaster preparedness and mitigate barriers 
like inadequate waste treatment.  
10. Investments in the above verticals will be screened for (i) meaningful climate mitigation 
and adaptation impact outcomes within the relevant sector ; and (ii) potential to achieve 
technology transfer , with at least 80  per cent  of investees having concrete plans to export their 
technologies outside  their countries . 
11. Prosperete is currently engaged in a fundraising process.  
1.2 Impact potential                                           Medium  
12. Prosperete is projected to achieve impactful outcomes in both climate  change  mitigation 
and adaptation. Over its 10 -year program me lifespan, the fund estimates it will avoid 9.2 million 
metric ton nes of carbon dioxide  (CO₂) equivalent in emissions and enhance the r esilience and 
adaptive capacity of approximately 3.2 million people in emerging markets by reducing climate 
vulnerabilities.  
13. The iTAP acknowledges the inherent complexities in accurately forecasting greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emission reductions and adaptation benefits from investment funds. These 
projections depend on multiple variables, including the final fund size, portfolio composition, 
and the ability of investee companies to achieve scalability and commercial success. 
Nevertheless, iTAP  have some reservations regarding the methodology used to calculate 
emission reductions, as it appears to lack sufficient conservatism. This raises the possibility that the projected outcomes may overstate the actual emission reduction potential. We recommend 
a review or adjustment of the assumptions and parameters to ensure more realistic and robust


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B. 43/02/Add. 29 
Page 117 
 
 
projections. For instance, the emission  reductions from the transport sector (which accounts for 
approximately 40  per cent  of projected emission reductions in this programme) appear to be 
unrealistic in our view. However, such uncertainties should not deter GCF support  since even 
discounting expected reductions by a third would amount to reasonable climate impact. 
Currently, emerging markets face a shortage of growth capital for climate- aligned technologies, 
creating an need for initiatives like PGF.  
14. Limited access to growth -stage equity significantly hampers the deployment of low -
carbon and climate -resilient technologies. Historically, funding has favoured asset -light, fast -
developing technologies, while climate solutions often require higher capital expenditures and 
longer timelines. This mismatch leads to:  
(a) Restricted scalability of climate -positive businesses ; 
(b) Limited attractiveness to commercial investors;  
(c) A fragmented climate technology ecosystem ; 
(d) High costs and reduced accessibility of solutions for vulnerable populations.  
15. PGF aims to break this cycle by providing the growth capital ( possibly across multiple 
rounds) to scale climate -focused enterprises, reduce costs through economies of scale, and 
make these solutions more accessible to underserved communities.  
16. In many emerging markets, early -stage funding is available through sector -agnostic 
funds, but growth- stage capital remains scarce. Entrepreneurs often lack access to the networks 
and resources necessary for scaling. PGF bridges this gap by providing late -venture and early -
growth equity, enabling businesses to attract institutional capital and expand their impact.  
17. The iTAP notes that the potential impact of this funding proposal depends heavily on the 
fund manager ’s ability to originate high quality investment opportunities, assess those same 
opportunities and deploy  capital promptly into portfolio companies that can achieve the 
targeted outcomes. The iTAP has a positive view of the PGF management team’s ability to 
implement the fund successfully.  Prosperete IM is a first -time manager but its strong individual 
track record, robust pipeline, and effective fundraising efforts suggest they are well- positioned 
to deploy capital into high -potential businesses, achieve impact objectives, and secure necessary 
co-financing.  
18. PGF plans to allocate 30  per cent  of its investments to adaptation -focused solutions, 
targeting an estimated three  million direct and indirect beneficiaries. Investments are selected 
based on their potential to serve vulnerable and underserved populations. Examples include  
solar -powered water pumps for agricultural resilience, modular wastewater treatment systems 
addressing water scarcity, and affordable electric vehicles for income generation. These 
solutions aim to enhance climate resilience while generat ing economic benefits for target 
communities.  
19. On the topic of climate impact potential, iTAP notes that, according to decision B.33/12, 
paragraph (c), resources will be allocated based on  the ability of a proposed activity to 
demonstrate its climate impact potential. In annex VI to the same decision, the Board defines 
four principles for demonstrating adaptation impact potential and five principles for 
demonstrating the mitigation impact potential of GCF -supported activities. It is iTAP’s  view that 
Prosperete adheres to the GCF’s principles for demonst rating climate impact potential, 
including the identification of climate risks, alignment with national policies, and the 
establishment of monitoring systems. While specific pipeline investments are in early diligence, 
the proposed framework for evaluating  and monitoring investments aligns with GCF standards.  
20. For instance, many in emerging markets aspire to acquire income -generating assets, 
such as electric vehicles, but are often hindered by high upfront costs and limited access to 
affordable financing. Prosperete’s pipeline includes initiatives such as agricu ltural resilience


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B. 43/02/Add. 29 
Page 118 
 
 
program mes, solar -powered water pumps, and modular wastewater treatment plants designed 
to promote water conservation, which are critical in regions facing water stress under projected 
climate scenarios. By facilitating these solutions, Prosperete seeks to boost incomes for these 
populations while achieving significant mitigation outcomes.  
21. The principles for demonstrating adaptation impact potential in GCF proposals include 
identifying current and future climate risks; explaining how the proposed activities address 
these risks; aligning the activities with national climate policies and strat egies; and outlining a 
monitoring and evaluation system to assess adaptation outcomes. The iTAP acknowledges that it is currently not possible to fully assess the climate adaptation potential of each specific 
investment in the pipeline, as these are still in early -stage  diligence . However, the funding 
proposal presents a minimally adequate process to secure these principles in the future. This 
includes a general method to identify climate risks, link them to the appropriateness of the 
proposed investments and establish monitoring requirements for assessing adaptation outputs 
and outcomes.  
22. The iTAP  also view s favourably the inclusion of a nominated climate expert on the 
Investment Committee. While it remains unclear whether this climate expert will have veto power over investments on climate grounds (which iTAP would prefer), their inclusion in the 
investment decision -making process is welcome.  
23. PGF emphasizes cross- market expansion to scale climate technologies, reducing costs 
and accelerating adoption through larger customer bases and economies of scale. By breaking 
down market barriers, Prosperete  aims to amplify the global impact of its investments and 
foster a more integrated climate technology ecosystem.  
24. By demonstrating success, PGF could establish a replicable model for other fund 
providers, particularly those based in emerging markets. Local investors are better equipped to manage country- specific and currency risks, paving the way for more sustainable and impactful 
investment ecosystems.  
25. PGF’s focus on scaling solutions such as electric vehicle infrastructure, renewable 
energy technologies, and sustainable building materials positions it as a potential catalyst for transformative climate action. Its efforts to lower costs and improve acces s to these 
technologies, particularly for underserved populations, are expected to deliver significant 
mitigation and adaptation outcomes.  
26. The iTAP assesses the impact potential of Prosperete as medium, with good prospects 
for improving climate  technology adoption across the targeted emerging markets.  
1.3 Paradigm shift potential                                      Medium  to high       
27. At the heart of a paradigm shift lies the belief that emerging markets can achieve 
economic growth that is aligned with a low -carbon, more resilient future. PGF is designed to 
scale and transfer climate technology solutions that facilitate this vision. Pro sperete’s 
investment thesis centres on identifying the most effective solutions across emerging markets and expanding them to other countries, maximizing mitigation and adaptation impacts.  
28. Unlike traditional public technology transfer program mes, which often fail to leverage 
market dynamics and are burdened by inefficiencies and missed opportunities, PGF employs a 
commercial strategy to drive meaningful outcomes. Prosperete IM collaborates closely with 
institutional investors, as it understands the scale, quality, and growth potential these investors 
seek. Currently, few companies offering climate solutions have reached the scale needed to 
attract significant private and institutional capital . By building a robust portfolio, Prosperete can 
serve as a pipeline for large funds, creating exit opportunities for its investments and enabling 
further growth in the sector.


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/B. 43/02/Add. 29 
Page 119 
 
 
29. A commercial fund approach offers the best mechanism to support effective 
technologies, making climate solutions more affordable and accessible. The need to generate 
competitive returns aligns the fund manager’s interests with selecting and nurturing compa nies 
that have a realistic path to scalability and growth, thus driving substantial climate impacts. 
Moreover, the commercial structure is inherently better equipped to attract private capital and , 
if successful, could encourage replication, scaling and an  expansion of funding sources for 
climate technology solutions.  
30. The iTAP highlights that growth -stage companies often face significant challenges in 
securing affordable capital. According to the PGF funding proposal, between 2017 and 2022, 
developed market investors raised  USD 270 billion for the energy transition, but only USD 
50 billion (18  per cent ) was allocated to growth -stage capital. This gap is even more 
pronounced in emerging markets, where limited capital flows are compounded by higher 
perceived risks and the novelty of climate -focused investments. Growth -stag e investments also 
require larger ticket sizes to scale operations and demonstrate a path to profitability. This 
funding scarcity hampers the expansion of climate solutions and limits choices to incumbent 
technologies  that are often reliant on fossil fuels and burdened with high societal costs.  
31. However, if growth -stage companies aligned with climate goals gain access to sufficient 
capital, there is improved potential to shift growth paradigms toward s cleaner, more 
sustainable models. While not guaranteed, the availability of growth capital increases the 
likelihood of success for climate solutions and creates opportunities for later -stage investments 
by commercial investors. Such investments can accele rate the adoption of climate technologies, 
reduce supply chain emissions, and support the greening  of economies. 
32. Based on our assessment, we are reasonably satisfied that the Prosperete team can 
establish an integrated platform to identify and scale solutions across emerging markets 
through technology transfer. This approach has the potential to create impacts, reduce costs, 
and improve affordability, fosteri ng a virtuous cycle of climate innovation and adoption.  
33. Funding alone is not sufficient to overcome the barriers to scaling climate companies. A 
successful paradigm shift requires more than investments; it necessitates hands- on support for 
portfolio companies. This includes providing access to strategic network s, guidance, and 
assistance in market expansion. The Prosperete team has demonstrated a deep understanding of this need and the capacity to help growth -stage companies become successful . Notably, they 
are already working closely with potential investees to  support their expansion plans, even 
before securing the funds for investment.  
34. We commend Prosperete’s early engagement approach, which involves assisting 
companies in their pipeline with strategic support, providing direct “sweat equity ” to investees, 
and partnering with other funds.  For example, Prosperete team facilitated matchmaking 
between a climatetech entity in their pipeline and a potential customer resulting in a new joint 
venture investment . 
35. Prosperete is also trying to build partnerships with funds across key markets to 
facilitate co -investment opportunities in emerging markets. In Indonesia and Bangladesh, they 
are collaborating with debt providers and early -stage climate investors to build a robust 
investment pipeline.  In India, early -stage climate -focused funds are increasingly raising capital 
from domestic and multilateral sources. We understand that these smaller funds see Prosperete 
as a potential partner to help their portfolio companie s secure growth capital, enabling scale 
and providing successful exits.  
36. The emphasis on supporting and co -investing with other funds and development 
institutions is another positive point of the funding proposal. Such partnerships enable better 
underwriting of transactions and foster sector -specific expertise in areas like electric mobility, 
green supply chains, energy transition, and data analytics for infrastructure. Recognizing the 
hesitancy of commercial investors to engage in emerging markets due to perceived challenges  –


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/B. 43/02/Add. 29 
Page 120 
 
 
such as limited scale and small ticket sizes – Prosperete seeks to leverage GCF’s junior capital, 
sectoral expertise, and strategic focus on target countries to address these barriers. By 
demonstrating the scalability and financial viability of green technologies, Prosperete aims to 
attract broader investor participation and establish a self -sustaining investment ecosystem.  
37. The iTAP believes that successful climate companies can catalyse  broader climate action 
by serving as examples of the economic viability of sustainable practices. This would enhance 
the availability of climate solutions, reduc e GHG e missions, and improve resilience to climate 
change. A successful Prosperete fund could also inspire other investors to enter the market, increasing the flow of climate finance into emerging markets. With its technical expertise and 
established network of g rowth and late -stage in vestors, Prosperete appears well- positioned to 
support such enterprises. Additionally, GCF funding provides critical de -risking for commercial 
investors.  
38. We assess the paradigm shift potential of PGF as medium  to high.  
1.4 Sustainable development potential                          Medium  to high                    
39. The PGF proposal  aims to contribute to the achievement of Sustainable Development 
Goals  6, 7, 8, 9 and 13 by investing in water -use efficiency, clean energy, climate- resilient 
infrastructure and other low -carbon solutions. It aims to scale  small and medium -sized 
enterprises  from emerging markets into global enterprises, fostering economic growth.  
40. Economic co-benefits: Prosperete is anticipated to significantly contribute to economic 
development and sustainable growth in participating countries by enabling companies to scale 
operations and expand into export markets. The p rogramme will drive business development, 
foster job creation, and attract talent to climate -focused enterprises. Furthermore, its success 
could help de -risk the climate sector, inspiring larger institutional capital investments in local 
companies.  
41. Environmental co-benefits: Prosperete adheres to  International Finance Corporation  
Performance Standards for due diligence and monitoring. All portfolio companies are required 
to track emissions, develop impact action plans, and adhere to  environmental, social and 
governance  standards. These measures are expected to yield extensive environmental benefits, 
including the sustainable and efficient use of land, air and water resources, leading to enhanced 
biodiversity and improved soil, air and water quality.  
42. Social co-benefits: Investments in Prosperete’s portfolio companies will bolster income 
resilience for vulnerable populations most affected by climate change. These investments will 
also promote inclusive access to sustainable goods and services. Prosperete evaluates  portfolio 
companies on critical social aspects such as workers’  rights, gender equality, and workplace 
safety. By enhancing the affordability and accessibility of solutions like low -carbon green 
transportation, Prosperete supports livelihoods and resilience for underserved communities at 
the base of the economic pyramid.  
43. The s ustainable development potential is  assessed as medium  to high.  
1.5 Needs of the recipient                                         Medium  to high       
44. The climate vulnerability of Bangladesh, India, Indonesia and Mauritius underscores the 
urgent need for adopting climate solutions from businesses specializing in technologies that 
deliver both mitigation and adaptation benefits.  
45. Technology and innovation are critical enablers for transitioning target countries 
toward s a net -zero economy and a climate- resilient future. However, growth -stage climate 
technologies often struggle to advance due to insufficient access to private capital. Climate -


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/B. 43/02/Add. 29 
Page 121 
 
 
focused financing can bridge this gap by mobilizing private investment and integrating climate 
technologies into mainstream markets. Prosperete’s participation in this initiative is expected to 
enhance credibility and attract a diverse range of funding sou rces, including venture capital, 
debt, grants and outcome -based financing. This approach is designed to address the shortage of 
patient, risk -tolerant capital essential for scaling innovative climate solutions.  
46. The funding proposal provides tangible examples of how the target countries could 
benefit from  the accelerated adoption of climate technologies. For example, clean drinking 
water and adequate sanitation remain critical challenges for large populations. Investments in decentralized wastewater treatment technologies and water purification systems can add ress 
these urgent needs while minimizing associated carbon footprints.  
47. Agriculture presents another vital area for investment, particularly in countries like 
Bangladesh, where wheat cultivation faces medium  to high drought risks. Climate -smart 
solutions, such as predictive analytics for weather , soil health and drought -resistant crop 
varieties, can bolster food security. Additionally, solar -powered water pumps offer a sustainable 
irrigation alternative, reducing reliance on erratic rainfall patterns.  
48. Furthermore, the adoption and transfer of climate technologies are explicit priorities 
outlined in the n ationally determined contributions (NDCs) of these countries. However, 
financing remains a critical barrier to achieving these goals. Funds like PGF could play a role in 
bridging the green financing gap by providing direct investments and facilitating access to complementary capital sources, such as partner -provided debt products.  
49. One area of concern is that the funding proponents have not been able to obtain all the 
required no -objection letters  (NOLs ) (see section 1.6 on country ownership  below). This implies 
a risk that PGF fails to obtains NOLs from countries, such as Bangladesh, that constitute a large 
part of their ‘ needs of recipient s’ argument. In th is context , we assess the ‘needs of  recipients’  as 
medium–high.  
1.6 Country ownership                                                      Medium    
50. The Prosperete funding proposal aligns closely with the NDCs of Bangladesh,  India,  
Indonesia and Mauritius.  
51. The iTAP notes that the funding proposal was developed after extensive stakeholder 
engagement by the Prosperete team, which included consultations with the governments of 
target countries as well as industry participants such as incubation centres , accelerators and 
venture capitalists. The PGF has received NOLs from the national designated authorities of India 
and Mauritius, and Prosperete continues to engage with the remaining target countries to 
secure the necessary NOLs.  
52. Our review highlights that the Prosperete team possesses considerable experience in 
the target countries and maintains strong relationships with key minist ry-level officials, 
regulators, and private sector stakeholders. The team is actively engaged with the target governments on multiple fronts, including participation in policy working groups focused on climate and blended finance.  
53. The iTAP also  recognize s the Prosperete team’s engagement with a wide range of 
potential financial partners in the target countries, including incubators, venture funds, local 
development  banks  and commercial banks. Feedback from these partners appears positive and 
reflects a good level of collaboration. For instance, Prosperete is exploring a potential partnership with Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) , a GCF -accredited 
entity in Bangladesh, to support pipeline development and provide loca l expertise for 
companies looking to expand into other emerging markets.


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B. 43/02/Add. 29 
Page 122 
 
 
54. Mauritius stands out as an example of country ownership. Prosperete has established 
both the fund and the investment management entity in Mauritius, where they are regulated by 
the Financial Services Commission of Mauritius.  
55. The Prosperete team is also in discussions with officials in Nigeria and South Africa as 
potential future expansion markets for investment and technology transfer opportunities.  
56. Despite these positive s, iTAP acknowledge s that two NOLs remain pending. However, 
iTAP  does not interpret this delay as indicative of any negative views or misalignment of PGF 
with the respective countries’  goals. Instead, it reflects a broader trend of slow or unresponsive 
NOL processes, which then leads to delays in the GCF process. This issue is particularly acute for 
programmatic private sector proposals and could benefit from reform. This systemic challenge has been factored into our evaluation of coun try ownership.  
57. On a less optimistic note, we observe that most of the PGF’s fundraising efforts are 
focused on international development finance institutions and non- emerging market 
institutional investors. There appears to be limited direct investment interest from publ ic or 
private sources within the target countries.  
58. Based on these observations, we assess country ownership of the funding proposal as 
medium.  
1.7 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                Medium  to high 
59. Prosperete proposes a GCF investment of USD 50 million in a junior equity tranche, 
aiming to catalyse additional private sector and development fund capital. The total targeted 
fund size of USD 220 million would result in a co -financing ratio of 1:3.4 for the GCF 
contribution.  
60. The PGF structure is thoughtfully designed and aligns well with fund models previously 
supported by GCF. A common risk of concessional funding for private sector funds is that it may 
unintentionally signal a lack of commercial viability, deterring investor s by implying high risk or 
an overly charitable approach. PGF addresses this concern effectively by balancing the benefits 
of concessional first -loss capital with a structured risk -sharing mechanism. For instance, the 
PGF distribution waterfall ensures tha t GCF recovers its initial investment before any party gets 
above initial investment. Additionally, the fund includes safeguards such as concentration limits 
on GCF contributions and mechanisms to prevent GCF funds from subsidizing risks for  other 
development partners. This approach demonstrates a sound balance between mobilizing investment and maintaining commercial credibility.  
61. During our assessment, we explored whether Prosperete’s request for junior equity 
differed sufficiently from other GCF -supported funds in the region that utilized pari passu  
equity. We were satisfied that the unique characteristics of growth -stage climate funds  – larger 
ticket sizes, fewer investments, longer return timelines  – justify the need for junior equity. 
Unlike venture funds focused on early -stage companies, Prosperete targets companies with 
established product -market fit requiring  substantial grow th capital.  
62. Notably, the PGF structure allows GCF investment funds to shift from junior -to-senior 
equity if Prosperete secures junior capital from other sources. While this is preferable to over -
capitalizing the junior equity tranche, it raises the question of whether a reduced GCF 
commitment might better serve its objectives if other funders ex press strong interest in 
participating in the junior equity. We would suggest that the GCF Secretariat consider this alternative going forward considering the many other funding  proposals that could benefit from 
freed up GCF funding.


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/B. 43/02/Add. 29 
Page 123 
 
 
63. Overall, iTAP agrees that by offering first -loss junior equity here, GCF’s investment can 
be expected to catalyse interest from commercial investors. Additionally, GCF’s imprimatur is 
likely to facilitate fundraising by enhancing Prosperete’ s credibility.  
64. Prosperete’s fees, hurdle rates, and incentives are well- aligned with the goal of achieving 
positive commercial outcomes. PGF’s focus on commercial returns ensures strong product -
market fit, sound pricing, and disciplined credit policies to scale impactful businesse s and 
generate competitive returns. Without this commercial north star , PGF risks devolving into a 
low-impact grant facility. Instead, PGF offers an opportunity to build a track record that could 
attract replication by other impact investors and scaling into new rounds and geographies . 
65. A commendable feature of this proposal is the General Partner equity contribution from 
Prosperete IM team members. This is standard and good practice in private equity funds and 
other similar vehicles but so often missing from GCF proposals. It is a signal to the market that 
this team is interested in generating investment and impact outcomes instead of primarily being 
focused on fundraising from the GCF.  
66. A weaker area is the limited interest from local investors in PGF. Mobilizing domestic 
funds is critical for addressing climate challenges sustainably, as over -reliance on foreign 
currency -denominated investments for a climate transition is a fool’s errand.  
67. Prosperete has engaged local institutional investors and family offices in emerging 
markets but reports limited interest due to the perceived nascency of climate investments and 
concerns about commercial viability. For instance, PGF reported back that “Since there are very 
few successful investors that exist in the climate investment space (given the nascency of the 
sector), local investors who are focused on returns are currently not inclined to write big 
cheques to wards climate and believe such investment  is non -commercial in nature.”  
68. However, we recognize Prosperete’s intention to attract domestic capital through initial 
successes and scaling. Prosperete’s success in scaling, potentially evidenced by a few successful 
exits, should contribute to crowding in local currency investors over time.  
69. While local investment interest at the fund level remains low, PGF has strong potential 
to mobilize local financing at the investee company level as a lead investor. As seen in India’s 
renewable energy sector, initial global investments by development finance institution s 
catalysed  domestic debt and equity interest over time. As strong returns become evident, 
domestic equity capital has shown increasing interest in such assets. Prosperete is actively 
collaborating with these institutions, and its ability to  demonstrate robust returns is expected to 
attract even greater domestic investment into the sector. Prosperete anticipates that while it 
took a decade to mobilize large -scale capital for renewable energy, the timeline for scaling 
emerging climate solutions – supported by Prosperete’s growth capital – will likely be shorter, 
estimated at four to five  years.  
70. The proposal includes plans for expansion into Nigeria and South Africa.  These markets 
strike iTAP  as natural opportunities for technology transfer and deployment of climate -friendly 
solutions sourced from other emerging markets.  
71. The iTAP raised concerns of whether Prosperete may need to enhance its team for 
specific experience in target countries.  A fundamental rationale for supporting emerging market 
fund managers is their presumed proximity to and understanding of the local legal, economic 
and cultural dynamics within target investment countries. This local familiarity is expected to 
enhance their  capacity to originate, evaluate and manage investments effectively. However, 
emerging markets are not homogen eous ; the expertise gaine d in India does not necessarily 
translate into a deep understanding of markets like Bangladesh,  Indonesia or the planned  
expansion onto the African  continent . 
72. Prosperete IM has indicated that they have engaged advisors with local expertise to 
address the staffing gap . While these measures are promising, we recommend that the GCF


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/B. 43/02/Add. 29 
Page 124 
 
 
Secretariat closely monitor the implementation of these plans to ensure that Prosperete IM 
establishes the necessary on- ground p resence to navigate the diverse realities of the target 
markets effectively.  
73. The funding proposal requests an  AE fee of XX per cent . In principle , iTAP  applaud s the 
trend (at least in Private Sector Facility  (PSF)  proposals) toward s AE fees  being  more intricately 
linked  to reasonable costs. In this instance, the fee would be the lowest for equity investments 
by GCF, which aligns with the PSAA nature of the proposal. In other words there is no third -
party AE acting as a pass -through f or GCF funds , and much of the fund operations can be 
supported for typical fund management fees. However, when  the iTAP  reviewed a breakdown of 
the activities specifically covered by t he AE fee, there seemed to be room for further alignment.  
74. The funding proposal projects a  GHG reduction cost of USD 23.65 per t onne of CO 2 
equivalent , which aligns with benchmarks for impactful climate finance.  
75. Submitted under the PSAA framework, the proposal exemplifies the efficiency and 
effectiveness of this approach for PSF  projects. The iTAP strongly encourages the GCF 
Secretariat to continue leveraging this approach to support PSF projects, particularly fund 
models. One of the significant challenges private sector proponents face at GCF is navigating the 
accreditation process, which often appears designed to hinder timely private sector 
participation. There is valid concern that req uiring private sector fund s to spend years in the 
accreditation process can lead to adverse selection. In other words, a fund capable of enduring the lengthy accreditation process or waiting years to secure a channel partner is not  well -
positioned to mobilize institutional investors effectively.  
76. By leveraging the PSAA model, GCF can align its processes with private sector timelines, 
preventing investment pipeline deterioration and outdated investment theses while retaining 
co-investor interest.  
77. The iTAP believes that this project has the potential to generate climate impacts by 
channelling  resources toward s growth -stage climate ventures. T he iTAP  assesses  the funding 
proposal’s efficiency and effectiveness as medium– high . 
II. Overall  remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
78. The iTAP recommends the following to the AE and the GCF Secretariat :   
(a) Prosperete IM should improve its  ability to originate pipelines  in all the target countries 
by establishing  on-the-ground presence to navigate the diverse realities of the target 
markets effectively .  
79. The iTAP recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal.


---
*Page 125*
---

  
       GCF/B. 43/02/Add.29 
Page 125 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessme nt (FP 264 ) 
Proposal name:  Prosperete Growth Fund  
Accredited entity:  Prosperete Investment Management Ltd (project -specific 
assessment approach)  
Country/(ies):  Bangladesh, India, Mauritius  
Project/Programme size:  Medium  
 
Impact potential  
We acknowledge the ITAP assessment of the Proposal as Medium. We agree with the ITAP 
view that measuring climate impact is inherently complex and availability of appropriate 
methodologies needs to be examined closely. Prosperete will measure climate impact  from 
the projects through rigorous assessment and application of internationally accepted 
methodologies. Investments with positive climate impact will be taken up by the Fund.  
Paradigm shift potential  
We agree that paradigm shift requires a multi -pronged approach beyond financing. 
Therefore, as ITAP has noted we are working on various facets including early engagement, 
working through partners across the globe and enabling policy environment. The Prosperete 
Team has demonstrated experience of working with companies beyond financing through a 
multi -pronged approach. We firmly believe, filling in the growth capital gap will have a large 
scale impact on mobilizing more climate finance for emerging markets.  
Sustainable development potential  
We agree that sustainable development is a key criteria for assessment of investment 
opportunities. We evaluate this in proposed investments and identify key monitorable items 
for economic and environment co -benefits. We also propose to work with other agencies to 
enhance outreach to vulnerable sections of society.  
Needs of the recipient  
We thank the iTAP for its suggestion. In May 2025, Prosperete received an endorsement and  
the requisite NOL from the NDA of Bangladesh. This was done after extensive engagement 
and stakeholder consultations, including several rounds of inter -ministerial consultations. 
Prosperete now has NOLs from 3 countries, in line with iTAP’s recommendation, an d 
continues to work on receiving more NOLs. As noted, we will also enhance the reach to other 
emerging markets through technology transfer.  
Country ownership  
As noted above , Prosperete  has NOLs from Government of Bangladesh, Government of India, 
Government of Mauritius. These countries have strongly endorsed Prosperete Growth Fund 
and its interventions. We are working with domestic institutions who have expressed interest 
in joining GCF funding to enhance climate solutions in these countries. Also,  we are working


---
*Page 126*
---

  
       GCF/B. 43/02/Add.29 
Page 126 
 
 
 with local financiers to provide additional financing to companies that Prosperete invests in. 
We will continue to have stakeholder consultations to make sure that activities of Prosperete 
align well with the respective countries’  priorities.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
We recognize that for climate projects to be effective, one needs to be efficient. We are 
designing the program to deliver high climate outcomes per dollar invested. We are also 
working on mobilizing financing from multiple pools of capital. In addition, w e will also see 
that companies that Prosperete invests in, create efficient and affordable solutions that enhance development needs for the countries.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
We note the recommendation from ITAP. Given the urgency of providing adequate climate solutions and  enable greater private capital mobilization timing is quite critical. Prosperete 
has strong endorsement  and NOL  from Bangladesh, Mauritius and India. All the governments 
have identified the need for growth funding for climate companies and Prosperete is well 
placed to provide this.  
Prosperete is working with partner funds and institutions to begin with and is already seeing a lot of opportunities in all its focus markets. Prosperete has already identified several key 
professionals to bolster its local presence in target countries. Prosperete will add such 
requisite team members as it builds its portfolio.


---
*Page 127*
---

1 
Prosperete Growth Fund: Gender Assessment 
Part I: Background and Introduction  
Prosperete is setting up a USD 220mn growth equity fund to promote SMEs focused on climate mitigation and 
adaptation by leveraging technology to provide solutions at scale. Unlike developed countries, emerging markets are not able to mobilize the funding required to scale climate solutions with the required urgency.  
Prosperete will create positive outcomes by investing in and scaling mitigation and adaptation solutions that use technologies that have achieved product market fit. The Fund will also invest in transitioning companies that have 
existing businesses and are looking to transition to greening  their operations and reducing their carbon footprint, but 
face constraints in pivoting and scaling such solutions. The constraints include high risk perception towards relatively newer businesses, limited availability of capital, lack of understanding of global markets. These legacy businesses can utilise their expertise across different markets, complex supply chains, and customer understanding for efficient 
deployment of climate solutions.  
Prosperete will promote gender equality and inclusion in the targeted countries and sectors by building the first 
women -led, growth stage climate focused fund that promotes transfer of technology across the global south and 
partnerships  with funds across its target countries.  Prosperete will work with its pipeline companies to increase 
female workforce participation across their organizations, including in senior leadership. Prosperete will also enable 
increased access to venture capital financing for wome n-owned/ women -led startups.   These measures would include 
financially sustainable scale -up of investee companies, responsible capitalization and strong governance.  
Prosperete’s indicative focus areas are (i) low emission transport, (ii) energy access and power generation, (iii) cities, 
buildings  and urban systems, (iv) climate information and early warning systems, (v) energy efficiency, (vi) water 
security, and (vii) agriculture and food security. Prosperete will invest across emerging markets with a focus on its 
target countries of India, Bangladesh and Mauritius . 
Prosperete has carried out a Gender Assessment  in respect of : 
1. The m acro  level  gender  context  for each target country
2. Gender  linked  vulnerabilities  with  respect  to climate  change  in each country
3. The gender context in Prosperete’s focus areas, in each target country, including the start- up ecosystem
more generally
1.In order to arrive at a comprehensive gender assessment to understand the roles, rights, needs, and opportunities of
women and men across target countries and focus areas, the team undertook desktop research, obtained feedback
from stakeholder consultation s and collated learnings  from the experiences of its senior leadership. The Prosperete
team brings several years of having worked on Infrastructure and Clean technology projects across the targetcountries with specific expertise and advocacy for gender diversity and inclusiven ess.Gender documentation for FP264


---
*Page 128*
---

2
 
Based on the assessment, Prosperete has created a Fund level Gender Action Plan (GAP) . Prosperete’s GAP sets out 
specific actions to be implemented at the Fund level and at portfolio c ompany level by Prosperete (acting as the fund 
manager) during the fund’s life .  
P
art II: Gender Assessment 
A.C
ountry Contexts
The OECD Development Centre’s Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) is a cross- country measure of 
discrimination against women in social institutions (formal and informal laws, social norms, and practices) across 180 
countries. The SIGI covers four dimensions of discriminatory social institutions, spanning major socio -economic areas 
that affect women’s lives:  (i) Discrimination in the family, (ii) Restricted physical integrity, (iii) Restricted access to 
productive and financial resources , and (iv) Restricted civil liberties.  
The SIGI’s variables quantify discriminatory social institutions such as unequal inheritance rights, child marriage, violence against women, and unequal land and property rights.  
As highlighted below, the countries that the Prosperete Growth Fund intends to invest in are ranked between 43 and 
50 on the SIGI , where a “0” score indicates no discrimination and “100” denotes absolute discrimination . In these 
countries, in general, labour force participation rate is significantly lower for women than for men. Prevalent 
discriminatory social norms, which limit women to conventional roles, stand as one of the primary reasons for this disparity. Moreover, biased perceptions regarding women's capabilities and discriminatory educational practices hinder their access to quality employment opportunities and confine them to specific sectors of the economy. Biases 
concerning the abilities of boys and girls influence educational decisions, particularly regarding fields such as science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), thereby reinforcing gender -based segregation within the 
workforce. Additionally, discriminatory social norms and biases related to women's access to markets, finance, training, and networks impede their entrepreneurial endeavors in these countries.  
Country  SIGI 2023  Discrimination in 
the Family  Restricted 
Physical 
Integrity  Restricted 
Access to 
Productive & 
Financial 
Resources  Restricted Civil 
Liberties  
India  43 60.1  51.2  41.2  13.8  
Mauritius  n/a 47.0  n/a 6.0 35.0  
Bangladesh  49.3  81.9  27.4  42.5  36.1  
P
rosperete will apply an intersectionality lens to identify different groups of women and men facing intersecting 
vulnerabilities at country level and particularly in the areas relevant to the Prosperete’s investment program.  
Prosperete’s intersectional gender lens will focus on both direct and indirect gender impacts of any


---
*Page 129*
---

 
3 
 
intervention/solution. Direct impacts  are those that have a direct and immediate effect on the status and position of 
women  and other vulnerable groups . Usually , a direct impact occurs when the intervention affects people’s access to 
resources (e.g. grants, loans, jobs) and/or people’s participation in areas of decision -making (e.g. rules for the 
composition of committees, etc.). Direct impacts include employment for women and other vulnerable groups and/or 
increased or more stable income, where such persons are the intended consumers of a technology  or service. Indirect 
impacts are when the planned intervention affects the means of provision of certain resources or services (e.g. 
procedu re to qualify companies, regulation of environmental quality management of certain activities and facilities, 
incentives for certain projects, etc.), behind which there are people (e.g. managers, workers, users, etc.) as the ultimate beneficiaries. In other words, e ven though the policy is not directly targeted at them, they can be affected by it. This 
could include interventions that would have a positive outcome on women’s lives including, access to clean energy, 
safer transportation , access to safe drinking water, green buildings etc .
1 
 
The expected impact on women and vulnerable groups through the fund’s activities will include the following:  
1) Empowerment of vulnerable groups and gender  through enhanced livelihoods and job opportunities and 
minorities in each of the sectors covered by Prosperete.   
2) Greater opportunities for women led businesses and enhanced job opportunities in Prosperete’s pipeline and 
portfolio companies  
3) Increase d awareness, knowledge sharing opportunities across genders and groups  in the field of climate tech 
across emerging markets to bring more gender parity in the sectors covered by Prosperete  
4) Greater gender integrated product design, distribution and recycling starting at the design stage to end of product life stage.  
5) Encourage pipeline and portfolio companies to have diversified workforce  and improve access to low carbon 
technologies for women through gender integrated product design and distribution.  
6) Reduce historical gender disparity in skills development across sectors such as energy transition, electrification of 
mobility, resource optimization , green buildings and new materials technologies; battery technology; electrical and 
mechanical engineering, among others. All of these areas generally have low participation of women.  
Prosperete will take into account  country specific sociocultural gender barriers related to the sector and these will 
be taken into account in the design of the specific Gender Action Plans being developed for its investee companies.  
Prosperete will also consider potential sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) risks that may be relevant to a particular country or company and include relevant SEAH measures in the Gender Action Plan prepared for invest ee companies.  
Prosperete will also strengthen the activities by including those that support transformative gender norms as well as 
sector specific gender equality milestones.  
 
1 https://georgia.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2022 -11/Gender%20impact.pdf


---
*Page 130*
---

 
4 
 
Prosperete has consulted with multiple stakeholders in preparing its Gender Assessment and Gender Action plan. 
Below are excerpts from a few of such consultations  
Stakeholder  & 
Country  Feedback  Action Items  
WinPE A Leading network to 
promote gender diversity in PE 
industry  
Country: India  • Female participation in PE Industry 
is poor at below 20%  
• Females face multiple challenges –  
i) not enough guidance; ii) not 
enough clarity about career path in 
the PE Industry; iii) need to 
increase funnel at entry level  
• PE funds are willing to take female 
professionals  
 • Prosperete as a team is mentoring 
4 industry female professionals  
• Prosperete working with WinPE in 
creating more awareness with PE 
players to enhance gender 
diversity  
• Prosperete team will assist WinPE 
in getting more female students 
attracted towards PE Industry  
 
SEWA is a leading self help group 
for females in rural areas.  
 
Country: India; Bangladesh  
 • Females in rural areas looking for 
better education solution  
• As regards enhancing income 
participation - females have a 
particular issue with irrigation of 
their farms. Access to cheap and 
mobile irrigation solution is critical  
• Females need access to better income earning avenues where 
they could leverage existing 
network and provide better solutions for each other  
• Access to better financial solutions 
is critical  
 • Prosperete helped identify a 
Swedish solution that is mobile, quite efficient and helps in easy 
irrigation of fields  
• Prosperete team working with 
SEWA team to create referral 
income for females who help buy 
others. Now a selling agent program is being developed  
• Prosperete working with SEWA to 
create a financing solution wherein females can get loans for 
financing their capex needs (e.g. 
for this solar pump solution)  
 
Talentnomics an organization to 
help promote gender diversity in 
legal industry  
 
Country: India; Bangladesh  • need to increase the number of 
women in leadership roles; 
eliminate the gender gap in 
leadership and pay.  • Prosperete will help Investee 
companies design programmes to 
ensure women are supported and 
trained to take on leadership roles.  
Frontier Fund Bangladesh, first PE 
fund in Bangladesh  
 
Country: Bangladesh  • Gender diversity is critical to 
achieve better impact from 
investee companies  
• Several opportunities in the 
cleantech sector to improve the 
participation of women and vulnerable persons  • Prosperete will work with Investee 
companies to increase the participation of a gender- diverse 
work force together with providing them opportunities for skilling and growth  
 
Set out b elow is the Gender Assessment by country that has already been undertaken by Prosperete based on publicly 
available sources of information, hands -on experience of Prosperete’s team, inputs from consultation (as above) with 
Prosperete partners that are focused on empowering women and entities in each country focused on issues specific


---
*Page 131*
---

 
5 
 
to a particular country.  
 
1. India  
The socio -economic  status  of women  in India  has been  a subject  of considerable  concern  and scrutiny over  the years.  
While  progress  has been  made  in several areas,  disparities  and challenges  continue  to persist , in major part due to 
the ways in which social identities , economic status, caste and other disparities interact  to create unique experiences 
of discrimination  and oppression . Status of women, compared against the global averages, is presented below:  
• Social  Status : India is ranked 127 out of 146 countries in the 2023 in the WEF’s Gender Gap Report 2023 , with 
India’s rank being 142/146 on the Health & Survival sub -index . World Bank data from 2021 shows that the 
sex ratio at birth was 1.08 male births to female births. These indicators show a continuing social bias against 
girls and women in India.  
Gender inequality in India is a complex issue. Despite the constitutional guarantee of equal rights for both 
genders, disparities persist across various aspects of life and society. There is pervasive gender discrimination, 
often favoring men, both (i) within families and homes, which are often patriarchal with family members 
holding conventional notions of a woman’s role  and their ability to work outside the house and pursue careers 
while fulfilling their obligations at home, and (ii) at the workplace , influencing career advancement and 
mental well -being. Although Indian laws are strong and protect women, and aim to prioritize women's safety, 
deeply entrenched discriminatory practices like rape and dowry remain prevalent . 
 
• Education: World Bank data shows adult female literacy ie., above the age of 15, to be 69 % in India in 2022 , 
while the figure is 83% for males above 15 years of age . The National Family Health Survey –  5 (2019- 2021) (NFHS -
5) showed that 41% women and 50% men had more than 10 years of schooling and only 33% women had used the 
internet while the figure was 57% for men. These indicators reveal the disparity in education and related opportunity 
between women and men in India; and the gender gap along these aspects is wide r in rural areas and among 
marginalized communities.  
 
• Healthcare and Maternal Mortality : As per the UN Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter- Agency Group 
(MMEIG) 2020 report, the maternal mortality rate in India has declined from 384 in 2000 to 103 in 2020 
whereas Global MMR has declined from 339 in 2000 to 223 in 2020. While India’s average annual rate of 
reduction of MMR during the 2000 -2020 periods was 6.36% compared to the global average of 2.07% , further 
improving access to quality healthcare and awareness among women of reproductive age and equipping 
them to have a greater say in reproductive decisions, especially in rural areas, is critical for India to make 
further progr ess towards the SDG MMR goal of 70.  
 
• Economic Participation : According to World Bank data, in India, the labor force participation rate among


---
*Page 132*
---

 
6 
 
females is 32.7% and among males is 76.8% for 2023 . While female labor force participation has increased  
since 1990, c ompared with labor force participation in the lower- middle income group, the gap between men 
and women is higher in India.  Further, while the “vulnerable employment” rate for women in India ie., 
workers that are least likely to have formal work arrangements, social protection, and safety nets to guard 
against economic shocks, has improved since 1990, it is still as high as 78% for 2022. The rate of vulnerable 
employment is higher for men and women in India compared to the average rate in South  Asia.  Tackling this 
aspect is vital to improve the socio -economic status of women in India.  
 
According to data  from  the International  Labour  Organization  (ILO),  the gender  pay gap in India was estimated 
to be around 34.5% in 2020, significantly higher than the global average of 20.2%. The WEF’s Gender Gap Report 2023 reveals that India's progress in economic participation and opportunity remains a challenge, with 
only 36.7% gender parity achieved in this domain. While individual characteristics such as education, skills or 
experience explain part of the gender pay gap, a large part of the gender pay gap can still be attributed purely 
to discrimination based on one’s gender or sex. Gender -based discriminatory pract ices include: lower wages 
paid to women for work of equal value; undervaluation of women’s work in highly feminized  occupations and 
enterprises, and motherhood pay gap —  lower wages for mothers compared to non -mothers.  
 
 As regards account ownership, World Bank Data shows that, in  2021,  an equal number of men and women 
(77.5%) had an account  at a bank or another type of financial institution or report personally using a mobile 
money service in the past 12 months.
2 Another important metric of economic empowerment is asset 
ownership and provides protection in the case of marital dissolution or abandonment. In India, only 46.5% of 
women owned a dwelling either alone or jointly in 2021, while >76% men did. Given the compelling evidence 
that ownership of property by women has positive consequences for women’s empowerment, nutritional and health outcomes, and children’s schooling, under the Prime Minister’s housing scheme (PMAY), the 
house is typically allotted jointly to husband and wife, unless the beneficiary is a single woman .  
 
• Political and Social Participation: India has universal suffrage and women in India have the right to run for 
public office. However, only 14% of legislators in India’s lower house of Parliament are women and in October 
2023, a new law was passed reserving 33% seats in Parliament for women.  The new law is expected to be 
implemented circa 2029  and is expected to increase female participation in the electoral process.   
 
In terms of decision -making, World Bank data from 2021 showed that 73.3% of currently marri ed women 
participated in making major decisions in the household including  decisions about their own healthcare, 
making major household purchases, and visits to family, relatives, friends.  However, while social participation 
 
2 https://genderdata.worldbank.org/en/economies/india


---
*Page 133*
---

 
7 
 
is high, crimes against women and adherence to gender stereotypes remain rampant.  
 
• Impact of Climate Change on Gender : Women and children are 14 times more likely to lose their lives during 
natural disasters compared to men  – in the aftermath of the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami, where  70% of the 
230,000 lives lost were women . Further, climate -induced migration and displacement can create 
opportunities for human traffickers to exploit vulnerable women and girls, subjecting them to trafficking for 
forced labor or sexual exploitation.3 Acknowledging this disparity, t he G20 Delhi Declaration  resolve d to 
accelerate climate action with gender equality at its core .  
 
Women are also primarily responsible for securing food, wate r, and fuel for the households, and therefore 
more vulnerable  to climate impacts  affecting these aspects . Data from the India Human Development Survey -
2 (IHDS), a national- level household survey on multiple development parameters, shows that women spend 
twice the amount of time (46 minutes) fetching water per day as compared to men (22 minutes).4 
In Indian agriculture  out of the 97.5 million females in the rural sector, 37.3% work as cultivators and 62.7% as 
agricultural laborers. A laborer is exposed to higher financial risks compared to a cultivator, primarily due to seasonality in employment and therefore is threatened by an irregularity in income, which is exaggerated in 
case of adverse climate conditions  such  as droughts  and floods . In addition, lower wage rates for female 
laborers compared to males, make them economically more deprived .
5 Studies have examined the magnitude 
of the impact of floods on gender -wise employment in the rural agricultural and non -agricultural sectors  found 
that flood damage creates differential impacts on employment by gender, with female agricultural workers 
more adversely affected than male workers.6 Women farmers in India often have limited access to resources 
such as land, credit, and technology, which can make it difficult for them to adapt to the impacts of climate 
change.  
Gender  Aspects of Prosperete’s Focus Areas  
India’s Start -up Ecosystem  
According to a 2023 report by WISER (Women in India’s Startup Ecosystem) Report, women -led startups have risen to 
18% in India in the past five years.7 This has come against the backdrop of strong government support to women 
entrepreneurs - The Women’s Entrepreneurship Platform (WEP) is a Government of India -backed initiative launched 
by the NITI Aayog in 2017 to promote a conducive ecosystem for women’s entrepreneurship in India. WEP serves as 
 
3 https://www.unodc.org/documents/data -and-analysis/glotip/GLOTIP_2020.pdf  
4 https://ihds.umd.edu/system/files/2020 -03/05HDinIndia.pdf  
5 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584- 018-2233- z 
6 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S2212420922001005?via%3Dihub; see also: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S221242092200694X  
7tps://ifmrlead.org/wp -content/uploads/2023/10/Women -in-India -s-Startup -Ecosystem -Report -
WISER_October_2023.pdf


---
*Page 134*
---

 
8 
 
an accelerator, helps with funding, marketing and provides mentorship.  
The WISER report highlights that startups are currently faring better than traditional enterprises, with 32% of women in 
managerial positions as against 21% in corporates. This gap widens further at the CXO level where corporates have only 5% of women in l eadership positions against 18% in startups. Additionally, startups with a woman founder have 2.5x 
women in senior roles compared to male -founded startups. However, while the overall figures are promising, significant 
work lies ahead -  10 years into their careers, 8 out of 10 men in startups occupy Director- level positions or higher, 
compared to only 5 in 10 women.  
As regards funding, the WISER report 18% of the total start -up funding in 2022 went to women- lead start -ups. Access 
to capital and funding remains a challenge due to unconscious biases, lack of gender diversity among investors and the “old boys club” / sel f-selection problem. Investors that bring not just capital but also better access to knowledge, 
resources and networks can become key enablers for women -lead start -ups to thrive. Equally, on the capital allocators 
side, increasing the representation of wom en in investment decision- making will help counter inherent gender biases.  
Specific gender aspects of Prosperete’s focus areas for investment are set out below , including specific challenges 
and opportunities that will ensure gender inclusivity . 
Energy Access & Power Generation; Energy Efficiency :  
The lack of access to energy or to clean cooking fuels particularly impacts women, limiting their work options, exposing 
them to health risks, and forcing them to forage for wood or other combustible materials.  In addition to health risks, 
a lack of clean cooking  methods  prevents many women and girls from accessing education, earning a wage or starting 
a business that would deliver financial autonomy.  While India has made concerted efforts in this regard and , in the last 
decade,  halved its population without access to clean cooking fuels, it is still home to many people without such access  
– according to a IEA Report  – A Vision for Clean Cooking Acces s for All , in 2022 approximately 448 million people  in 
India lack access in India (approx. 25% of population) .8 
As regards representation of women in the energy sector, according to the WEF’s Global Gender Gap Report , globally, 
the energy sector is one where there remains a wide gender gap, with only 1 in five senior positions in the sector being 
held by women. Women's  participation  in the sector  is limited  due to several factors,  including limited training in 
science, technology, engineering, and management, lack of suitable job opportunities  and flexibility,  safety  and security  
concerns,  and societal challenges.  For instance, women represent a mere 11 % of the workforce in India’s renewable 
energy sector, significantly lower than the global average of 32 % .9  
 
To support women in the energy sector, the Indian government has taken vari ous steps including the Women's 
Empowerment Scheme, which aims to provide skill development and training programmes aimed at women in the 
 
8https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/212dda1e -63ec -4f42-a530 -
f2ef3da74fdf/AVisionforCleanCookingAccessforAll.pdf  
9 https://energyalliance.org/gender -empowerment -in-the-renewable -energy -sector/


---
*Page 135*
---

 
9 
 
renewable energy sector. There are also various other schemes and incentives aimed at increasing women’s 
participation in the energy sector, such as a subsidy for solar home systems installed by women.10  
 
Increasing women’s participation in the energy sector presents a significant opportunity as well –  according to the 
Council for Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW), if women’s participation in the energy sector is increased by 30%, it could create up to 3.2 million additional jobs by 2025. Increased representation of women in the sector will bring 
diverse perspectives, drive innovation and a more inclusive approach to decision -making with improved outcomes for 
both industry and society.  
 
Water Security; Agriculture & Food Security :  
In India , women  play a crucial role in  water  collection,  purification,  and management - women  and girls spend  a 
collective 200  million  hours  collecting  water,  which  has a disproportionate  effect on their  everyday  lives and  pushes  
communities  towards  poverty.  In India  in 2018,  nearly  20%  of households  in urban areas  lacked  access  to drinking water  
facilities  within  the household  premises,  and almost  28% of households did not use an improved source of drinking 
water.11 Further, access to potable tap water is a  fundamental necessity  for every household for ensuring basic 
health  and hygiene.  However, despite the success of the government’s “ har ghar jal ” (water in every home) scheme, 
in rural India, a significant portion of the population still lacks this essential amenity.12 Therefore, water security is 
critical to improving women’s lives and enabling their participation in gainful employment.   
Furthermore, 50%+ districts in India will face critical water stress within two decades , and approximately 60% of 
cultivated area is dependent on rain  for irrigation and therefore influenced by the climate . According to the Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO), women make up 43% of the agricultural  labor  force  in India.  Women  are more  likely 
to be  involved  in subsistence  farming and small- scale agriculture, which makes them particularly vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change, such as changing rainfall patterns and increased temperatures. The Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) reports that women are responsible for about 60 -80% of food and nutrition -related 
activities, including seed selection, crop management, and  food  preparation.  Climate -induced  crop  failures  and 
reduced  agricultural productivity  can thus have a direct impact on women's food security and nutritional well -being.  
Given the above, access to interventions and techno logies that could help women weather climate shocks affecting 
farming and agriculture as well as enable better water management would  have a significant impact on womens’ 
lives and livelihoods.  
 
10 https://energy.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/renewable/breaking -stereotypes -women -in-energy -are-
transforming -indias -clean -energy -and-green -tech-space/100499649  
11 https://www.indiawaterportal.org/articles/gender -sensitive -water -management -cornerstone -equitable -
outcomes  
12 https://www.drishtiias.com/daily -updates/daily -news -editorials/india -water -challenges -and-har-ghar-jal-
scheme


---
*Page 136*
---

 
10 
 
Cities, Buildings & Urban Systems :  
While climate change creates a shortage of affordable housing, lack of affordable green housing exacerbates climate 
change. Those who cannot afford to live in well- insulated and energy -efficient homes tend to rely more on carbon -
intensive housing. In alone, residences emit 7% of the country’s greenhouse gas emissions and consume more than 
25% of the total electricity, making the sector the third -largest consumer of electricity.  Mitigating the environmental 
impact of housing necessitates a shift towards more  sustainable energy and water consumption practices, along with 
the utilization of eco -friendly construction materials. Implementing housing designs and construction methods tailored 
to climate -related risks can enhance resilience and contribute to mitigat ion endeavors.  However, women are 
frequently excluded from participating in policymaking and decision -making processes concerning planning, design, 
and the construction of housing. However, increasing women’s participation in infrastructure planning, manag ement 
and design can also promote green and gender sensitive policies and projects. Women bring diverse perspectives and 
ideas, which, in turn, lead to more innovative and sustainable solutions.  
Although women may trail men in terms of home ownership, they hold significant influence in climate adaptation and 
mitigation efforts through their adoption of sustainable practices within households. This includes investing in clean 
energy solutions like solar panels and environmentally -friendly cook stoves. Women often exhibit a propensity for 
sustainable consumption and demonstrate heightened sensitivity to ecological, environmental, and health -related 
issues.13 
One reason why female home ownership is lagging is that most women work in the informal sector, therefore lacking the credit history and documentation required to access finance  such as housing loans.  Traditional social norms and 
inheritance practices also affect their ability to assert an ownership right.  
Increasing women’s participation in the green buildings sector and while a ddressing the need for affordable, green 
housing is vital both to improve women’s lives and livelihoods and to improve emissions reductions outcomes . It also 
requires interventions to ensure gender -sensitive financing and technology -enhanced access to financing.  
Low-emission Transport :  
India’s transport sector is responsible for 14 % of the country’s energy -related CO2 emissions —and the accompanying 
impacts on air quality, public health, road safety, and sustainable urban development. In recent years, increased 
vehicle use has lead to an augmentation in congestion, accidents, and loca l air pollution. If this trend continues, all of 
these problems will get worse. At the same time, a ccess to affordable and reliable transportation is one of the biggest 
barriers to paid employment for women in India . Why and how women move through urban spaces is largely 
influenced by their disproportionate share of childcare and domestic responsibilities and real and perceived concerns 
around personal safety and security. There is a growing recognition of the need to align development and climate goals 
but also of the importance of gender -informed transportation policies to ensure growth is both sustain able and 
 
13 https://blogs.adb.org/blog/three -pathways -inclusive -green -housing- women -asia-and-pacific


---
*Page 137*
---

 
11 
 
equitable. In particular, in India where sexual exploitation, abuse and  harassment (SEAH) and gender based 
violence (GBV)  against women is a significant concern – in a 2021 study, 88% of the women that used public transport 
reported feeling unsafe while travelling, especially while waiting at congested interchanges and using transport 
facilities that do not have any technological add -ons for safety (for instance, a non -app-based taxi instead of an app -
based one) or that requires physical proximity to strange rs (shared riding).14 
Electric vehicles, especially e-rickshaws, e -carts, or e -bikes, offer an affordable and eco -friendly mode of transportation 
that can be easily adopted by individuals  and that encourage micro -entrepreneurship  which is widely embraced by 
women . They th us enable women to enter various service sectors like last -mile delivery, transportation, and local 
commuting, empowering them to generate income and uplift their communities.  Data indicates  that an encouraging 
25% of women in Tier 2 cities in India have alre ady embraced EVs contributing to family incomes . Further investing 
and supporting the EV ecosystem will further unlock the potential of women’s micro -entrepreneurship  contributing to 
inclusive and sustainable g rowth.  
 
2. Bangladesh  
 
According to the 2023 Global Gender Gap Report by the World Economic Forum (WEF), Bangladesh has achieved the 
highest ranking in gender parity among South Asian nations. With a score of 72.2%, it is placed 59th worldwide, 
demonstrating considerable strides toward gender equality. This year, women in Bangladesh saw an improvement in 
gender parity, evidenced by a higher score and improved index ranking, up from 71st out of 146 countries in 2022.  
 
This has been possible due to the significant steps taken by Bangladesh to bridge gender gaps, enacting laws aimed at 
bolstering women's rights and promoting equality. The nation's Constitution upholds the principle of equal rights for both men and women, reinforcing the government's commitment to enhancing female participation across education, 
employment, and political spheres. Despite these initiatives, challenges remain in fully overcoming gender disparities 
within various segments of Bangladeshi societ y. 
 
The country's push towards gender equality is rooted in both its legal framework and adherence to international 
standards. Bangladesh's dedication to the Sustainable Development Goals and international conventions, like the 
Convention on the Elimination of  All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), has guided its implementation 
of laws and policies designed to foster gender equality and empower women.  
 
Central to these legal reforms is the Constitution of Bangladesh, which explicitly prohibits discrimination based on sex 
under Article 28(1) and serves as a foundation for gender -sensitive legislation. The government has also introduced 
several pivotal law s and policies, such as the Women Development Policy of 2011, which aims to boost women's socio -
 
14 https://www.orfonline.org/wp -content/uploads/2021/05/ORF_Monograph_WomenOnTheMove.pdf


---
*Page 138*
---

 
12 
 
economic standing and encourage their involvement in education, healthcare, and politics. This policy is a clear 
manifestation of the government’s strategy to integrate gender considerations across all sectors and enhance 
women's empowerment at multiple levels.  
 
Demographic profile : Bangladesh, a densely populated country in South Asia. With a total population exceeding 165 
million people (as per the 2022 Census), it stands as one of the world's most populous nations. The demographic 
landscape of Bangladesh is characterised by its y outhful population, with a significant proportion under the age of 25.  
 
Based on the latest census data from 2022, Bangladesh has experienced a notable demographic shift, with females 
now outnumbering males for the first time in the country's census history. The total female population stands at 
approximately 83.34 million, co mpared to 81.71 million males. The sex ratio is 98 as compared to 100 in previous 
census in 201115.  
 
Social Status : Gender dynamics in Bangladesh are shaped by a complex interplay of socio -economic factors that 
influence opportunities, access to resources, and power relations between men and women. Household dynamics in 
Bangladesh are influenced by socio -economic fact ors such as poverty, urbanization, and access to resources. 
Patriarchal norms and traditional gender roles often dictate women's roles within the household, including caregiving 
responsibilities, household chores, and decision -making power. So cio-economic disparities exacerbate gender 
inequalities within households, as women from lower socio -economic backgrounds face greater restrictions on their 
autonomy and agency. Addressing socio -economic factors such as poverty, access to education, and wo men's 
economic empowerment is crucial for challenging traditional gender roles and promoting more equitable household 
dynamics in Bangladesh.  
 
In Bangladesh, a predominantly male -dominated society, the majority of households are traditionally led by men. 
Currently, about 85 % of households nationwide are headed by men, with a slightly higher percentage in urban areas 
(85.5 %) compared to rural areas (84.6 %). Conversely, women head around 15 % of households, with rural areas 
seeing slightly more female -headed households (15.4 %) compared to urban areas (14.5 %).16 
The Women, Business and the Law 2022 report by the World Bank concludes that Bangladesh while having made progress in building a legal framework that supports gender equality, there is still a need for substantial improvements 
in both the legal and support ive frameworks to fully empower women economically.  
 
Access to healthcare : Healthcare access and utilisation are also shaped by socio -economic factors, with women facing 
barriers such as poverty, geographic remoteness, and cultural norms that prioritise male health needs. Limited access 
 
15 Population and Housing Census 2022: Preliminary Report  
16 Women And Men In Bangladesh Facts and Figures 2022. Demography and Health Wing, Bangladesh Bureau 
of Statistics, Statistics and Informatics Division Ministry of Planning


---
*Page 139*
---

 
13 
 
to maternal healthcare services contributes to high maternal mortality rates in Bangladesh, particularly among 
marginalised communities. Socio -economic disparities in healthcare access also intersect with gender norms, resulting 
in differential treatment and neglect of women's health issues.  
 Prevailing gender inequalities are exacerbated and are resulting in gaps in access to health services. According to a 
survey conducted by UN Women in April 2020, 61% of women in Bangladesh reported being unable to seek medical care when they needed it, and only 1% of women reported being covered by health insurance. The same survey reveals a concerning proportion of both women and men reporting difficulties finding medical supplies (78% and 61%, 
resp ectively). Results from the survey underline that a total of 62% of women reported that their mental and 
emotional health has been affected. These findings are in line with the Anticipatory Need Assessment by NAWG, which 
found that 49% of women and childre n are unable to access health and nutrition services at the health facilities.
17 
 
The expectations of life at birth for women and men were 54.5 and 55.3 in 1981. These increased to 74.5 and 71.2 years in 2020 over a period of 39 years
18. As per the Gender Gap Index, Bangladesh achieved a parity rate of 96.2% 
due to higher parity in sex ratios at birth. In terms of healthy life expectancy, however, gender parity has been dropping 
as men's life expectancy has been increasing faster than th at of women since the 2020 edition.  
 
Education: The Census 2022 reveals a literacy rate of 74.66% for individuals aged seven and above, slightly increasing 
to 75.6% for those 15 years and older, with males at 78.2% and females at 73.0%. This represents a notable rise from 
the previous figures recorded  in the last census, where the national literacy rate was only 51.77% and even lower for 
women at 49.44%. Moreover, 2023 Global Gender Gap Report indicates that Bangladesh has achieved a gender parity 
score of 93.6% in education. This reflects ong oing improvements in both women's and men's literacy and enrolment 
rates in secondary and tertiary education over the past decade.  
 
Economic participation: Bangladesh's performance in terms of economic participation and opportunity remained one 
of the lowest globally. According to the latest report, Bangladesh ranked 139th globally, with a parity rate of only 
43.8%. The World Gender Gad index for 2023, Bangladesh stands at 139 out of 146 countries showing marginal improvement over the last year (141 in 2022) in economic participation and opportunity. According to the World Bank data, the female work force participation in Bangladesh for the year 2023 is at 3 4.2%. Its ranking in the world for labor 
force participation rate is at 132 out of 146 countries.  
 Employment patterns in Bangladesh are heavily influenced by socio -economic factors, with women disproportionately 
represented in informal and low -paying sectors such as agriculture, garment manufacturing, and domestic work. 
 
17 COVID- 19 Bangladesh Rapid Gender Analysis, 2020 UN Women 
18 Women And Men In Bangladesh, Facts and Figures 2022 by Demography and Health Wing, Bangladesh 
Bureau of Statistics, Statistics and Informatics Division Ministry of Planning


---
*Page 140*
---

 
14 
 
Despite constituting a significant portion of the labour force, women often face discriminatory practices, including 
unequal pay, limited access to formal employment, and lack of social protection.  
 
The World Bank publication "Voices to Choices: Bangladesh’s Journey in Women’s Economic Empowerment" presents 
the following key conclusions about the economic empowerment of women in Bangladesh:  
 
a) Land Ownership Disparity: Women own land at significantly lower rates than men in rural Bangladesh. Only 12% of rural women solely or jointly own agricultural land, and 7% own non -agricultural land, compared to 69% and 
86% of rural men, respectively. About  96% of household land in rural areas is owned exclusively by husbands. This 
gender gap in land ownership is mainly due to male -biased inheritance practices.  
b) Account Ownership Growth: From 2014 to 2017, men's account ownership in Bangladesh increased by 30 
percentage points to 65%, while women's account ownership rose by only 10 percentage points to 36%. In rural 
areas, nearly three -quarters of women rely on NG Os for borrowing and saving, whereas men have a more diverse 
range of savings and borrowing sources, including formal and informal avenues such as friends, store credit, leasing land, or informal lenders.  
c) Female Entrepreneurship: Despite efforts by the government and Bangladesh Bank to promote women 
entrepreneurs, Bangladesh has one of the lowest shares of female -majority ownership of formal enterprises 
globally, at just 1.7%. This is much lower than the So uth Asian and global averages of 9.6% and 14.5%, respectively. 
Including both formal and informal firms, women's ownership rates have increased from over 7% in 2013 to 10% 
in 2017. However, many women entrepreneurs remain in the informal sector due to barriers in registering 
enterprises.  
d) Minority Women's Vulnerabilities: Ethnic and religious minority women face compounded economic 
vulnerabilities due to broader societal and institutional factors affecting women's economic engagement, as well 
as the overall marginalization of minority group s in Bangladesh.  
 
These points highlight the ongoing challenges and disparities in economic empowerment for women in Bangladesh, 
underscoring the need for targeted interventions and sustained efforts to improve gender equity in economic participation and ownership  
 
Women’s Financial Inclusion report for Bangladesh mentions that “Outside of the RMG sector, most female economic 
activity is informal. Before the pandemic around one in nine women in both rural and urban settings (93.3 % in rural and 87.3 % in urban areas)  were in informal employment
19. Most women’s enterprises in the country are Cottage, 
Micro, Small, and Medium -Sized Enterprises (CMSMEs), which tend to operate informally and are concentrated in a 
few sectors – mostly in the wholesale and retail trade of textiles (23.8 %). Among small businesses with above five 
 
19 UN Women, 2020. COVID -19 Bangladesh Rapid Gender Analysis.


---
*Page 141*
---

 
15 
 
employees, only 13 % of businesses are fully or partially owned by women, which is lower than average for the region. 
The highest proportion (69 %) of women’s enterprises operate in commerce, followed by manufacturing (19 %) and 
services (12 %). 96 % of wo men enterprises, are sole proprietorships20. In the emerging space of e- commerce on big 
social media platforms, half of businesses are estimated to be owned by women. Poverty and limited economic opportunity represent obstacles to financial inclusion. Women are less likely to own businesses in Bang ladesh than 
men, with one of the lowest rates of female entrepreneurship in the region. About 10 % of the country’s registered micro -, small- , and medium - enterprises (MSMEs) are women owned or - led, most of which are microbusinesses. 
Access to finance rem ains a significant challenge; less than 20 % of women -owned/led MSMEs use formal services.
21,22 
 Gender based violence : Gender based discrimination and particularly Violence Against Women (VAW) is a major 
concern and an obstacle to higher studies for women in Bangladesh. According to the Violence Against Women Survey 
2015, there are reports of as many as 80.2 % of currently  married women have experienced some forms of violence 
by their husbands in their lifetime. A total of 21,688 women responded to the survey. Almost two thirds (72.6%) of 
ever -married women had experienced some forms of partner violen ce in their lifetime and more than half (54.7%) 
had experienced it in the last 12 months.  
 
The OECD’s Report on Social Institutions & Gender Index (SIGI) presents similar findings, highlighting that 50% of 
women in Bangladesh experience domestic violence, and 17% of women justify such violence. The report assesses the legal framework against domestic violence as incomplete, indicating that social norms significantly hinder women's 
fuller inclusion in society . These findings underscore the pervasive impact of entrenched societal norms on gender 
equality.  
 
Political Participation : The constitution of Bangladesh since the beginning has provided reservation for women under 
Section 65, currently standing at 50 seats out of 350. While having reserved seats has proved to be an effective tactic for increasing female participation in polit ics, the progressive made by Bangladesh is quite slow to have a major 
impact.  
 According to the Gender Gap Report, Bangladesh is one of the ten countries with a political empowerment score above 50%, standing at 55.2%. Alongside Iceland, Bangladesh is notable for having had women in the highest political 
positions for more years than men over the past 50 years. Specifically, Bangladesh has had a woman head of state for 
29.3 of the last 50 years, the longest duration globally. Despite this, the representation of women in ministerial (10%) and parliamentary (20.9%) positions remains low.  
 
 
20 Think Asia, Women Entrepreneurs in SMEs: Bangladesh Perspective. 2017  
21 HERProject. 2020. HerProject 2020 Highlights  
22 Women’s financial inclusion, digital financial services, and covid -19 policy response: case of Bangladesh


---
*Page 142*
---

 
16 
 
Regional disparities : In Bangladesh, regional disparities based on gender exist across various socio -economic 
indicators. While progress has been made in improving gender equality nationwide, certain regions still face significant 
challenges:  
 
1. Education: In rural and remote areas, especially in the southern and Southeastern regions, girls often have lower access to education compared to boys. Factors such as distance to schools, socio -cultural norms, and 
poverty contribute to this disparity.  
 
2. Employment: Urban areas, particularly in the central and northern regions, may offer more opportunities for women's employment in sectors like garment factories and service industries. However, in rural and 
disadvantaged regions, women often face limited o ptions for formal employment and are more likely to 
engage in unpaid agricultural work.  
 
3. Health: Access to healthcare services varies across regions, with rural and remote areas facing greater 
challenges. Maternal mortality rates are higher in these regions due to limited access to quality maternal 
healthcare services, leading to disparities in maternal health outcomes.  
 
4. Political Participation: While Bangladesh has made strides in promoting women's political participation at the 
national level, there are regional disparities in women's representation in local government bodies, with some 
areas experiencing lower levels of female political leadership and participation.  
 
Gender Aspects of Prosperete’s Focus Areas  
 
Start -up Ecosystem:  
 
Bangladesh’s startup scene saw an increase in 2023 and jumped 4 spots from the previous year, outranking Qatar. 
Transportation is among one of the leading sectors for start -ups in Bangladesh, and this sector so significant growth 
in 2023.23 
 
The startup ecosystem in Bangladesh is maturing, driven by several key factors, including a strong economy, fueled by a 
tech- savvy young population, with 62% under the age of 35 (8th largest in the world), burgeoning middle class, 98% mobile 
phone connecti on and 62% internet penetration. Apart from a youthful population, keen on embracing innovation and 
entrepreneurship it also  boasts a skilled workforce (with over 5,000 IT graduates annually). In addition, Bangladesh's 
entrepreneurship ecosystem is at an i nflection point - attracting over $200 million in international investments from 
renowned corporate investors and venture capitalists over the past four years. Key sectors attracting investment include 
 
23 https://www.startupblink.com/startup -ecosystem/bangladesh


---
*Page 143*
---

 
17 
 
FinTech, Logistics, and Mobility. The rise of active Angel Investment Networks, Impact Investing, and numerous local and 
international accelerators/incubators has fostered the growth of over 1,000 active startups, creating over 1.5 million jobs and integra ting startup products and services into everyday life. Furthermore, the approval of small- cap stock exchange 
guidelines by the Bangladesh Securities and Exchange Commission (BSEC) represents a significant step towards providing viable exit strategies for i nvestors in startups. Finally, the  government has also been proactive in nurturing the startup 
ecosystem. Various initiatives, such as the IDEA Project and Startup Bangladesh Limited, supported by funds totaling 100 
crore BDT (approximately $11.5 million), are geared towards enhancing the local startup landscape.  
 
Against all odds, women are asserting their presence in the startup ecosystem, crafting their own tales of success in the 
contemporary world. Several of these startups are aiming for global markets, having already left a notable impression in 
Bangladesh.
24 However, they note the difficulty in raising capital as a key barrier to growth.  
Investing with a gender lens in Bangladesh involves two key steps:25 creating specialized accelerator and incubation 
programs for women entrepreneurs and establishing dedicated investment initiatives for startups and SMEs following 
the gender lens investment (GLI) framework. Utilizing existing platforms like iDEA, Startup Bangladesh Limited, and 
the SME Foundation can help set up these programs. Additionally, incentivizing private entities such as incubators, 
accelerators, universities, and funds to participate in pipeline development and investment efforts can help bridge the 
gap between male and female startups.  
 
Energy Access & Power Generation; Energy Efficiency :   
 
According to the 2022 Census, 97.61% of households in Bangladesh use electricity from the national grid as their main 
source of power. Only 1.45% of households rely on solar energy, and 0.19% use other sources such as generators. 
Nearly all households (99. 25%) have access to electricity, leaving a very small percentage (0.75%) without this facility.  
 Bangladesh has achieved near- universal access to electricity due to electrification efforts that began more than two 
decades ago
26. However, the country is currently facing an energy crisis, leading to widespread power shortages. This 
crisis is mainly driven by the growing demand for power and a shortfall in fuel supply, particularly natural gas, which 
is crucial for electricity gene ration. Contributing factors include the global surge in fuel prices, influenced by 
international events like the conflict in Ukraine, and local challenges such as cyclones disrupting fuel imports.  
 
The installed generation capacity in Bangladesh has increased to 26,700 MW, including captive and renewable energy sources. Per capita power generation stands at 609 kWh. The power distribution network has expanded to 629,000 
km, and the number of consumer s has grown to 44.5 million. The system loss has decreased to 9.30% as of December 
 
24 https://thefinancialexpress.com.bd/national/theres -a-woman -behind -many -successful -startups -in-bangladesh-
1615457652#google_vignette  
25 https://www.unescap.org/kp/2022/bangladesh -startup -ecosystem -assessment -report  
26 Gendered energy poverty and energy justice in rural Bangladesh by Md  Moniruzzaman , Rosie  Day


---
*Page 144*
---

 
18 
 
FY 2022 -23, down from 14.73% in FY 2010 -1127. 
 
According to World Bank data, only 27% of the population in Bangladesh has access to clean cooking fuel. The 
Bangladesh Demographic and Household Survey (BDHS) 2017 -18 shows that 20.45% of households use advanced or 
cleaner cooking fuels, while 79.23% relied on traditional fuels. Only 0.57% use electricity for cooking, and 6.96% use 
LPG. Biogas is used by 0.11%, and 0.03% still use kerosene. The dominant fuel is wood, used by 46.25% of households. Other sources include charcoal (0.10%), straw/shrubs/grass ( 0.63%), agricultural crop residues (25.96%), and animal 
dung (6.39%).  
 Currently, there are 5.8 million SHSs in Bangladesh that generate around 327.14 MW of electricity in the country’s off-
grid area. Some 137,400 jobs have been created in Bangladesh's SHSs, representing about 80% of the total installed 
solar capacity, accord ing to the latest figures released by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
28. 
 
Household air pollution is considered to be a serious health concern. This issue disproportionately affects women, 
who spend significant time collecting fuel and cooking while being exposed to harmful indoor air pollution. Several 
studies have established that indoor air pollution is linked to hypertension, respiratory and eye health, cardiovascular 
health, under -five mortality29, and adverse obstetric outcomes among women exposed to biomass fuel.  
 
As of December 2018, under IDCOL 1.65 million improved cook stoves (ICS) have been disseminated to reduce the use 
of solid fuels, indoor air pollution (IAP) and GHG Emission. By January 2017 its initial target of disseminating 1 million 
ICS was achieved al most two years ahead of the project completion period.  
 
The Government of Bangladesh is promoting clean cook stoves through several initiatives. One major effort is the 
Country Action Plan for Clean Cook Stoves (CAP), which aims to provide clean cooking solutions to over 30 million 
households by 2030. To suppor t this goal, the Household Energy Platform Program in Bangladesh was implemented 
from July 2016 to June 2021. This program focused on raising awareness about improved cook stoves, providing financial access for entrepreneurs, developing new business models , overcoming barriers, introducing new 
technology, establishing a testing lab, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, building capacity, and researching new cooking solutions.  
 Water Security; Agriculture & Food Security :  
 
 
27 Bangladesh Economic Review 2023  
28 European Union. Study On Women Engagement In Green Energy Transition In Bangladesh 
29 Household air pollution from cooking fuels and its association with under -five mortality in Bangladesh by Md 
Badsha Alam.


---
*Page 145*
---

 
19 
 
Bangladesh is a densely populated country with 171 million people. According to WaterAid, around 98% of the 
population has basic water coverage, but there is a significant gap between coverage and the quality of available 
water. The latest Joint Monitoring  Programme (JMP) Report of 2022 states that only 59.11%30 of Bangladesh's 
population has access to safely managed water, and just 15% have piped water supply. Water contamination is a major concern, with 86% of the poorest households showing E. coli contamination and 16.7% of the population consuming arsenic -contaminated water.  
 
As per the 2022 Census, nationally, tubewells (both deep and shallow) are the primary source for 85.66% of 
households, followed by piped (supply) water at 11.74%. Among the divisions, Rangpur has the highest percentage of households using tubewell water at  98.83%, while Dhaka has the highest percentage using piped (supply) water at 
26.64%.  
 In Bangladesh, the responsibility of water collection for household consumption primarily falls on women. The Joint Monitoring Program Report states that women are ten times more likely to collect water than men. Women typically 
spend 2 to 3 hours each day  fetching water, time that could otherwise be devoted to education, economic 
opportunities, or other productive activities.  
 
Bangladesh is an agrarian country, it’s economic activities are largely agro based. But, with the pace of industrial revolution share of agriculture in GDP has been changed. Notably contribution of GDP from agriculture in current and constant prices over the last 12 years (2010 to 2021) has been following a declining trend
31.  Educational sector 
contributes about 11.38% to the country's GDP and employees around 45.33% of total labour force32. 
 To ensure food security, Bangladesh is increasing the production of various crops, including rice and corn, by 
developing high -quality seeds through biotechnology and promoting the optimal use of surface water and solar -
powered irrigation. Organic fertiliz ers are encouraged to maintain soil health, and farmers receive smart cards and 
weather forecasts through a climate -smart agriculture system. The government provides ongoing subsidies for 
agricultural inputs like fertilizers and seeds and makes agricultural machinery available to farmers. Initiatives include 
expanding synchronized cultivation, enhancing the production, storage, and marketing of vegetables and fruits, and 
utilizing fallow land for crop cultivation. The total production target of food grains in FY 2022- 23 is 484.98 lakh MT, 
which was 465.83 lakh MT in FY 2021- 22. In the revised budget of FY 2022 -23, the target for domestic food grain 
procurement is 17.35 lakh MT. As of February 2023, the country has imported 11.56 lakh MT of food grains under government management. However, a total of 17.53 lakh MT (4.14 lakh MT of rice and 13.39 lakh MT of wheat) was 
 
30 WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JMP)  
31 Contribution of Agriculture Sector in the GDP Growth of Bangladesh bySushan Chowhana,b, Md. Moshiur 
Rahmanc, Razia Sultanad,e, Md. Abdur Rouff and Majharul Islam  
32 Yearbook of Agricultural Statistics, 2022, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics.


---
*Page 146*
---

 
20 
 
imported in the private sector33.  
Bangladesh is one of the most climate vulnerable countries in the world. Located between the Himalayas and the Bay 
of Bengal, the country is prone to natural disasters. Climate change accelerated the intensity and frequency of 
occurrences of salinity, stor ms, drought, irregular rainfall, high temperature, flash floods, etc. that resulted from global 
warming. Global warming is harmful for crops of the tropical countries.  
 
The World Bank's report on Climate Change Risks and Food Security in Bangladesh highlights that the country faces 
significant threats to its food security due to climate change, including increased frequency and intensity of natural 
disasters like floods, cyclones, and droughts. These events disrupt agricultural production, damage infrastructure, and 
reduce crop yields. The report emphasizes the need for adaptive measures such as improving irrigation systems, 
developing climate -resilient crop varieties, and  implementing sustainable land management practices. Strengthening 
early warning systems and investing in infrastructure to mitigate climate impacts are also crucial. Additionally, 
enhancing farmers' access to information, financial services, and technolog y is vital to build resilience against climate -
induced risks. The study estimates that climate change will significantly exacerbate the negative impacts of existing 
climate variability, resulting in a projected cumulative reduction of rice production by 80  million tons from 2005 to 
2050. This amounts to an approximate annual decrease of 3.9%, primarily driven by a decline in boro crop 
production34. 
 
Women in Bangladesh are heavily involved in agricultural activities, both as unpaid family labourers and independent 
farmers. They contribute significantly to food production, accounting for a substantial agricultural workforce. 
Women’s participation is particularly in labour- intensive tasks, such as planting, weeding, harvesting, and postharvest 
activities. They play a crucial role in transforming raw agricultural produce into marketable products through sorting, grading, cleaning, packaging, and preservat ion. Women’s contributions extend beyond on -farm activities and 
encompass the entire agricultural value chain, including the marketing and distributing of agricultural products.  
 
The impact of climate change on agriculture is felt differently by women. The review "Impact of Climate Change on 
Agricultural Production and Food Security: A Review on Coastal Regions of Bangladesh" by M.S. Hossain and A.K. Majumder highlights the disprop ortionate impact of climate change on women in these regions. Climate change 
exacerbates existing vulnerabilities, with women being particularly affected due to their roles in agriculture, household 
food security, and caregiving. Additionally, they have limited access to resources, decision -making processes, and 
adaptation strategies, further hindering their ability to cope with climate impacts. The review emphasizes the need 
for gender -sensitive policies and programs to address these disparities and suppor t women's resilience in the face of 
climate change.  
 
 
33 Bangladesh Economic Review 2023  
34 World Bank. 2010. Climate Change Risks And Food Security In Bangladesh


---
*Page 147*
---

 
21 
 
Cities, Buildings & Urban Systems :  
 
Bangladesh is one of the fastest urbanising countries in the world, with an average annual Rate of Urbanisation (RoU) 
of 5.34 since 1974 (BBS, 2015c). Although there is a decreasing RoU during the last few decades, the Level of 
Urbanisation (LoU) is still rising at an alarming rate35. In Bangladesh the percentage of the population living in urban 
areas rose from 24 % in 2000 to 38 % in 2020. By 2050, an estimated 60 % of the population will live in urban areas.  
Based on pre -pandemic urbanization and poverty reduction trends, more than half of poor households are projected 
to live in urban areas within a decade. As a result, cities face significant congestion and negative externalities, including  
air and water pollution, elevated exposure to health risks such as infectious and vector borne diseases, and 
environmental degradation. Urbanization also has resulted in the loss of  
 
Urbanization brings numerous challenges, such as air and water pollution, noise pollution, and land degradation. In 
cities like Dhaka, air pollution ranks among the highest globally, with traffic jams worsening both air quality and economic productivity. R apid urbanization has led to poor urban planning and weak management
36. Most cities in 
Bangladesh lack the road infrastructure necessary to accommodate the increasing volume of traffic. This deficiency leads to severe congestion, frequent traffic jams, and prolonged travel times, which negatively impact both economic 
productivity and the quality of life for resident s. 
 
In addition to the infrastructure challenges, a significant portion of the urban population lives in substandard conditions, often residing in densely populated slums. These slum areas are characterized by overcrowding, 
inadequate sanitation, and limited access to clean water and essential services. The poor living conditions in these 
areas exacerbate health risks, making residents more vulnerable to diseases and infections.  
 
Women migrants made up 4.12 % of all migrant workers from Bangladesh in 2004, with the percentage gradually 
increasing in the years that followed up to 2013. With relatively sharp rises in 2014 and 2015, women made up 18.66 
% of all Bangladeshi migrant workers by 2015
37. The urbanization presents women with several challenges, such as: 
limited access to formal employment, income inequality and poor living conditions in slums that are overcrowded. Women therefore often experience considerable security concerns, high rates  of violence and many difficulties 
accessing affordable healthcare options. Moreover, they tend to shoulder a double burden in their homes and at work. 
Although better educational facilities exist in the cities cultural barriers still inhibit most women fr om accessing higher 
education and vocational training.   
 
35 Urbanisation in Bangladesh: Challenges and way froward by Shilpi Roy  
36 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/351427159_URBANIZATION_IN_BANGLADESH_EMERGING_
CHALLENGES_AND_THE_WAY_FORWARD  
37 UN Women. Policy Brief on Women and Migration in Bangladesh


---
*Page 148*
---

 
22 
 
Low-emission Transport :  
 
In 2021, Bangladesh adopted the Automotive Industry Development Policy to establish a clear roadmap for developing 
the country's automotive production base over the next decade. The goal is to create robust domestic supply chains 
for a modern, competitive,  and viable automobile and auto -parts industry by 2030 (Ministry of Industry, 2021). As part 
of this policy, Bangladesh plans to develop an energy -efficient vehicle (EEV) hub. According to the Automobile Industry 
Development Policy 2021, EEVs are vehicles that meet specific carbon emission and fuel consumption standards. This 
category includes fuel- efficient internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles, hybrid vehicles (HVs), electric vehicles, and 
alternative -fuel vehicles such as those powered by CNG, LPG, b iodiesel, ethanol, hydrogen, and fuel cells. The 
government offers tax incentives for purchasing electric vehicles. According to the 2021 Fuel Economy report, 11.5% 
of diesel consumed in Bangladesh is locally produced, while 88.5% is imported, primarily fr om the Middle East. Since 
2020, diesel imported into Bangladesh has a sulfur content of no more than 50 ppm38, according to BRTA regulations.  
 
Prosperete will take into account the specific challenges for gender equity in Bangladesh which may require some 
country level interventions working with the Government and Non -Government Organisations to bring about 
transformative change at the country, c ommunity, and company level in Bangladesh.  
 
3. Mauritius  
According to the Global Gender Gap Report 2023 by the World Economic Forum ( WEF Report ), Mauritius ranks 98th 
out of 146 countries. The country's Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI) score is 0.689. The Republic of Mauritius continues to make progress in advancing women’s and girls’ rights and the attainment of gender equality in the country. While 
significant progress has been made towards removing formal barriers to achieving gender equality, a lot remains to be done before gender equality is achieved.  
The Republic of Mauritius has signed and ratified different treaties to protect women’s rights and prevent 
discrimination against women. Mauritius has passed domestic legislation to give effect to most of the treaties it has 
signed. The Children’s Act 2020  has been in force since 24 January 2022 and this will enable Mauritius to address 
earlier reservations to some of the Articles of the Maputo Protocol. The Act brings an end to child marriages and 
cohabitation in the country, where girls who are the main v ictims of these practices will be better protected.  
The Constitution of Mauritius enshrines the right to equality under Article 3 and 16 and the amendment to Article 
16(3) of the Constitution added sex as another characteristic which ensured that women have the same legal rights as 
men. Everybody is equal b efore the law and nobody can be discriminated against, directly or indirectly, on grounds 
including age, sex, creed, ethnicity or even religion. Women and men have the right to equal enjoyment of rights and freedom, including opportunities and responsibilities in the social, economic, cultural and political spheres (Task Force 
 
38 2021. Fuel Economy Baseline and Trends in Light Duty Vehicles in Bangladesh


---
*Page 149*
---

 
23 
 
Report, 2001). Yet, in spite of the elimination of sex discrimination in the legal framework and increased educational 
and economic opportunities for women, Mauritius remains a patriarchal society, one where deep -seated patriarchal 
norms and values continu e to hinder women’s progress, emancipation and empowerment. Whereas Mauritius has 
made major progress towards creating de jure equality between women and men, there is still a lot to be done before de facto equality between men and women is attained in the  country.  
Mauritius’ new National Gender Policy (2022 -2030) provides a framework for collective action by public - and private -
sector stakeholders to achieve gender equality, empower women and girls, and ensure their full enjoyment of all 
human rights. In line with t he SDG No. 5, the policy outlines the government’s commitment to gender equality as a 
development and human rights concern. Among its objectives, the policy aims to promote inclusion of gender equality 
in legislation and policies, to ensure equal participa tion of women in decision making at all levels, and to eliminate all 
forms of gender- based violence. The government is also drafting a gender equality bill designed to accelerate the 
country’s progress toward gender equality in the social, economic, and po litical arenas.  
The World Bank’s Women, Business, and the Law (WBL) legal frameworks score for Mauritius is 87.5 out of 100 which 
is higher than the global average (64.2) and significantly higher than the Sub -Saharan Africa regional average (57.4) 
and Middle East & North Africa regional average (38.6). It is interesting to note that Mauritius received a score of 100 
for five indicators: Mobility, Workplace, Pay, Childcare, and Assets. It received a score of 75 on Safety, Marriage, Parenthood, Entrepreneurship, and Pension because the law in Mauritius does not address femicide, restricts a 
woman’s right to remarry, does not provide maternal leave benefits paid solely by the government, and lacks 
provisions on gender -sensitive procurement for public procurement processes and on the accounting of periods of 
absence due to childcare in pension benefits. As a result, the Women, Business and the Law 2.0 legal frameworks score for Mauritius is 87.5, which is the unweighted average of the 10 indicator scores on a scale of 0 –100
39.  
Demography and Social Status: As of 2024, Mauritius’ total population is approximately 1.3 million people40. The 
population is fairly evenly  split between genders, with the female population being approximately 0.64 million, and 
the male population approximately 0.62 million. In 2023, approximately 40% of Mauritius’ population lived in urban centres, and 60% lived in rural areas.  
In 2023, Mauritius did not receive an overall SIGI score due to missing data.  The country obtained a score of 47 in the 
“Discrimination in the family” dimension, followed by “Restricted civil liberties” (35), and “Restricted access to 
productive and financ ial resources” (6).  
Education: According to the Global Gender Gap Index 2023, Mauritius achieves a high score of 99%, indicating near 
parity in access to education between men and women and it ranked 71 out of 146 countries. The same report shows 
finds that more women than men were enro lled at all levels of education, with the gap being nearly 5% in secondary 
education and as high as 18% for tertiary education.  
 
39 World Bank’s Women, Business and the Law 2024 report  
40 United Nations Population Fund


---
*Page 150*
---

 
24 
 
Enhanced access to higher education has not always translated into improved career opportunities for women. 
Although both men and women enrol for a Bachelor's Degree, fewer women are involved in higher degree research at PhD, MPhil and DBA levels. In 2019 there were 244 women enrolled in research degrees whereas the number of 
men was 259. As a result, women are underrepresented in research. Women tend to be under -represented in science -
related fields such as Engineering (2.0% against 10.6% for men) and Info rmation Technology (5.6% against 16.0% for 
men).
41 
Health: As the Global Gender Gap report 2023, Mauritius is ranked 1st with a score of .98. In 2023, maternal mortality 
was at 61 deaths per 100,000 live births.   
The comprehensive welfare state provides free health care, universal pensions, state provision of free education at all levels as well, thereby enabling women and girls who may have been disadvantaged by patriarchal culture and/or 
precarious income situati ons to benefit.  
Economic Participation: In Mauritius, the labor force participation rate among females is 43% and among males is 
68.5% for 2023. Since 1990, female labor force participation has  increased. Compared with labor force participation 
in the upper middle -income group, the gap between men and women is  higher  in Mauritius. However, women 
represented  only 27%  of those employed in senior and middle management in  2022.
42 This is despite unemployed 
women being generally more qualified than their male counterparts, with about 60% of them holding at least a School Certificate compared to 48% among males.
43 However, thereafter, women tend to follow gendered livelihood 
pathways with more women were enrolled in topics such as administration, accounting, as compared to information technology and engineering, which in turn skews their career and financial opport unities.  
While gender pay gap data is not available for Mauritius in either the ILO or the WEF’s database, a 2018 -2019 time 
use survey carried out by Statistics Mauritius shows that on the average, men spend 4.7 hours at work (all income earning activities) per day , almost twice that of women (2.5 hours). On the other hand, women spend more time on 
household chores (housework and care of household members) than men (4.4 hours against 1.7 hours). At the level of the employed (those having paid jobs or working in their own businesses), men spend 6.8 hours per day at work and women 6.0 hours. Employed women spend 3.6 hours on household chores compared to only 1.7 hours by men. These statistics indicate that in Mauritian society, domestic chores are still overwhelmingly borne by women, although men do take on a certain degree of domestic duties. The unequal division of labour within the household implies that 
women spend less time at work in paid activities and more time at home in unpaid activities.
44 
In 2021,  89.4%  of women and  91.7%  of men in  Mauritius  had an account. The female rate in Mauritius is higher than 
both Sub -Saharan Africa and the upper middle income group. Asset ownership data for women, an important metric 
 
41 https://africa.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2023 -11/maurituis_gender_equality_profile.pdf  
42 https://genderdata.worldbank.org/en/economies/mauritius  
43 https://www.undp.org/mauritius -seychelles/blog/unfinished -business -journey- womens -equality -mauritius  
44 https://africa.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2023 -11/maurituis_gender_equality_profile.pdf


---
*Page 151*
---

 
25 
 
of economic empowerment which provides protection in the case of marital dissolution or abandonment, is not 
available for Mauritius.  
Political and Social Participation:  
20%  of seats in national parliament were held by women in  2023 in Mauritius. The proportion of seats held by women 
in Mauritius  has remained roughly the same as  2010. The current rate is  lower than  the average rate in upper middle 
income economies. Mauritius, to date, has had only 2 female heads of state according to the WEF Report. As these 
statistics show, women remain underrepresented in politics and at this level, Mauritius still has a significant gender 
deficit. Politics in Mauritius remains highly mal e dominated and very few women have been able to make inroads into 
the political system. Some progress has been made at local government level, especially through the Local 
Government Act, which provides that every group presenting more than 2 candidates a t a Municipal election should 
ensure that not more than two -thirds of the candidates should be of the same sex. However, further changes are 
needed to further embed the need to have candidates from both sexes -  although the number of women elected at 
Munic ipal Council elections has increased following the promulgation of the Local Government Act in 2011, the 
number of women mayors has remained low. In 2018, there was only one woman mayor whereas in 2020, there was 
no woman mayor in the five municipalities. Electoral reform is therefore a major opportunity for Mauritian women to 
claim their space in parliament and politics, but garnering consensus on this has been a challenge.45 
Impact of Climate Change on Gender: Mauritius is highly vulnerable to adverse impacts of climate change. The 2021 
World Risk Report has ranked Mauritius as the 51st country with the highest disaster risk, out of 181 countries. Flooding is the second largest risk after cyclones, causing 20% o f direct economic losses associated with disasters 
(World Bank, 2020) - Mauritius has been experiencing floods, including flash floods with increasing frequency. These 
have affected many families, causing damage to homes  and household and for some families, even food supplies were 
affected. The time use survey showed that women spend longer hours on household chores and the floods would have contributed to the triple burden on women especially for clean -up purposes. There  is also the issue of renewing 
food supplies and women having to handle these domestic duties. Women are often responsible in the mitigation of 
the effects and adaption of climate change by supporting their families and societies. While impacts of climate change 
have a negative impact on both women’s and men’s health and livelihoods, the impact on women is more detrimental if gender inequalities are not addressed.  
To this end, the Climate Change Act 2020 has made provision for gender to be taken into consideration, in line with 
the 2005 Paris Agreement of Climate Change and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 -2030. The 
Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change (MESWMCC) is incorporating the gender 
dimension of climate change in awareness raising activities, targeting as well as involving women as agents of change 
in on -going mitigation and adaptation programmes. In addition,  further focused studies are still needed to be done to 
assess the impact on women of climate change together with targeted programmes that mitigate these impacts.  
 
45 https://africa.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2023 -11/maurituis_gender_equality_profile.pdf


---
*Page 152*
---

 
26 
 
Gender Aspects of Prosperete’s Focus Areas  
Start -up Ecosystem  
Mauritius boasts a small but vibrant startup ecosystem, supported by a close community of freelancers and 
entrepreneurs. The country has a well -developed physical infrastructure that provides a strong foundation for new 
businesses. Both the public and priv ate sectors are committed to nurturing this ecosystem, providing funding, 
competitions, and networking opportunities for entrepreneurs. Mauritius is also recognized as a tax haven for offshore 
investments, featuring Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements and  Investment Promotion and Protection 
Agreements (IPPAs). Additionally, the country has established an Occupation Permit available to investors, freelancers, 
and startup founders alike.46 
Recent policy developments, such as the Business Facilitation Act, have streamlined the process of starting a business 
in Mauritius. The country has rolled out various financial support programs for entrepreneurs, including the Business 
Development Scheme,  which provides loans to startups, and the Booster Microcredit program for projects in sectors 
like ICT. Furthermore, the Economic Development Board (EDB) has launched a Regulatory Sandbox Licence (RSL) that enables companies to test innovative fintech ini tiatives in a controlled environment prior to full launch. Mauritius is 
committed to fostering its innovation economy by revising the national curriculum and offering research funding to 
PhD students. Given its small population, the nation faces challenges  in attracting and retaining talent within its startup 
ecosystem. The 10 -Year Master Plan for the SME Sector reflects the public sector’s awareness of these challenges and 
outlines strategies to address them. Support for startups and entrepreneurship is es sential for driving the country’s 
innovation economy, with resources such as business incubators, targeted policies, and investment opportunities 
fueling growth and success. Mauritius's emphasis on nurturing talent and innovation is evident in its policies , making 
it an appealing destination for startups seeking a supportive business landscape.  
Energy Access & Power Generation; Energy Efficiency :  
Globally, women are underrepresented in the energy sector, making up only 22% of the workforce.  In Mauritius, the 
figure is even lower, at 5% of the workforce. This situation spans the energy sector including production through 
renewable sources such as solar, wind, hydro, tidal, geothermal and biomass energy. Another pervasive gender issue 
playing against women in the energy sector is the global calamity of female poverty and the subsequent feminization 
of energy poverty10. Mauritius is no exception, with 11% of women living below the poverty line compared to 9.6% 
of men.47 
In a bid to empower women in RE and economically, the UNDP supported a Green Climate Fund (GCF) project entitled “Accelerating the transformational shift to a low -carbon economy in the Republic of Mauritius”. This programme helps 
 
46 https://www.startupblink.com/startup- ecosystem/mauritius  
47 https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/mu/GV -02---Green -Energy --
web.pdf#:~:text=Energy%20is%20not%20gender%20neutral.%201%20Globally,of%202000%20employees%20(0.4%%20of%20to
tal%20employment).


---
*Page 153*
---

 
27 
 
the Government of Mauritius achieve its renewable energy (RE) targets including by providing grant support of USD 
28 million, alongside over USD 162 million in co -financing from stakeholders and government partners. This grant will 
be used to (i) review an d update national RE policies; (ii) purchase and install advanced technologies to improve the 
national grid's capacity for integrating RE sources; and (iii) implement 25MW of rooftop photovoltaic (PV) systems, particularly benefiting low -income households and financially struggling women -headed households. Basic training on 
solar PV installation for female entrepreneurs who can then potentially integrate RE in their business activities has 
also been provided by the programme. While awareness and training se ssions are critical for women entrepreneurs 
to understand the benefits of transitioning to renewable energy sources, financing is crucial for renewable energy in 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) like Mauritius, which are heavily reliant on imported fo ssil fuels resulting in high 
costs and climate risks. However, despite growing interest in diversity and gender equality among funders,  insufficient 
funding is allocated to close the gender financing gap  and address the SIDS climate challenge.   
Water Security; Agriculture & Food Security :  
The agricultural sector's contribution to the GDP of the Republic of Mauritius, which includes the main islands of Mauritius and Rodrigues, has decreased over the years. While it averaged 30% in the 1960s, it now stands at just 4.1% 
(Statistics Mauritius, 2024). Nevertheless, agriculture remains crucial for food security, job creation, and generating 
export revenue, particularly through sugar and tea.  
Mauritius has a total of 186,500 hectares, with agriculture occupying about 44% of the arable land. However, land 
dedicated to agricultural production has significantly declined. In 2002, around 80,000 hectares were used for sugarcane, crops, and orchards,  but by 2024, only about 42,000 hectares are under sugarcane cultivation, with an 
additional 8,000 hectares for other crops and orchards (MCIA, 2024; MAIFS, 2024). Rodrigues, which has a total area 
of 10,800 hectares, has faced a drastic reduction in its agricultural land, losing approximately 3,000 hectares over the 
years. Currently, only 175 hectares are actively cultivated. However, Rodrigues has a greater livestock capacity than 
Mauritius.
48 
Mauritius faces significant challenges in achieving food security. The country imports a highly significant quantity of its food requirements, making it vulnerable to global market fluctuations and disruptions. The agricultural sector, though crucial, has seen a decline in its contribution to the GDP, exacerbated by factors such as climate change, loss 
of agricultural land, labour shortages, and water scarcity. Recognizing the local crop production capacity helps identify 
opportunities for increasing output  and decreasing reliance on imports. However, suitable agricultural land has 
decreased in both Rodrigues and Mauritius. High production costs, driven by a lack of economies of scale, combined 
with a significant labor shortage, have resulted in abandoned ag ricultural activities. Additionally, climate change and 
water availability for irrigation, despite heavy rainfall, significantly affect cultivation.  
Food security also encompasses health and the availability of safe and nutritious food. Mauritius has a high prevalence 
 
48 https://agriculture.govmu.org/Pages/About%20Us/Overview.aspx


---
*Page 154*
---

 
28 
 
of non -communicable diseases affecting half of the population. They bring to the forefront the necessity to create 
awareness and the consumption of nutritious food. Since consumers are at the core, and most decisions in households 
on what is eaten are made by women, women have to be involved and exposed to a diverse range of quality food and 
educated to make the right choices and have an understanding of the endeavour to increase local food production and reduce imports.  
Further, promoting the adoption of climate -resilient crops and technologies, such as hydroponics and agri -voltaic 
systems, to mitigate the impacts of climate change and enhance food production. Further, investing in modern farming techniques, including she ltered farming and controlled environment agriculture, to improve yields, reduce pesticide 
use, and ICT integration could attract young entrepreneurs. Finally, a study by the Mauritius Academy of Science and 
Technology
49 recommends that facilitating investments from foreign entrepreneurs in agricultural production is an 
option to be considered in the endeavour for enhanced food security. Eligible young entrepreneurs, especially women, 
can be supported in the preparation of enterprise development plans and produce bankable business plans. Initiatives in the dairy sector, goats and sheep, and specialized forage production can be envisaged.  
Cities, Buildings & Urban Systems :  
As a SIDS, Mauritius has a limited natural resources and one of the main objectives of the government is to promote 
Mauritius as a ‘Sustainable Island State’. ‘Vision 2030 - Transforming Our Future for the Better’ is the long -term vision 
of the Government of Mauritius, aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals and Agenda 2030.  
The island of Mauritius is 1864 km2 in size and has an overall population density of 634 inhabitants per km2 per area 
of land as of 2021.50 The population density has been increasing, almost doubling since 1970 and is even higher than 
the world’s most populous middle income countries such as India and Nigeria. Some of the urban areas such as Beau 
Bassin/Rose Hill in Mauritius are even more de nsely populated than the megacities such as Shanghai and Lagos where 
population density is 3,800 p/km2 and 3,200 p/km2 respectively.51 The reason for the high population density is the 
limited amount of land resources available. However, according to World Bank data, urbanisation has remained about 
constant at 41% over the past few years and has actually declined in the past decade. Juxt aposed with the growing 
population size and density, this means urbanisation is occurring outside the legally defined urban boundaries, which 
need identification in order to ensure sustainable development.52 The Government of Mauritius is taking steps to 
identify and plan these areas. For instance, it has launched a smart city development scheme with a view of developing 
self- sufficient sustainable cities. These smart cities are being built on undeveloped land in rural areas. The Economic 
Development Board of Mauritius has granted 15+ permits for smart cities which are essentially mixed -use, green urban 
 
49 https://www.interacademies.org/sites/default/files/inline -
files/BOOKLET_Empowering%20Food%20Security%20in%20Mauritius%20online%20reduce.pdf  
50 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.POP.DNST?locations=MU  
51 REVISITING THE URBAN DEFINITION FOR THE ISLAND OF MAURITIUS , in the Sustainable City, XIV available at 
https://www.witpress.com/Secure/elibrary/papers/SC20/SC20002FU1.pdf  
52 REVISITING THE URBAN DEFINITION FOR THE ISLAND OF MAURITIUS , in the Sustainable City, XIV available at 
https://www.witpress.com/Secure/elibrary/papers/SC20/SC20002FU1.pdf


---
*Page 155*
---

29 
spaces across the country, that manage resources and contribute to social welfare and nature conservation and are 
aimed at boosting innovation and helping businesses set up in Mauritius.53 
In the construction sector, the government of Mauritius, in collaboration with private sector stakeholders and 
international partners, has been actively promoting green building practices. These initiatives are aimed at reducing 
the environmental footprint of the construction sector, which is a significant contributor to greenhouse gas emissions 
and resource consumption. Key policies and programs have been introduced to encourage the adoption of sustainable 
building standards. The Building Control Act has b een revised to incorporate green building codes, mandating energy -
efficient designs, the use of renewable energy sources, and sustainable materials. Additionally, financial incentives 
such as tax rebates and subsidies are provided to developers who meet th ese green criteria.  
A critical aspect of Mauritius's green building initiatives is the integration of renewable energy sources. Solar energy, 
in particular, plays a pivotal role and wind energy is also being harnessed. The combined use of solar and wind energy 
is positioning Mauritius as a leader in renewable energy adoption within the region.  
The national strategy also includes retrofitting existing buildings to improve their energy efficiency and sustainability. 
By upgrading older structures, Mauritius can accelerate its progress toward reducing carbon emissions and conserving 
resources.  
According to the United Nations, women make up approximately  80%  of the people who are displaced from their 
homes by climate change -related factors, such as extreme weather events, natural disasters, and environmental 
degradation.54 Women and children  are overwhelmingly more likely to die of or be severely affected by indoor air 
pollution given the additional time they spend indoors due to social -economic and cultural factors.55  Data from a 
2018- 2019 time use survey in Mauritius shows that on average, women spend more time on household chores than 
men (4.4 hours against 1.7 hours).  Therefore, it is clear that green buildings can play a significant role in facilitating 
gender eq uality by addressing various aspects of the built environment that impact women’s lives and the 
Government of Mauritius is leading the way with its multi- pronged approach to greening the construction sector.56 
53 https://residency.mu/acquire/smart -city-scheme/  
54 https://www.ohchr.org/en/stories/2022/07/climate -change -exacerbates -violence -against -women -and-
girls#:~:text=It%20is%20estimated%20that%2080,women%2C%20according%20to%20UN%20Environment.  
55 https://www.who.int/news -room/fact -sheets/detail/household -air-pollution -and-
health#:~:text=Women%20and%20children%20disproportionately%20bear,from%20polluting%20stoves%20and%20fuels.  
56 https://www.remax24.com/news/green -building -initiatives -in-mauritius -leading- the-way-in-sustainable -development/


---
*Page 156*
---

Annex 8  
Gender Action Plan  
GENDER  ACTION  PLAN  
Activities  Indicators/Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Costs1* 
Impact Statement : Increasing participation of and decision -making by women in the emerging markets climate ecosystem, particularly in Prosperete’s focus areas 
mentioned above  
Outcome Statement:  
1)Enhancement  of gender diversity, livelihoods/economic potential of women by driving women’s participation in the workforce, including at senior levels
2)Enhancement of successful outcomes, through capital access and  value -addition, for women -owned/ women -led startups.  These outcomes would include
financially sustainable scale -up, responsible capitalization, strong governance.
Rationale for Targets and baseline:  
Targets have been assigned based on current situation identified in our gender assessments, giving a stretch target for achievability, and stakeholder feedback. 
Baselines will be measured in respect of each investment using data provided by the relevant company and this will inform the development of the specific company 
gender action plan, including the targets. Qualitative Targets are provided in italics in table below.  
Fund Level  
Output  1: Building one of the few  women- led, growth stage climate focused fund in EM 
Employ gender diverse workforce 
at Prosperete  achieve gender balanced  workforce  To be 
maintained  
through the life 
of the Fund.  Prosperete team  - 
Applying the gender lens in investment decision -making and 
portfolio management. Supporting activities to include:  
a)Working closely with Win PE
and other similar forums to build and maintain relationships with women entrepreneurs
b)Mentor Maintain a diverse team with high female representation  i) 30%  investment pipeline  qualifies  under the 2x Criteria To be 
maintained  
through the life 
of the Fund.  Prosperete team  - 
1 To be paid from the fund  manager’s  management  fee.


---
*Page 157*
---

Annex 8  
Gender Action Plan  
Portfolio Level  
Output  2: Partner  with  Fund portfolio companies  to increase  female  workforce  participation across  their  organizations,  including  in senior  leadership  
Development of Gender Action 
Plans for each portfolio company. The GAPs will be formulated basis an assessment at the time 
of investment due diligence.  
It must be noted that the GAP  
shall not be used as a screening 
tool but as a baseline to support portfolio companies in improving gender performance. Company specific GAP shall include inclusivity in design of products and services as required.  1 GAP per portfolio company, progress to be measured against agreed timelines  To be developed 90 days after investment closure  Prosperete team and portfolio company  US$ 
30,000  
Supporting portfolio companies in attracting, retaining and supporting a gender diverse workforce. This would include the following activities:  
-building a culture ofinclusivity at portfoliocompanies
-ensuring a conducive workenvironment, includingsupportive policies a
nd
p
ractices that foster a sa fe
wo
rk environment  and
a
ddress potential GBV issuesi)I mplementation of non -discrimination as part of HR policies . Implementation
of Grievance redressal , including in particular a GBV grievance  mechanism.
(Tracking of grievance received) 180 days  from 
GAP  adoption  Prosperete’s deal team (Lead, Impact Specialist) +
p
ortfoli o
c
ompanyUS$ 
10,000  
i i)I mplementation of all gender -related legal and regulatory Mechanisms,
including in respect of SEAH / sexual harassment policies
(Compliance reports to identify any lapses)  180 days  from 
GAP  adoption  Prosperete’s deal 
team (Lead, Impact Specialist) +
p
ortfoli o
c
ompanyUS$ 
10,000  
iii)Identification of gender specific risks in the context of the specific country,
sector and operating environment and outlining measures to address a nd
m
itigate those risks180 d
ays from 
GAP adoption  Prosperete’s deal team (Lead, Impact Specialist) 
+portfoli oUS$ 
10,000


---
*Page 158*
---

Annex 8  
Gender Action Plan  
 
(Conducting a detailed study to inform the formulation of relevant measures; 
tracking sof implementation of measures ) 
 company  
 
 iv) Conducting 1 annual training on gender sensitization  
(Satisfactory feedback from training sessions)  Annual  Prosperete’s deal 
team (Lead, Impact Specialist) + portfolio company  US$ 
10,000  
 v) Adoption of at least 1 policy associated with building gender inclusive workplace that goes beyond legal and regulatory requirements  Annually  Prosperete’s deal team (Lead, Impact Specialist) + portfolio company  US$ 
10,000  
 (vi) Atleast 30% women in th e work force across the Fund portfolio at an 
aggregate level  To be tracked  
and measured  
from Year  5 
(2029)  Prosperete’s deal team (Lead, Impact Specialist) + portfolio company   
 (vii) Help portfolio companies have gender diverse board  To be tracked  
and measured  
from Year  5 
(2029)  Prosperete’s deal team (Lead, Impact Specialist) + portfolio company   
 (vii) Implement additional measures as may be identified during program implementation  Annually  Prosperete’s deal team (Lead, Impact Specialist) + portfolio company   
Output  3: Enable  increased  access  to venture  capital  financing  for women -owned/  women -led startups  
Supporting capacity building for female founders building technology solutions for climate  
Creating avenues to help women founders access domain 
knowledge, mentorship and 
networks  i) 1 session a year for women climate founders  
ii) 1 Women in Climate networking session yearly  
iii) 1 Ecosystem wide event per year to support gender sensitization for climate tech companies, beyond Prosperete portfolio  
iv) 1 event for gender awareness across portfolio companies (to sensitize both genders)  
(obtain good feedback from such sessions)  Annually  Prosperete team-  
Impact Specialist  US$10,000


---
*Page 159*
---

Annex 8  
Gender Action Plan  
Output  4: Transformative activities to help overcome gender norms  
Identify specific societal / 
workplace norms which are regressive for genders.  
Help create awareness and 
deliver trainings to sensitize people about such norms so that they can overcome such barriers  i) Applying the intersectional lens, for each focus country, i dentif
y
s
pecific socio -cultural barriers (eg., economic status, financial
literacy, education, healthcare etc) that contribute todiscrimination against women and vulnerable groups
(Commission a study, as needed,  per focus country to identify thes
e
so
cio-cultural barriers)
ii)Conduct awareness program s to help people overcome the above identified
barriers / norms
iii)Use the results of the study in (i) to identify steps to be undertake n by
i
nvestee companies to overcome identified socio -cultural barriers, set
targets and track the achievement of those targets (for eg., number o f
wo
men in STEM roles employed; number of women in unskilled roles who
have been given financial literacy training, number of women in leadershi p
p
ositions et c)Fi rst 3 years  
A
nnual 
T
o be tracked 
and measured 
from Year 5 (2029)  P
rosperete team- 
Impact Specialist  US$10,000  
__________