=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20201015172044+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
/ModDate: D:20201021113803+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board 
9 – 13 November 2020 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 11  GCF/B.27/0 2/Add.01 
21 October 2020  
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum I 
Funding proposal package f or FP 141  
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled "Improving Adaptive Capacity and Risk Management of
Rural communities in Mongolia";
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat’s assessment;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g)Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.27/02 /Add.01 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 73 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  75 
Secretariat’s assessment  78 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   90 
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's  
assessment  104  
Gender documentation  107


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  Improving Adaptive Capacity and Risk Management of Rural 
Communities in Mongolia  
Country(ies):  Mongolia  
Accredited Entity:  United Nations Development Programme   
Date of first submission:  2018 /06/22  
Date of current submission  2020/ 09/15  
Version number  V.13


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 0 OF 68  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 1 OF 68 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP ) Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s) , indicate  the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of the percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:   
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:     
☒ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
N/A 
N/A 
N/A  
N/A 
 
 
38% 
N/A 
N/A 
62% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  As per suggestion by GCF 
Sec, estimate CO2 
sequestration from 
sustainable land 
management not included, 
to eliminate risk of double 
counting with ADB/GCF  
project  
 
Indicate t CO2eq over lifespan  A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  Direct beneficiaries :  
26,000 households 
(130,000 people)  
50% or 65,000 female  
Indirect beneficiaries: 
160,000 households 
(800,000 people)  
50% or 400,000 female  
Direct beneficiaries:  
4.5% of total national 
population  
47% of the population in target aimags  
Indirect beneficiaries:  
26% of total national population  
100% of herder households in target 
aimags  
Gender  
50% of all direct and 
indirect beneficiaries  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  79,301,276 USD   
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  23,101,276 USD  
Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts . The sum of all total amounts should be consistent  
with A.8.


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 2 OF 68 
 A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  ☒ Grant  23,101,276   
☐ Loan   Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  7 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  6/22/2018  A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.) ? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  The Executing Entity is Mongolia, represented by the Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism (MET)  
National Designated Authority  
Mr. Batjargal Zamba  
Nature Conservation Fund  
Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET)  
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 pages ) 
1. With an observed temperature increase of 2.1 °C over the past 70 years1, Mongolia is among the countries most 
impacted by climate change. Increased temperatures, coupled with decreased precipitation, have resulted in a drying 
trend impacting pastures and water sources, and shifting natural zones. Changes have also been observ ed related to 
the frequency and intensity of extreme events, including disasters brought about by dzud (summer drought followed by 
harsh winters [low temperatures and higher snowfall]) , drought, snow and dust storms, flash floods and both cold and 
heat wav es. Responses to climate impacts by herders have, furthermore  not been informed by climate information or 
by the potential impact of those responses on land and water resources. Unsustainable herding practices and livestock 
numbers are further stressing increasingly fragile ecosystems and related ecosystem services.   
 
2.   Livestock productivity and quality has been declining in the changing landscape due to drought conditions, heat 
stress, harsh winters and unsustainable practices, resulting also in reductions in outputs for subsistence and important income sources. Studies indicate that livestock sector production decreased by 26% compared to that of the 1980s, along with its contribution to the country’s economy.  
 
3. Herder households make up one third of the population in Mongolia, approximately 160,000 households or 90% of 
the agriculture sector. Around 85% of all 332 soum economies in 21 provinces of the country are agriculture based.  
While herder households are the most exposed to climate risks, their scale and thus potential impact also means that tailored interventions can support transformational change towards more climate- informed and sustainable herder 
practices, benefitting the sector, the economy and the environment.     
 4. The proposed project seeks  to strengthen the resilience of resource -dependent herder communities in four 
aimags vulnerable to climate change .  This will be achieved through three complementary Outputs:  
• Integrate climate information into land and water use planning at the national and sub -national 
levels  
• Scaling up climate -resilient water and soil management practices for enhanced small scale herder 
resource management  
 
1 Technology Needs Assessment, Volume 1 – Climate Change Adaptation in Mongolia, Ministry of Env ironment and Green Development, 
2013


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 3 OF 68 
 • Build herder capacity to access markets for sustainably sourced, climate -resilient livestock 
products  
 
5. The proposed project brings together climate- informed natural resources management and sustainable livestock 
practices – building on traditional cooperative approaches among herders, innovative technologies, such as blockchain 
for traceability of sustainably sourced and climate- resilient livestock products, and with links to a responsible private 
sector investment fund to ensure long term, market -driven s ustainability. As 80% of Mongolia is rangeland, information 
generated under Output 1 is relevant across the country and will be applied at the sectoral, national and local levels. 
Interventions under Outputs 2- 3 are focused on priority aimags identified by  government, with high vulnerability to 
climate change impacts and slow onset disasters , as well as  fragile catchment areas that need protection/rehabilitation.  
As the areas are also representative of diverse ecological zones, the approaches and intervent ions of the project can 
be replicated in other  aimags of the country.  
  
6. With Mongolia, represented by the Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET) as the executing entity 
(implementing partner), and the Ministry of Agriculture and Light Industry (MoFALI) as a key partner, this integrated 
proposal is fully aligned with national priorities and is in support of Mongolia’s adaptation and mitigation goals detailed 
in the nationally determined contribution (NDC), namely: to implement sustainable pasture management and emissions 
reductions in the livestock sector  through soil carbon sequestration, to maintain availability of water resources through 
protection of runoff formation zones and their native ecosystems in river basins, and to introduce water sav ing 
technologies. The proposed project contributes to several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): SDG1 No Poverty, 
SDG12 Responsible Consumption and Production, SDG13 Climate Action, SDG15 Life on Land and SDG17 
Partnerships for the Goals.


---
*Page 8*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 68 
 
  
2 Batjargal, Zambyn; Desertification in Mongolia, RALA Report 200 (NEMA)  
3 Technology Needs Assessment, Volume 1 – Climate Change Adaptation in Mongolia, Ministry of Environment and Green Development, 
2013 
4 MARCC (2014) Mongolia Second Assessment Report on Climate Change 2014. Minist. Environ. Green Dev. Mong. pp. 1- 302. 
5 https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/2016GL072033  
6 Permafrost mapping in Mongolia, Insitute of Geoecology, 2016   
7  IPCC. 2012. Summary for Policymakers. In Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. 
A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Edited by C. B. Field et al. Cambridge, UK 
and New York: Cambridge  University Press, 1– 19 (Figure SPM.4A and SPM.4B).  
8 UNFCCC Third National Communication, 2018  
9 Future projections of climate change over Mongolia is predicted using an ensemble mean of 10 Global Climate Models (GCMs). However, 
GCMs output (200km) have been downscaled to regional scale using Regional Climate Model (RCMs) similar to the CORDEX (Coordinated 
Downscaling Experiment, 50- 60km) experiment, except down to a finer spatial resolution (30km). All climate change impact assessments on 
socio -economic s ectors in the country were done based on these high resolution results during TNC (Third National Communication).  
10 Third National Commination of Mongolia under UNFCCC, p.134- 137, 2018  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
7. Observed climate change trends in Mongolia are evident since the 1940’s , with impacts on traditional herder 
households (30% of the population) and on the  natural resources upon which they rely . These impacts  are multi -faceted 
and interlinked, and include increases  in air temperatures  resulting in melting glaciers and permafrost, precipitation 
reductions (particularly during summer) , intensifying desertification and an overall shift of desert zones to the North. 
Overall, climate change is having a drying effect on Mongolia and is contributing to land degradation and desertification 
- 90% of the Mongolian territory is regarde d as vulnerable to desertification.2   
 
8. Over the past 70 years the mean annual air temperature has increased by 2.1°C3.  Annual and summer rainfall has 
decreased and is expected to continue to decrease,  whilst winter snowfalls have increased in places . Together these 
increases in summer drought and increasing winter snowfalls contribut e to more extreme dzud events  resulting in high 
livestock losses.  Average annual precipitation (90% of which falls as rainfall during  April-September) has decreased by 
10% over the past 70 years, resulting in overall  higher aridity , particularly during summer . This w arming and drying 
trend has contributed to desertification in Mongolia, affecting 70% of the grasslands of the country to varying degrees. Pastureland health and availability of biomass heavily affect livestock and livelihoods of herders. Winter pasture yield 
and grazing capacity following a dry summer versus a  relatively mild summer significant ly affects  the survival rates of 
animals .  Ecosystems of the forest steppe and the high mountains are projected to decrease and the steppe and the 
desert steppe are expected to expand. Pasture biomass is expected to decrease significantly in all regions, especially 
in the forest -steppe and steppe regions
4.  
 
9. Seasonal thawing of permafrost layers has also increased, changing the patterns and typology of permafrost, as 
well as vegetation patterns and water resources. The area of glaciers has decreased by 30% over the last 70 years, 
leading to changes in river runoff - expected to be lower in most regions of Mongolia, and higher in some  mountain 
areas. Lake volumes are expected to change, with some rising due to glacier and permafrost melting, but mostly 
lowering or disappearing altogether5. The latest study comm issioned by Ministry of Environment and Tourism 
(MET)/UNDP shows that the permafrost distribution shrunk by 5% in the last 20 years over the country’s territory6.   
 
10. General Circulation Models (GCM) project that Mongolia will be warmer by 2.56°C and 5.16°C by 2050  and 2090 
respectively.   Studies further suggest that for East Asia by the end of the century, 1- in-20-year maximum daily 
precipitation events are likely to become 1- in-4-year to 1- in-15-year events, and the 1- in-20-year hottest day will likely 
become 1- in-2-year or annual events.7  Whilst there may potentially be an overall increase in precipitation, this will be 
exceeded by increases in the evaporation rate8, reducing water availability and subsequent water resources.  According 
to downscaled projections (scenario RCP8.5) using a regional climate model (RegCM4)9 10, Mongolia’s annual mean 
temperature  will be warmer by 1.1- 1.5oC, 2.2- 3.4oC and 4.0- 5.7oC by 2030, 2050 and 2080. Mean annual precipitation 
is project ed to increase by 5.3- 5.6%, 13.7- 14.5% and 25.8- 32.1% respectively at the same time, though  there is an 
accompanying projected 10-20% decreas e in summer rainfall throughout  central part s of Mongolia.  These projected 
decreases in summer rainfall and increases in temperature (increasing aridity during summer) are consistent with observed trends in historical climate, both at the national level and in target aimags , where decreasing precipitation, 
increasing temperatures and potential evapotranspiration during summer  combine  with increases in winter snowfall in 
3 aimags (Figures 26- 30, FS)  to increase the intensity of dzuds (Figure 46 and 47, FS) . These trends are consisten t 
with downscaled projections using a regional climate model, which indicate increasing temperatures and decreasing 
precipitation during the summer season in the target aimags (Figures 37- 40, FS)  
and simulated increases in the 
intensity of dzuds (Figure 44, FS) .


---
*Page 9*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 68 
 
  
11 Mongolia SNC,  Ministry of Nature and Environment, UNEP, 2010  
12 Wang,  L., Yao, Z -J., Jiang, L., Wang, R., Wu, S -S., & Liu, Z -F. (2016). Changes in Climate Extremes and Catastrophic Events in the 
Mongolian Plateau from 1951 to 2012. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 55(5), 1169- 1182. DOI: 10.1175/JAMC -D-14-0282.1  
13 Discussions with Ministry of Agriculture officials and with representatives of the four aimags.  
14 UNDP, NEMA, SDC (2010) The 2009- 10 Dzud Winter Disaster in Mongolia: Lessons Learned (unpublished)  
15 see https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/2016GL 072033  
16 Approximately US$75 million against 2017 budget.  11. The country is also impacted by natural disasters, including harsh winter s, drought, snow and dust storms, flash 
floods and both cold and heat waves, which take a heavy toll on livestock and thereby rural livelihoods.  The magnitude 
and frequency of natural disasters have nearly tripled due to climate change11 in the last decade. Related economic 
costs are estimated to be USD10- 15million annually.  Studies indicate drought as the most serious extreme disaster 
affecting the country in the last 50 years , with  an increasing trend in the area affected by drought between 1951 and 
2012.12  Observations indicate that since 2000, summer droughts , which reduce pasture for livestock , are more 
frequently followed by harsh winters with heavy snowfall s and/or lower temperatures , the combination of which lead to  
dzud events . Since 1940 winter snowfall has  increased by 22% , which combined with increasing summer drought 
(reducing pastures) leads to a significant increase in dzud events since 1999 (see Figures 45 , 46 and 47 , FS). 
 
12. Extended periods  of summer drought and winter snow coverage, as with dzud events, result in significant losses of 
livestock due to the lack of vegetation for grazing, and thus impacts herder livelihoods. This is consistent with 
experiences shared by herder representatives, who have reported increases in dzuds events and related losses to 
livestock.13  The 2009- 10 dzud winter disaster was particularly devastating, when over 10 million head of livestock 
perished;  22% of the national herd. The disaster directly affected 200,000 h ouseholds or nearly a million people in a 
country of 2.8 million14. 
 
13. The climate rationale for the project is primarily based on observed and projected increases in the frequency and 
severity of dzud events , which quantify  the combination of summer drought, followed by harsh winters  (high snowfall 
and/or low temperatures) , and which lead to increased livestock losses (91% of non- natural livestock mortality) during 
winter.   The climate changes that contribute to increasing d zud intensity and frequency, particularly increases in 
summer drought, also lead to other secondary effects:  
• Reductions in the number and area of lakes on the plateau15 which reduce access to water resources for 
livestock;  
• Reduced vegetation and fodder ava ilable at the end of the summer  and throughout the winter.  
 
14. These increases in drought and consequent reductions in water and vegetation reduce the condition of livestock 
by the end of summer, which increases the risk of mortality during the following wint er. If the winter is harsh (either low 
temperatures or high snowfalls) then mortality is higher.  Unsustainable livestock practices also contribute to land 
degradation and affect water resources in Mongolia.  Coping mechanisms, such as increasing the herd s ize to avoid a 
total loss during a dzud, have in part contributed to the growing number of livestock in Mongolia – now 70.9 million 
animals.  The growing size, and changing make- up of the herds, apply pressure on land and water resources, 
accelerating land degradation and water scarcity.  
  
15. The impact of climate change is therefore two- fold and mutually compounding 1) climate change is having an overall 
drying effect on Mongolia, changing the availability or condition of land and water resources, and 2) the choices made 
by herders to protect their herds against extreme events (i.e. increasing herd size to save from total loss during dzud) 
are adding pressure to increasingly fragile land and water resources.  Recognizing this relationship, 3% of the national 
budget is allocated to support the Nati onal Mongolian Livestock Program16 which sets ambitious livestock reduction 
targets, with an overall purpose of developing “a livestock sector that is adaptable to climate change and social 
development and to create an environment where the sector is economically viable and competitive in the market 
economy, to provide safe and health food supply to the population, to deliver quality raw materials to processing 
industries, and to increase exports.”  The Programme includes investments in livestock health and veterinary services 
(including measures to combat and prevent infectious animal diseases which currently prevent Mongolian livestock products from export), guidance for herders on herd structure, development of an animal registration database and 
network,  construction of wells for livestock water supply, and development of industry marketing to capture the intended 
market.   
 
16. Further, the Government of Mongolia has highlighted the impact of climate change on land and water resources 
and the vulnerability of herders in its adaptation strategy and programmes. As a party to the UNFCCC, Mongolian 
Parliament approved the National Action Programme on Climate Change (NAPCC) and updated it in 2011 to include 
concrete measures in response to climate change covering all principal sectors of the economy. Further, a technology 
needs assessment (TNA) was conducted to determine the highest priority sectors, and technologies needed, in order


---
*Page 10*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 68 
 
  
17 Technology Needs Assessment, Volume 1 – Climate Change Adaptation in Mongolia, Ministry of Environment and Green Development, 
2013 
18 Technology Needs Assessment, Volume 1 – Climate Change Adaptati on in Mongolia, Ministry of Environment and Green Development, 
2013 to adapt to climate change. The participatory TNA process led by the National Clim ate Change Coordination Office 
(CCCO) under the MET, applied Multi Criteria Decisions Analysis (MCDA), through which animal husbandry was 
identified among the most vulnerable sectors, given social, economic and environmental losses due to climate change 
impacts are expected to be higher than those of other sectors17. The agriculture sector is the second largest contributor 
(13.7% of GDP) and employs almost 40% of country’s workforce.  
 
17. Mongolia’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) includes an adaptat ion component, highlighting the 
country’s need to overcome negative impacts of climate change, and strengthen resilience of ecosystems and socio-
economic sectors, particularly animal husbandry, water resources and natural disaster management. The NDC is 
conceptually rooted in the Green Development Policy of Mongolia, approved by the Parliament in 2014, with which key 
sectorial action plans at the national level have been aligned. The recently approved Sustainable Development Vision 
(SDV) 2030 of Mongolia al so reflects specific targets on adaptation to climate change, specifically maintaining stable 
ecosystems, integrated water resources management and agriculture sector development.  
 
18. While the individual issues have been identified and are in part being addressed, critical for successful adaptation 
in Mongolia will be to recognize and work in the areas of interlinkages.  Land and water resources cannot be protected without broader climate- informed land and water management.  Sustainable land and water management cannot be 
achieved unless herders move away from activities which contribute to land degradation and water scarcity. Herders 
cannot make the changes needed without access to knowledge about how and where climate change is impacting the 
land and wat er resources on which they rely.  
 
Baseline Scenario  
Land and water use planning at the national and sub -national levels  
19. Already, climate change impacts to Mongolia’s ecosystems are notable; natural zones are shifting and vegetation 
cover has reduced significantly. Plant species composition of rangelands has changed, palatable species have 
decreased and so has the total biomass available as livestock forage.  Changes in temperature, rainfall patterns, 
permafrost and glacial coverage further  affect the availability of fresh water. With such a complex  set of interacting 
factors impacting the ecological balance needed for sustainable herder  livelihoods, an integrated ecosystems 
approach, informed by knowledge of the climate, is needed for effective management of natural resources, particularly 
of water and pastureland.  G oing forward the sustainable use of water and land resources will be critical for Mongolia 
to meet its goals of livestock sector development.  Planning must be informed by climate knowledge, in particular, the impacts of climate change on water and land resources.   
 
20. The Government makes winter plans regarding animals’ location and their movements. The plan is based on 
pastureland carrying capacity defined by maximum biomass stock, but seasonal forecasts are not taken into account due to insufficient capacity
18. Inform ation on the changing landscape and available water resources would further inform 
these plans, providing guidance to herder households which could maximize the survival rate of their livestock. Greater coordination among agencies is also needed in order t o fully realize the benefits that climate information could generate. 
At the national and sub- national planning level, climate information paired with data on the pastureland conditions and 
water resources, can  inform sustainable water and land use planning, to ensure preparedness for extreme events, as 
well as for continuity and enhancement of ecosystem services in changing conditions.    
 
21. In the absence of climate- informed planning, the livestock sector is placing incredible pressure on already fragile 
ecosystems. Mongolian herders are mostly nomadic or semi -nomadic; winter and spring camps are chosen for 
availability of some shelter and ac cess to forage and water (access to summer and autumn pasture is less contested 
than to winter camps and, traditionally within a soum or similar sub- unit, are usually communally used). Migration 
circuits and extent are dependent largely on the availability  of water and adequate grazing. For instance, w ith the drying 
affect climate change is having in Mongolia, herders are basing their movement on the availability of water at fewer points , resulting also in increased pressure on land resources around those w ater sources
.  Further, to protect 
themselves from excessive losses (i.e. during droughts or dzuds), herders have increased their number of livestock.  
Unchecked, this has resulted in an increase of over 50% in total number of livestock since 2012 –  placin g further stress 
on water and land resources already impacted by climate change. And the current numbers have more than doubled, to a total of 70.9 million, since 1990 (marked by the democratic transition).  
 
22. Currently, the two largest groups of animals are represented by sheep ( 32.2 million , 45.5% ) and goats (29.2 million, 
41.2% ) representing roughl y a 1:1 ratio . Goats are particularly destructive to the landscape - pulling grass out by the


---
*Page 11*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 68 
 
 root and keeping it from regenerating, thereby accelerating land degradation. Per traditional knowledge, the ideal ratio 
within herds is 3 sheep to 1 goat , to avoid overstressin g land. Other major livestock groups include cattle  (4.7 million , 
6.7%) , horses  (4.2 million , 5.9%) and camels  (0.5 million,  0.7%) .   
 
23. The ongoing National Mongolian Livestock Programme (closing in 2021) set both overall livestock reduction targets 
and improved herd structure targets. The programme sought to reduce the total number of livestock by 16% or 6.8 
million from the 2008 baseline, while improving the ratio of animals within the national herd –  reducing the number of 
smaller animals, especially goat s, while moderately increasing the number of larger animals. The target for reduction 
of small animals acknowledged the impact that large numbers of sheep, and goats especially, have on the landscape, 
while the increase in large animals sought to diversify  livelihoods and improve productivity. However, as it was 
developed over 10 years ago, the targets did not adequately take into account the additional stresses that climate 
change would place on land and water resources. Had the current programme achieved its 2021 herd structure and 
herd size targets, it would have supported relieving some pressure on land resources, but the demand for water would have increased (see Annex 2). Current livestock figures, however, far exceed the programme’s 2021 targets, and 
pressure on both water and land resources have increased significantly from the 2008 baseline. The programme’s 
baseline and targets, compared to current figures are provided below.  
 
  2008 NMLP Baseline  2021 NMLP Targets  Current Figures (2019)  
  Livestock 
(000s)  % Livestock 
(000s)  % Livestock 
(000s)  % 
Camel  260 0.60%  328 0.90%  472 0.70%  
Horse  2,208 5.10%  2,990 8.20%  4,215 5.90%  
Cattle  2,511 5.80%  5,031 13.80%  4,753 6.70%  
Sheep  18,354 42.40%  16,442 45.10%  32,267 45.50%  
Goat  19,956 46.10%  11,666 32.00%  29,262 41.20%  
Totals  43,288 100.00%  36,458 100.00%  70,969 100.00%  
 
24. A national programme, a  successor to the Mongolian Livestock Programme, will be developed over the next 2 
years. Similarly, the programme is expected to include livestock reduction targets and herd structure targets.  These 
targets will need to take into account the new baseline of 70.9 million animals and the significant impact that the larger 
herd has on the landscape and on water resources.  It is also critical that targets are informed by the impacts of climate 
change on natural resources, and that policies and incentives for herders are in place, to support overall sustainable 
livestock management and sustainable use of natural resources. For instance, l arger animals demand more fodder and 
water, but the productivity and outputs of large animals are much greater , at the same time the impact of smaller 
animals on the landscape should not be underestimated, especially at the current scale.  
 
25. While the new national programme is still under development, it  is expected to include a) livestock reduction targets 
of over 25% b) herd structure targets and c) the establishment of a land use payment system based on regional 
differences  to limit the num ber of livestock within the carrying capacity, and to balance the grazing pressure (2050 
Vision document) .   
 
 
Community level ecosystems- based adaptation approaches to protect land and water resources  
26. The main climate change impacts in Mongolia are to natural resources and related ecosystems, specifically 
decreasing of green mass in rangelands and drying of water resources. Land degradation contributes to erosion and 
compaction of soil, which can reduce the soil’s capacity to regulate water.  Similarly, decreases in water resources, as 
well as contributes to loss of biomass and soil erosion -  accelerating desertification and affecting land productivity.   
 
27. Such impacts pose a threat to the rural population whose livelihood is directly dependent on availability of land and 
water resources.  Mongolian livestock obtains over 90% of its annual feed intake from the natural pastures. Pasture 
yields are strongly af fected by climate and weather conditions. The peak of pasture biomass has declined by 20 to 30% 
during the past 40 years and is projected to continue to decline as climate conditions change. Likewise, palatable 
species composition has also declined. In addition to reduced nutrition from pastures, rising temperatures are expected 
to adversely affect the grazing time available to livestock. Water availability will be affected due to inconsistent -high, 
intensity -short -duration rainfall events. Extreme cold spe lls and higher frequency of dzud events will likely increase


---
*Page 12*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 68 
 
  
19 MOR2 Policy Brief No. 2 Community -based Rangeland Management in Mongolia: Outcomes and Keys to Success  mortality and further stress animals. This will also combine to result in a continued trend of reduction in average body 
weight and productivity.  
 
28. Monitoring of ecosystems and ecosystem services , and related protection measures, can therefore be categorized 
into two areas a) sustainable pasture management and b) water resources management and efficient use. Related 
baseline efforts include: cooperative use among herders of shared natural resources, increased fodder production, 
sustainable land management and integrated water resources management (IWRM).  While baseline efforts were not 
specifically designed as adaptation interventions, there are clear adaptation co- benefits – cooperation among her ders 
prevents overexploitation of natural resources and therefore greater resilience to the drying effects of climate change, 
and better fodder production reduces the impact of harsher winters and dzuds on livestock.  There is potential to build 
on these existing best practices, to include climate projections and related impacts on the landscape and on water 
resources.  In this way, herder groups and soum governors can build adaptation into planning and include those 
projections in the design of support to herder communities.  
 
Pasture Management  
29. A nationwide assessment of rangeland health in 2015 indicated that 65% of Mongolian rangelands are significantly 
altered but that 90% still maintain the capacity to regenerate naturally through improved grazing management informed by the impact of climate change on land and reduced stocking rates . Without immediate interventions at scale, land 
degradation in Mongolia will continue beyond levels which can be naturally regenerated. Herder communities rely on 
healthy  rangelands for livestock production and to prepare for winter, as they promote greater overall forage and better 
nutrition for animals, leading to healthy animals for a) better quality livestock products and b) higher survival rate of 
animals dur ing increasingly harsh winters and dzuds.  
 
30. Increased temperatures and decreased overall precipitation further exacerbate land degradation and accelerate 
desertification. In the proposed project aimags, desertification is a growing concern.  A desertification map developed 
by the Institute of Geo- Ecology shows that an average of 62.8% of territories of the Dornod, 76.8% of Sukhbaatar, 
58.4% of Khovd and 64.4% of Zavkhan aimags are showing signs of desertification to some extent, with an average of 
26% of territories of Dornod aimag, 21.4% of Sukhbaatar, 5.3% of Khovd and 4.6% Zavkhan aimags are categorized 
as ‘very severe’. Territories in eastern provinces (Sukhbaatar and Dornod) are estimated to have the highest 
percentage of strongly desertified areas compared to other provinces in Mongolia.  
 
31. Pasture land in Mongolia is a public good and not yet adequately regulated to prevent unsustainable herding 
practices, including herd sizes that exceed the carrying capacity of the land.  Traditional herder  group- based 
approaches, however, have proven successful to foster the necessary cooperation for sustainable pasture 
management through herder group- based approaches. Community organizations of herders and forest user groups, 
are recognized as entities under the Civil Code (4.8.1.).  Current land law provides for the option to allocate use rights 
to natural resources including winter and spring pastures to customary resource users. It also enables contracts 
between the soum governor and a group of herders/c ustomary resource users for management and protection of an 
area of which the boundary should be agreed by neighboring users or groups.   
 
32. At the local level, aimag and soum administrations have critical roles in providing technical assistance to herder 
associations and herder households in joint planning and co- management of natural resources. In this regard, annual 
land management plans of the soums are developed under participatory approach including herders and soum 
government officials and off icers in charge of land, environment and agriculture. This community -based rangeland 
management (CBRM) approach is implemented successfully in parts of the country where the herder groups or pasture 
user groups are active.  Through this approach, herders use grassland in accordance with the pasture management plan developed by them and the pasture use contract entered into with soum governors. Related ecological
 
improvements are most notable for winter pastures – steppe landscapes in CBRM communities are healthier than those 
of non- CBRM communities. And w inter/fodder preparation approaches through reserve pastures, small areas protected 
by fencing and large areas protected by consensus and guarding, have been successfully (re- ) introduced. CBRM 
member households are therefore better prepared for dzud and lose a smaller proportion of their herds, indicating that CBRM can help reduce vulnerability and increase adaptive capacity
19. Social cohesion developed through joint 
activities in natural resource management , and basic income generating activities are the basis for developing 
organizations such as cooperatives for production and marketing – a strategy that is pursued by the government.  
Successful interventions applying CBRM include those supported by develop ment partner such as the Swiss Agency 
for Development and Cooperation (SDC) and International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD).


---
*Page 13*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 68 
 
  
20 Mongolia Assessment report on Climate change, Government of Mongolia, 2014  
21 Permafrost mapping in Mongolia, Institute of Geoecology, 2016    33. Further, a newly introduced process by ALAGaC promotes group -based pasture  land management through 
allocation of natur al resource use rights at soum level, based on customary use, and facilitation of agreements among 
herders, herder groups and soum government. ALAGaC is responsible for overseeing country’s land use and 
management. The agency monitors changes in land use c haracteristics, develops and implements policy on land 
ownership, possession, and use, and protection and rehabilitation of land resources, organizes and provides 
professional guidance for the development of land management plans at national and local levels.  
 
34. There are opportunities to build on the CBRM approach to ensure that decision- making is informed by climate 
information and includes best practices related sustainable land management and ecosystems based adaptation, a) 
establishing reference sites i n different ecological zones, b) aligning monitoring methods, and c) evaluating results of 
different approaches to pasture use planning and management.     
 
35. To inform sustainable land management practices, guidelines are available.  The Sustainable Land Management 
for Combating Desertification project (SLM Project) implemented by the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry 
(MoFALI) and MET successfully piloted and scaled up sustainable land management practices based on a collaborative management approach from 2008 to 2012. In collabor ation with other development partners, the SLM project developed 
guidelines for the development of the soum level annual pasture land management plan. This strengthened the capacity 
for collaborative management among the soum government land officers and organized herder groups, a key element 
for sustainable pasture land management in Mongolia. 
The project successfully piloted a series of practices for 
sustainable pasture use, (re) -introducing rotation and resting, fodder production, rehabilitation of water  sources, 
protection from soil erosion, establishment of wind- breaks, intercropping, and cultivation of trees and bushes. The 
project generated technical reports to inform on species for fodder production windbreaks and soil protection feasible for differe nt zones. The SLM project also supported establishment of the Center for Desertification Research and 
introduced SLM as a degree course at the National University of Mongolia, thus improving national research capacity 
for SLM and combating desertification.   These resources can be drawn on in sustainable land management activities 
under the proposed project.   
 
Water Resources Protection and Use  
36. Given  the drying effects of climate change in Mongolia, it is critical to monitor, protect and manage water resou rces.  
With increased temperatures, water resources are becoming increasingly scarce. Latest observation of glacier retreat in the western mountainous region of the country indicates that water resources from glaciers may get completely 
exhausted within the next 2- 3 decades
20, affecting the rivers and streams originating from these glaciers that have been 
providing water to the mountain valleys and grazing lands downstream, and communities for thousands of years.  
 
37. As herders respond to climate change by mi grating in search of healthier pastures, similarly the impacts of climate 
change on water resources also trigger migration.  As water sources dry up, herders migrate in search of other sources 
for their herds.  Water wells have traditionally been a source of water for livestock, however, the number of functioning 
livestock watering wells has fallen, while the livestock numbers have increased.  This drop in functioning wells was 
mainly due the collapse of the state systems to maintain and renovate water infr astructure. In 2000, the GoM initiated 
a new programme to construct new wells and rehabilitate existing structures under the National Mongolian Livestock 
Program.  In addition, around 500 reservoirs and ponds with a capacity of 92,500m3 are used for livest ock water supply.  
 
38. Combined, the drying of water sources due to climate change and decreased number of wells, result in increased 
pressure on rivers, springs, lakes and ponds that do have water.  Related land degradation around those water sources 
and river basins affects hy drologic cycles and ecosystem services –  reduced vegetation that prevents soil erosion, and 
compacting soil resulting in accelerated runoff and inhibited absorption of water and ground water recharge.  
 
39. Overall the country’s surface water resources have been declining and are expected to continue to decline through 
the drying effects of climate change. At the same time, however, the western mountainous region that contain half of 
country’s surface water resources will have temporary abundance of water resources due to thawing of glaciers and 
permafrost that supply origin of major rivers –  the western mountainous areas (Zavkhan, Khovd and Dornod aimags) 
show a temporary increase in number of surface water bodies due to melting glaciers, while in the eastern region’s 
semi desert area (Sukhbaatar aimag) there has been a decrease.  At the national level, glaciers have retreated by 30% in the last 70 years and permafrost areas have shrunk by 5% in last 20 years
21.  
 
40.  The concept of IWRM was introd uced in Mongolia to improve planning and ensure coordinated usage of water 
resources. As a part of the IWRM process, River Basin Administrations (RBAs) have been formally established in 21


---
*Page 14*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 68 
 
  
22 The four project aimags are covered by 13 river basins. However, one river basin only includes 2% of one aimag and therefore is not 
considered under this project.   of the 29 water basins and have been tasked with developing Integra ted Water Management Plans. So far, of the 12 
river or lake basins pertinent to proposed aimags for intervention22, IWRM Plans incorporating preliminary climate 
change adaptation strategies have been developed for seven and plans are under development for four. However, the 
critical step of implementing these plans at the pasture level has not yet been taken and lacking are related climate 
change forecasts to ensure plans are climate- informed.  T here are however best practices, which can serve as a model, 
applying ecosystem based approaches for protection of water resources.  
 
41. The UNDP/Adaptation Fund Ecosystem Based Adaptation Approach to Maintaining Water Security in Critical Water 
Catchments in Mongolia (EbA) project has built on experiences of the SLM project, promoting user groups and 
community participation to implement local adaptation measures, and is successfully introducing measures in water resources protection and efficient use. Under this project, integrated 
strategies/management plans for target 
landscapes and river basins have been developed, ratified and are under implementation already in Khentii, Uvs and 
Dornod aimags and 17 soums. The project has supported the development of IWRM plans for two RBAs including one 
that is pertinent to the proposed GCF project. Institutional structures for river basin management integrating climate 
change risks were established and are in operation in the target areas as model for replication. Commencing in 2012, 
its impleme ntation is planned for completion in 2017. Target areas are the two main critical and unique landscapes - 
Turgen and Kharhiraa river basins in Western Mongolia, and the Ulz river basin in the Eastern Steppes. The main 
objective of the project is to maintai n the water provisioning services supplied by  mountain and steppe ecosystems by 
internalizing climate change risks within land water  resource management. Project implementation is organized under 
three components on:  
 
• Integrated strategies/management plans for target landscapes/river basins developed and under 
Implementation  
• Implementing landscape level adaptation techniques to maintain ecosystem integrity and water security under 
conditions of climate change 
• Strengthening capacit ies/institutions to support EbA strategies and integrated river basin management, their 
replication and mainstreaming in sector policies  
 
42. There is also opportunity for water harvesting through small ponds.  In the Altai Mountain ranges of western 
Mongolia in particular, there is a high potential to harvest water from glacier and snow melt to compensate for the water 
deficit during the hot and dry spell in summer. Through the pilot sites of the EbA project, water harvesting in high altitudes from snow and gl
acier melt and heavy summer rainfalls has shown to have multiple ecosystem service 
benefits:  
 
• Regulated and stable water supply for livestock and wildlife and for irrigation with relatively low level of 
evaporation  
• Ground water recharge  
• Replenishment of soil moisture 
• Minimizing soil erosion from intensive rain and potential land slides  
 
43. Further, the National Mongolian Livestock Program is working to improve livestock water supply.  This includes 
digging new and rehabilitating existing wells, creating new reservoirs, and introducing water harvesting measures to 
collect rain water or snow.  The program works closely with herder groups and communities to establ ish agreements 
to ensure ownership as well as long term maintenance of the investments.      
  
44. Best practices developed by the EbA project, as well as the SLM project, are well documented and should be used 
as guiding materials for further related work. Gi ven the inextricable nature of herders and the landscape, any 
interventions seeking to rehabilitate or protect land and water resources must include and consider herder livelihoods – their challenges and their adaptation needs.  Without which, maladaptive measures can continue to stress natural 
resources beyond tipping points, with implications for ecosystems, ecosystem services and for the people which rely 
on them.        
 
Support to herder households and livestock productivity  
45. Herder households make up 30% of the population of Mongolia. Given their reliance on natural resources, herders 
are the most sensitive to changes in the landscape and availability of water resources.   While herders are extremely 
vulnerable to climate change, they can also inadvertently contribute to land degradation through unsustainable livestock 
management – exacerbating land degradation and stressing water sources.


---
*Page 15*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 68 
 
  
23 http://en.montsame.mn/agriculture/number -livestock -increases -almost -56-million -heads   
24 Per traditional knowledge, the ideal ratio within herds is 3 sheep to 1 goat to avoid over stressing land. Currently, the two largest groups of 
animals are represented by sheep ( 32.2 million) and goats (29.2 million) representing approximately a 1:1 ratio, followed by cattle, horses 
and camels.  
25 3% of the national budget is allocated to the Programme, or approximately USD75 million against 2017 budget.   
46. Impacts of climate change on l and and water resources, and market forces, have resulted in response measures 
by herders that contribute to their vulnerability. For instance, as the market for meat is limited and value chains are 
undeveloped, herders have opted to raise more goats in or der to benefit from the raw cashmere market.  As a result, 
the number of livestock of Mongolia has increased to 70.9  million animals23, with a disproportionate number of goats24.  
This approach has several drawbacks 1) overpopulation of livestock degrades pasture and water sources, resulting in 
poor animal health and in substandard quality of livestock products (meat, milk, wool, leather etc), 2) as goats are more 
vulnerable to extreme cold, they ultimately incur greater losses during dzud events impacting herder livelihoods and 3) 
goats, in particular, are destructive to the landscape, pulling grass out by the root and keeping it from regenerating – 
contributing to land degradati on.  
 
47. The Government of Mongolia recognizes the growing number of livestock and is working towards addressing it 
through the National Mongolian Livestock Programme25. The Programme seeks to reduce the overall number of 
livestock by addressing the animal health challenges (e.g. hoof -and-mouth disease) that prevent export of livestock 
products and contribute to the low livestock off -take rate. The Programme invests in livestock health and veterinary 
services, guidance for herders on herd structure, developmen t of an animal registration database and network, 
construction of wells for livestock water supply, and development of industry marketing to capture the intended market.  
The Programme will be implemented in two phases; the first 2010- 2015 was recently completely, and the second will 
soon commence and continue until 2021.   
 
48. While the programme has fallen short of its Phase I targets, important progress and achievements have been made.  
A review of the program’s first phase was undertaken in early 2015.  The rate of implementation was estimated at 
36.0% against the Phase I target, as at end- 2014. The achievements from the Phase I of the Programme are as follows:  
 
• Legislative framework strengthened by draft Laws on Animal health and Domestic animal gene fund, as well as a National sub programme to support productivity of animal husbandry;  
• Approximately 21,000 herders and 16,000 professionals received refresher trai ning opportunities through 332 
state and 133 private entities.  
• 859,229 animals got ear -tagged in 2014 alone and were entered into the national database with which a 
percentage of traceability reached 22% of all animals.  
• Number of newly established wells for rural water supply reached a total of 2,067 wells. In 2014 alone 1,128 
wells were established by allocating MNT10 Bln (approx. USD4.2 million).  
• Although the overall number of animals has not yet begun to decrease, the herd structure improved with the 
percentage of goats in country’s total livestock reduced by 0.2%.  
• Land area allocated for special purposes and classified as long- distance and reserve pastures reached 5.4% 
of the country’s total territory.  
• And 10.3% of the country’s herders covered by index -based livestock insurance scheme.  
 
49. A national programme , a successor to the Mongolian Livestock Programme  is expected to include creating 
“favorable investment and business conditions for development of the pasture and intensive livestock industries 
simultaneously, and decrease the exposure to natural risk and increase the productivity of the livestock industry”.   
 
50. Improvements to livestock health and reductions to livestock numbers will not be sufficient to increase adaptive 
capacity of herder households.  Significant investment has been made by the government to support livestock product 
processing of raw materials (see Annex 2), with the goal of broadening the domestic market and extending into the 
international market.  However, herders will require support in order to eventually access markets for products which are of higher value and which are consistent with sustainable land and water management criteria in the face of climate 
change (e.g. sustainably -sourced cashmere).   
 
51. If practices continue as usual, herders will produce only raw materials, but of decreasing value.  As climate change 
is impacting the grasslands and water sources that animals need for sustenance, the result is increasingly 
undernourished or unhealthy anim als, and therefore lower quality livestock products.  For cashmere, this means 
undernourished goats with coarser hairs. The same can be said of other livestock products –  increasingly 
undernourished and unhealthy animals result in reduced quality of livest ock products.  In response, herders have opted 
for larger herds to cover the losses of decrease quality and thus value of livestock products – adding more pressure on


---
*Page 16*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 68 
 
 grasslands and water resources. While there is still time for impactful interventions, th is dangerous cycle can quickly 
push Mongolia towards a tipping point. Support is needed for herders to move away from low quality raw materials, 
and towards climate- informed herding practices for both sustainability of herder livelihoods as well as the nat ural 
resources on which herders rely.   
 
52. The livestock sector overall can be described as a low input – high risk -low productivity sector. In  2015, there were 
153,085 herder households corresponding to around 30% of the people living in the country.  The agriculture sector contributes 14.7% to the country’s economy, 85.6% of which is livestock husbandry and ~7% of export income, whereas 
the con tribution to a national economy was 38% in 1995. Livestock is the main livelihood source for more than 70% of 
the rural population. Although there are 70.9  million head of livestock in Mongolia, MoFALI and Green Gold project data 
shows that more than 60% of herder households own less than 200 animals which makes their annual disposable 
income below national poverty line and therefore the most vulnerable population segment in the country. During project 
consultations, aimag officials stated that up to 88% of  the herder households in the Dornod aimag are indebted. The 
debt is due to combined impacts of remoteness, lack of regular cash income, land- use conflict, and, now, increasing 
climate change risks and related disasters.  
 
53. Climate change renders current her ding practices and production systems more unviable than they have already 
become (in part, due to increasing intensity of climate variability, but also reflecting the emphasis on herd sizes as a proxy for collateral by informal and formal purveyors of finance). The impact of climate change hampers efforts to reduce animal numbers with a view to increasing incomes by boosting the value per unit of production. This further 
compromises the ability to develop markets and lowers incomes for herders.  Breaking t his cycle and promoting a 
sustainable pasture management practices is key to developing a climate resilient livestock industry and to reducing 
vulnerability of herder communities.  Thus, recalibrating the livestock sector requires climate- adaptive and resi lient 
strategies which, in turn, require investment, training and upskilling at the herder level, improved processing and 
reduced value- chain fragmentation.  
 
54. Knowledge  on herders’ institutions for pasture management and income generation, and on apex organ izations for 
processing and marketing, has been much expanded in recent years, with contributions by other projects supported by 
the UNDP, World Bank ( Sustainable Livelihoods Project , now in Phase III), SDC ( Green Gold Project), and IFAD 
(Project for Market and Pasture Management Development ); all of which share approaches of collective action by 
herders. The government’s Herder Policy and the Law on Cooperatives likewise seek to promote collective action and community organization. The concept of the Law on Pastureland was approved by the Government in May 2016 after 
pending almost a decade. The law
 allows pasture user groups to obtain possession rights over the land where they 
reside.  
 
55. The government, development partners and development banks have been active in the livestock sector over the 
last two decades. The World Bank’s Integrated Livestock -based Livelihoods Support Project  has been mainstreamed 
into all aimags. It has supported l ivestock production, pasture management and rural community development in all 
aimags and focused on linking herders to markets and raising livestock productivity through animal health, breeding and genetic improvement and nutrition. SDC, the International  Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) and the United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID) through Mercy Corps are active in livestock and pastureland 
management, value addition to livestock products and rural business development.  Furthe
r, there are other 
programmes on quality upgrading, better pricing methods, business capacity development of herder groups, milk sector 
development, fodder supply system, food safety system, intensive livestock production systems, animal health systems, 
drugs and epidemic prevention, and rural income diversification. The GoM has also invested significantly in value chain 
development (e.g. processing centers for livestock products, the Cashmere Program), poor quality products and animal 
health however has been challenges for maximizing impact of these investments.  Climate change is exacerbating 
these challenges, as pasture and water resources become increasingly degraded or scarce.         
 
56. Overall, livestock sector interventions are focused largely on anima l health and short term measures to improving 
herder livelihoods (e.g. dzud relief programmes), but not necessarily on building long term climate resilience, nor on 
ensuring that livestock practices are in the long term climate resilient or sustainable.  T here are opportunities to integrate 
climate resilience into programmes that support herder households, while extending support to help herders access 
markets for livestock products, particularly products which were sourced sustainably through climate infor med use of 
natural resources.   
 
Summary of Gaps Related to Baseline Efforts  
57. There are opportunities to bring available information, climate and environmental, together to produce tailored 
products that could inform livestock planning towards greater climate- resilience, and ensure medium to long- term 
preparedness measures.  For ins tance, the National Agency for Meteorology and Environmental Monitoring (NAMEM)


---
*Page 17*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 68 
 
 collects environmental data related to land carrying capacity, and officers of the soum livestock unit undertake data 
collection on indicators to monitor implementation of the five priority areas of the National Livestock Program, including 
pastureland management. These data however are  not analyzed in the context of climate change and vulnerability in 
a manner that could inform climate- resilient livestock planning.   
 
58. While the re are several successful interventions related to sustainable use of natural resources and herder 
livelihoods in Mongolia, efforts have been siloed, focused for instance solely on development of value chains, or 
cooperation of herders on natural resources  management. Cooperative approaches among herders for pastureland 
and water management have been developed for sustainable use of land and water resources, but not necessarily 
taking into account the impact climate change is having, or will have, on natural resources. Similarly, investments into 
value chains have been with a focus on economic development and herder productivity, without necessarily considering the longer term sustainability of herder practices given limits of natural resources in the changi ng climate. There are 
opportunities to foster an integrated approach, building on established efforts and best practices, while applying a climate lens to interventions.  
 
59. Importantly, the link to markets for sustainable livestock products is needed to ens ure adaptation is a viable solution 
for both land and water resources, as well as herder livelihoods.  For instance, the natural and organic quality of Mongolian livestock products, significant idle production capacity, availability of educated workers, relatively low labor 
costs, agro- processing and other value addition for primary agricultural products, together provide an opportunity to 
reduce the vulnerability of not only herder livelihoods but also the overall economy of Mongolia. Current government 
policies consider agro-
processing as one of the priority sectors for development for transforming the Mongolian 
economy from low -value -added to high- value -added production and its diversification. In order to promote the premium 
quality of the sector and reg ulate labeling and certification processes, Organic Food Law has been drafted and 
approved by the Government in 2016.  
 
60. The Government of Mongolia seeks a long term solution that ensures continued service of its ecosystems in the 
face of climate change, wh ile also building resilience of its most climate- vulnerable group, herders.  To do this, an 
integrated approach which brings together a) climate -informed planning and disaster preparedness, b) cooperative 
approaches for protection of land and water resourc es and c) a forward- thinking approach to increase resilience and 
improve productivity for herder livelihoods is needed.    
 
Key barriers that must be addressed in order to achieve the long term solution  
Technical capacity and limited computing/storage capacity, prohibiting longer term climate- resilient planning  
61. Mongolia has a well -established hydromet system. Currently, hydrometeorological data are collected through a 
national monitoring network of 135 meteorology stations operating 24 hours with 5- 6 employees and in 95 of them 
automatic data loggers are coupled with traditional (analog) data collection system. The network also includes 181 
monitoring posts with 1- 2 employees  each. There are 7 upper -air, as well as 147 hydrological and 152 agro-
meteorological observation posts. The hydrometeorology agency employs 1,979 individuals at central and local (aimag and soum) levels. Complementing this are internationally available seasonal and monthly forecasts. Accuracy for these 
are, however, relatively low at mid and high latitudes compared to other regions, resulting in more neutral seasonal and 
monthly forecasts.  
 
62. While existing computing and storage capacity is sufficient to use the data for current application (i.e. daily to weekly 
weather forecasts), investment is needed for improved accuracy of monthly and seasonal forecasts and to generate the climate models needed to inform longer term climate- informed planning.  With the existing system, 536 out of the  
available 768 cores are used for short term weather forecast models, prohibiting expansion towards longer forecasts 
with finer grids for higher accuracy, particularly for a country covering 1,564,116 km
2.  The national weather service 
(NWS) is forecasting based on existing ground and upper air observation, satellite and radar monitoring, and modeling 
systems. However, the NWS needs to move towards and initiate impact based forecasts (IBF) and ensure that IBF is 
used to support forecast based finance (FBF),  and its scale- up. Towards that end, there are capacity gaps related to 
computing resources, setting- up an early warning system (particularly for dzuds), effectively using radar and satellite 
remote sensing data, as well as processing these data in GIS env ironments to produce IBF which can support climate 
service and information requirements. Upgrades in the computing and storage capacity would allow for more accurate 
projections to better inform planning and adaptation measures (i.e. land and water resourc es management, livestock, 
rangeland, arable farming, health, infrastructure, disaster management, water resource, forest, permafrost, wild 
animals, ecosystem etc.). Applying this information to planning and for climate -resilient policies, will also require  
strengthening capacity of technical staff to develop the necessary models and analyses, as well as sensitization of 
decision -makers to the impacts of climate change on natural resources and thus herder livelihoods.


---
*Page 18*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 68 
 
  
26 IWRM plan of Mongolia, 2013, Chapter: 5.2 Agriculture sector, pp 64  Drying water sources due to climate c hange and limited wells presenting challenges for herders to access water for 
livestock  
63. Rivers, streams and ponds, and related ecosystems are facing increasing pressure by grazing animals due to the 
decline in functional livestock water wells.  The national IWRM plan indicates that between 1990 and 2000 the number 
of functioning livestock watering wells fell from 38,000 to 31,00026, while the number of livestock has significantly 
increased. This drop in functioning wells was mainly due the collapse o f the state systems to maintain and renovate 
livestock infrastructure.  
 
64. In 2000 the GoM initiated a new program to construct new wells and rehabilitate existing structures under the 
Mongolian National Livestock Program but progress has been slow with most  investments being close to Ulaanbaatar. 
In 2009, totally 39.3 thousand wells were operational for livestock watering and from which 26.8 thousand are located 
in the pasture. In addition, around 500 reservoirs and ponds with a capacity of 92,500m3 are used for livestock water 
supply.  
 
65. Support is needed to expand the coverage for water well construction and rehabilitation to reach underserved 
remote herder communities,  in order to improve access to underutilized pastures and relieve pressure from 
overstress ed land and water sources that are increasingly fragile due to climate change.  Importantly, planning of these 
wells must be informed by climate change to avoid overexploitation of groundwater in areas which will become 
increasingly water stressed by clima te change.  Further, opportunities to harvest existing water supplies are 
underutilized.  In the western Altai Mountain ranges and Great Lakes Valley, there are opportunities to better harvest 
glacier melt through rehabilitation of ancient water supply net works, which should be further explored.   
 
Limited haymaking and storage impacting livestock health and survival, resulting in significant economic loss to herders 
during winters/dzud events  
66. In nomadic livestock husbandry, animals are raised throughout the year in open pastures. However, the availability 
of forage decreases in August and the grass starts to dry from late August -September.  After October, feed is deficient 
in both quantity and quality.  With the impact of climate change, winters are becoming harsher and the incidence of 
dzud is increasing, with corresponding increases in losses, particularly for subsistence herders who make up the 
majority. Just a few more centimeters of snow be yond the average locks the forage under a thick frozen layer, 
preventing animals from reaching it and causing high mortality among the livestock.  The winter dzud of 1999, 2000 
and 2001 reduced the national herd by about one- third. The dzud of 2009- 2010 resulted in the death of over 10 million 
animals out of 43 million, at an estimated cost of more than USD 340 million. As a result of these two dzuds, more than 
20,000 households lost their livelihoods.   
 
67. As a coping mechanism, some herder households allow for a larger herd. This approach has several set backs, 1) 
more animals against limited natural resources result in unhealthy animals and low quality livestock products, and 2) 
at scale this approach further exacerbates land degradation.  Increased haymaking and related storage can ensure that animals have nourishment through the increasingly harsh winters, resulting in stronger and healthier animals, fewer 
losses and increased quality of livestock products.  This can also give herders the assurance needed to cope with harsh 
winters by increasing their herd size.     
 
Policy, regulatory or market factors that contribute to increased number of livestock and thus pressure on land and 
water resources  
68. Overpopulat ion of livestock degrades pasture and water resources resulting in substandard animal health and low 
quality of livestock products (i.e. cashmere, wool, milk, meat, leather, etc), which further compromises the ability to develop markets and ensure reliable 
income for herders. Breaking this cycle and promoting sustainable pasture 
management practices is key to protecting land and water resources, developing a climate resilient livestock industry 
and to reducing vulnerability of herder communities.  The following are the main drivers inhibiting reduction of livestock 
numbers:   
• Lack of markets – with unrestricted access to pasture and lack of access to markets, the livestock off -take 
rate is below the replacement rate  
• Lack of individual or group land tenure –  land is owned by the state therefore a non- exclusive and unregulated 
public good  
• Government subsidies –  public transfer payments and commercial credits tied to number of livestock owned  
• Economic model for livestock value chains dominated by payments based on volume


---
*Page 19*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 68 
 
 69.   Without intervention in the form of policy transformation towards an enabling environment for sustainable livestock 
products and away from incentives that favor a large number of animals, livestock numbers will continue to increase 
beyond carrying capacity  of the land.   
 
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages  plus diagram ) 
70. The objective of the proposed project is to strengthen the resilience of resource -dependent herder 
communities in four aimags vulnerable to climate change.  The proposed project seeks an integrated approach to address climate change impacts on herder livelihoods and on the natural resources on which they rely.  This will require 
strengthening capacity to generate climate models for longer term climate resilient planning, while reconciling the 
ambitious economic development goals of livestock sector with the limits of increasingly fragile land and water sources 
due to climate change. To do this, the project complements significant investment from the Government of Mongolia 
related to the livestock sector and natural resources management, while addressing the key barriers through 
strengthening the computing and capacity needs for long term climate- informed planning, investments in water access 
points, and support to the policy transformations needed to remove incentives for maladaptive herder practices.    
 
Theory of Change Diagram  
 
 
 
71. To address the barrier related to capacity, the project will strengthen capacity of NAMEM to collect and analyze the 
data necessary for climate- informed planning.  This will include investments to computing equipment and data storage, 
as well as technical training to enable climate- informed and risk -informed livestock planning.  Support will also be 
provided to integrate climate change into aimag and soum level development plans to ensure that local planning 
considers climate change in regards to carrying c apacity of land resources and guidance to herders on Integration of 
climate change and climate -informed carrying capacity into aimag and soum level development plans  
 
72. To address the barrier of water access, the project will apply EbA measures to protect l and and natural water 
resources, while also establishing or rehabilitating water wells for livestock. Using community -based resources 
management, herders will coordinate on rotational pastures and sustainable use of water resources, as well as 
establishing  means of maintaining EbA results and water well investments.  This will relieve pressure on rivers, streams 
and ponds as well as on over -utilized pastures which are increasingly fragile due to climate change.  
 
73. Support to haymaking and pasture reserves, and related storage, will ensure livestock are better able to survive 
increasingly harsh winters, and losses to subsistence herders are reduced. Stronger and healthier animals are not only


---
*Page 20*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 68 
 
 able to survive the harsh climatic events (i.e . dzud) but also are less likely to be affected by outbreak of infectious 
diseases.   
 
74. And to address the policy barrier, the project will support the planned policy transformations under the National 
Mongolian Livestock Programme, by ensuring that changes are informed by climate risk.  Also, analytical products will 
be developed to inform related programmes, such as government investments in livestock commodities development 
and dzud relief programmes to ensure that support does not inadvertently incentiviz e growing livestock numbers against 
land and water resources which are increasingly drying due to climate change.   
 
75. This approach is underpinned by a number of assumptions, including: a) MET and MoFALI commitment to climate-
informed planning, including the integration of climate information into national and sub- national planning, co- financing 
for investments and the approval of needed reforms, b) investments identified during proposal development (e.g. water 
wells, SLM measures, etc.) are validated with resource user agreements and c) herders adopt adaptive practices and 
are willing to cooperate through herder producer organizations.   
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages ) 
76. The objective of the project will be achieved through a combination of a) enhanced climate informed planning for 
land and water use localized to the aimag level, b) ecosystem- based adaptation measures and c) building herder 
capacity to pursue climate resilient livelihoods.   The proposed project takes an integrated approach, implemented by 
MET, in close collaboration with MoFALI, particularly the National Mongolian Livestock Programme, to address the 
impacts of climate change on natural resources, as well as supporting the necessary changes to the livestock sector through planning, policy transformations and adaptive herder practices.  
 
Output 1:  Integrate climate information into land and water use planning at the national and sub -
national levels  
Output 2:  Scaling up climate -resilient water and soil management practices for enhanced small 
scale herder resource management  
Output 3:  Build herder capacity to access markets for sustainably sourced, climate resilient 
livestock products  
 
77. Proposed areas for intervention are the Zavhkhan, Khovd, Dornod and Sukhbaatar aimags covering steppe, desert 
steppe, mountain, mountain steppe and forest steppe zones (see Annex 16 ).  These sites were selected by 
government, not because they are the most degraded areas of the Mongolia, but rather the urgent need to protect 
critical watersheds in a drying environment. The selection criteria were as follows:   
 
• High vulnerability to climate change impacts and slow onset disasters  
• Fragile catchment areas that need protection/rehabilitation  
• Representation of diverse ecological zones to maximize impact of interventions  
• Availability of previously generated adaptation best practices in similar eco- regions  
• Isolation or distance from the central area and suppor t 
 
78. GCF resources will finance the additional costs of integrating climate change into land and water use planning, 
management and development, as well as investments in water harvesting, management and access structures in all 
soums of the four project aimags  to address issue of few watering points in the four target aimags. The project will also 
support land- use planning and management, emphasizing climate- resilient, sustainable and ecosystem -focused 
pasture management. The project together with local governm ent authorities will assist communities develop and 
implement land and water management plans incorporating ecosystem based adaptation principles and fund the 
development of small -scale infrastructures required to reduce the negative impacts of adverse wea ther events and 
trends.  Importantly, through support to policy transformation and market access for sustainably -sourced livestock 
products, the project will incentivize behavior change among herders towards greater climate resilience.   
 
Output 1: Integra te climate information into land and water use planning at the national and sub -national levels  
(GCF grant: USD  5,236,744; Co -financing: USD 11,200,000)  
 
79. Output 1 is focused on supporting the Government of Mongolia to move beyond short term preparedness and 
emergency response, and towards longer term climate -informed planning.  This will include developing the technical 
capacity to forecast medium- to-long t erm climate change, then applying that information to predict related changes to 
water and land resources.  Support will be provided at both the national and sub- national levels to effectively integrate 
this climate change and related impacts into climate -resilient planning. Importantly, GCF resources will complement


---
*Page 21*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 68 
 
 the Government of Mongolia’s National Mongolian Livestock Programme, by bringing a climate lens to planned policy 
and regulatory reforms.   
 
Activity 1.1. Enhance technical capacity for long -term climate resilient development planning, and medium- term 
response planning capacity  
80. GCF resources will support NAMEM to enhance their capacity to develop seasonal and long- term climate change 
forecasts. GCF funds will invest in the acquisition and installation of weather/climate forecasting/prediction software 
and equipment, to enable NAMEM to develop longer term (seasonal, decadal and climate change) models and deliver 
forecasts.  This will considerably increase technical and computing capacities and capabilities compared to the current 
system and allow the agency to increase accuracy and spatial resolution of the atmospheric models (GCMs, RCMs) 
and use dynamic models for forecasting. The introduction of this additional computing capacity will strategically 
complement the existing capacity allowing NAMEM to provide the key weather forecasts and climate predictions 
required for planning and preparedness for  enhancement of subnational and national natural resources management 
(water , land and forest) planning, with key focus on pasture management and livestock husbandry.  
 
81. The proposed project will also invest in strengthening human resources capacity at NAMEM with targeted training 
courses and workshops. The training will include:  
 
• Training to NAMEM senior and technical staff on applying methods, models, and post -processing approaches 
including: weather research and forecasting (WRF) model, Community Earth System Model (CESM), and 
NCAR command language (NCL)  
• Training to technical and operational level staff of NAMEM and NEMA on the processing, interpretation and 
use of outputs generated by the climate modelling results, climate change impact, vulnerability and risk 
assessments and climate informed development planning and emergency planning and coordination at central level.   
 
82. The project will also provide training to local government at the aimag and soum levels on climate change impacts, 
conducting vulnerability and risk assessments and integrating climate change and the results of vulnerability and risk 
assessments into planning. The training will emphasize cross -sectoral planning approaches by including 
environmental, land and agricultural officers, as well as hydro- met and NEMA personnel. The personnel trained will 
lead the development planning to guide adaptation measures (management and infrastructure) under Output 2 of the 
proposed project. The four aimags will pilot the incorporation of climate change into development planning for replication 
across the country. Stre ngthened national technical capacity (i.e. NAMEM and NEMA), guidelines for climate risk 
informed forecasts and projections can therefore be applied across the country.  
 
83. Improved data and forecasting ability, coupled with local information (e.g. vulnerabili ty assessments and information 
on environmental conditions supported under Output 2), the project will  support a quantitative  approach to impact and 
risk.  Consistent with the impact based forecasting (IBF) methodology supported by WMO, the project will support MET 
and MoFALI with guidelines, tools and training on impact estimation (developing operational impact models for water  
availability , operational pasture yield/fodder  and dzuds) , as well as risk reduction and response scenarios  to inform 
decision making. This w ould inform early warning to herders, as well as government preparatory planning and related 
investment, including for instance:  increasing fodder production if a dzud is expected or if pasture yield is expected to 
be low, informing herders of which water sources are expected to dry up due to increased temperature or drought, or taking additional adaptation or conservation measures in areas where land is particularly vulnerable to degrada tion due 
to conditions. Training will extend to each of the four selected aimags for government officials on the interpretation and 
use of outputs generated by climate modelling and climate informed development planning, as well as seasonal 
livestock secto r planning and emergency planning and coordination at provincial levels.  
 84. Importantly, this Output would support the development of the national programme, a successor to the Mongolian 
Livestock Programme,  – ensuring it is informed by projected climate imp acts on the natural resources upon which 
herders rely .  This national programme is expected to have a greater focus on climate smart livestock management 
and sustainability .  And like the ongoing programme, it will seek to improve herd structure, while reducing overall herd 
size.  This builds on work started under the Fourth Priority Area of the ongoing phase:  Develop livestock production 
that is adaptable to climatic and ecological changes with strengthened risk management capacity.  
 
85. Ensuring that climate risk informed planning is paired with the necessary finance and support is critical. The project 
will support integration of climate information and related risks in to planning and public budgeting. The project will also 
support dialogue and the development of methodologies towards  forecast based financ ing (FBF) , for public planning


---
*Page 22*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 68 
 
  
27 The HCT is made up of UN agencies (incl. UNDP) and International Organizat ions (incl. the International Federation of Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies (IFRC)) that undertake humanitarian actions and have accepted to co- lead, with government, sector wide approaches to 
preparing for and responding to disasters in Mongolia.  The overall objective of the HCT is to facilitate a harmonized and effective approach 
to assist people affected by humanitarian crisis. Results to be achieved by this high- level body will ensure that the activities of both 
Government and supporting organizat ions are coordinated, that humanitarian assessments are jointly conducted, that support is delivered in 
a timely and efficient manner and longer -term recovery from humanitarian crisis is achieved.  In times of non- disaster, its activities focus on 
preparedness, especially on areas of policy coordination, response planning, monitoring sectoral work, information sharing and resour ce 
mobilization. One of the major tasks of the Humanitarian Country Team is to ensure linkages to national and international non- governmental 
organizations, providing opportunities for dialogue and consultation.  
28 Early Warning Early Action: Mechanisms for Rapid Decision Making (IFRC, Save the Children, OXFAM, FAO, WFP)   but also for coordination of other potential funding sources . The Humanitarian Country Team (HCT)27 will serve as the 
platform for dialogue and decision making, where aspects such as triggers for action, flexible funding, contingency 
plans and an enabling environment 28 can be discussed and agreed.  This will build on and be informed by the best 
practices and lessons learned of the IFRC’s Forecast -based Financing for Vulnerable Herders in Mongolia pilot  project , 
which developed an FBF module for d zud as well as r elated cost benefit analyses .  
 
86. The project will assist State Emergency Commission Secretariat hosted by NEMA to improve medium term 
response planning (i.e. planning for projected seasonal extreme weather events). Support will include technical support 
for emergency planning and coordination, and guidelines and procedures for seasonal planning, and coordinating of 
national and international responses. The project together with NEMA will fund the training of aimag level government 
representatives in contingency planning for projected extreme weather events.  
 
87. Information generated and capacity developed under this Output  will also support transboundary climate- informed 
planning. T he improvement of Mongolia’s Hydromet system, and data and analyses generated through this project, are  
beneficial to neighboring countries, as well as the Central Asia sub- continent with similar landscape and climate 
conditions. More accurate hydromet for ecasts and data can be used for reducing regional vulnerabilities to climate risks 
and weather hazards, in particular transboundary eco- regions of global significance, such as Daurian Steppes and Altai 
Mountains. NAMEM already has bilateral cooperation agr eements with the Russian Federation and the People's 
Republic of China (PRC), where information and data sharing protocols are defined.  
 
88. Sub-activities include:  
• Validation of specifications for NAMEM technical capacity and computing equipment  
• Strengthen t he technical and human resources capacity within NAMEM to produce seasonal to long term 
climate models  
• Support development of guidelines  and tools  (incl water availability, operational pasture yield/fodder  and dzud 
impact models) for impact based forecast ing (IBF), climate risk informed land, water and livestock planning to 
be adopted at the national and aimag level  
• Support to MoFALI and MET to integrate climate change and risks and plan for long- term climate resilient 
development at the national, aimag level (dissemination and application following Development Planning Law)  
• Support to NEMA planning, applying projected seasonal extreme weather events    
• Support application of seasonal forecasts to national and aimag level systems and planning/budgeti ng to 
respond to extreme events (e.g. drought, dzud) , incl forecast based financing (FBF)  
• Strengthen technical capacity in the State Emergency Commission (under NEMA) in emergency planning , incl 
guidelines and procedures for seasonal planning, and coordinati on of national and international responses  and 
related finance  
 
Activity 1.2. Integration of climate change and climate- informed carrying capacity into aimag and soum level 
development plans  (incl. Integrated River Basin Management Plans (IRBMP))  
89. The project will build on the existing Integrated River Basin Management Plans (IRBMP) for the 12 river/lake basins 
in the target aimags to include climate change considerations, as historically NAME M was not able to produce detailed 
forecasts specific to the basin. The IRBMPs developed by various development partners and NGOs are varied in their resolution and level of detail. The planning process proposed in this project starts with these IRBMPs, develops River 
Basin climate risk and adaptation profiles and options, and then downscales that to soum level development plans and 
Resource User Agreements at the herder level. As herder groups are the key stakeholder in developing RUAs together 
with local government, the process facilitates a bottom -up feedback mechanism for the large- scale IRBMPs.  
 
 
Integrated River Basin 
Management Plans
CC risk & adaptation 
profiles & options 
CC Informed Local 
Development Plans 
Resource Use 
Agreements


---
*Page 23*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 68 
 
 90. The project will downscale these national and regional strategies and incorporate climate change projections to 
develop climate risk and adaptation profiles as a common platform to guide access, synthesis, and analysis of relevant 
data and information for disaster risk reduction and adaptation to climate change. The profiles developed at the river 
basin level and disaggregated to the aimag and soum levels will  provide a reference source for the project to guide 
soum level officials and the community better integrate climate resilience in the development of soum Level 
Development Plans and Resource Use Agreements (RUAs) (see Output 2).  
 
91. Based on the Climate Risk and Adaptation Profiles developed and using lessons learned from the UNDP EbA 
project, this component will support the development of Water Use and Management Plans for each soum. These will be comprehensive multi -year management 
and investment plans and monitoring and evaluation tools that will 
effectively set the baseline for the use and management of the hydrological and land assets of the watershed and serve 
as a road map for the implementation of subsequent project activities and investments. They will include a rapid 
resource mapping, water budgeting and ecological site descriptions to guide investments in infrastructure, integrated water resources management and sustainable pasture management. These plans will serve as a road map for the 
development of RUAs by the Resource User Groups and guide the implementation of subsequent activities and 
investments under the proposed project.  
 
92. To provide technical input for the development of the Water Use and Management Plans on a parti cipatory basis 
and in close collaboration with local agencies, the project will recruit external technical agencies to support the project 
teams. These external agencies will help define watersheds, conduct surface and groundwater balance assessments, 
link watershed plans to river basin management plans and recommend a suite of management options and 
infrastructure options.  Activities and investments will be prioritized during the planning process, by applying criteria 
related to ecosystem services benefit s (e.g. greater access to water sources for herder households and reducing 
pressure on land).  The Water Use Plans will undergo a rigorous quality review and validation process before being 
used to prioritize and place investments (Activity 2.2 and 2.4). C riteria for prioritization will be informed by urgency, 
water access benefits to herders and potential of investments to relieve pressure on degraded rangeland.  
 
93. Sub-activities include:  
• Development of river basin climate risk and adaptation profiles and options  
• Development of soum level resilience- based land and water use and management plans  
 
94. While the river basin climate risk and adaptation profiles are specific to the project area -  priority areas for this 
project as identified by the Government of Mongolia - the approach applied can be replicated in other river basins in 
the country.  
 
Activity 1.3. Analytical products to support policy and regulatory transformation promoting sustainable land and water 
management and resilient herder livelihoods  
95. The proposed GCF project will develop scenario analyses, to support the planned policies and reforms relevant to 
the livestock sector – comparing a business -as-usual scenario in which rangeland ecosystems eventually collapse 
versus an ec osystem based adaptation scenario in which productivity losses are halted and then reversed.  With this 
important tool, the proposed GCF project can inform the necessary reforms to policies and programmes which 
inadvertently contribute to the unsustainable number of livestock in the country against a drying landscape due to 
climate change. Support will be provided to decision- makers in applying this information in drafting changes to existing 
policies and programmes, which still assists herders, but in a ma nner which does not accelerate degradation of already 
fragile ecosystems. To complement this work, the proposed project will also support sensitization of decision- makers 
and ministry staff, climate change impacts on land and water resources, related ecosy stem services and on livestock 
productivity and herder livelihoods.  Products will consider available or potential resources, to support sustainable land 
and water management and resilient herder livelihoods, including: central and local government budgets,  BIOFIN, the 
Mongolia Conservation Trust Fund (MCTF), impact investment (where investors could include private sector actors, development financing institutions (DFIs), multilateral development banks (MDBs), foundations, family offices, and high 
net-worth individuals), and access to finance supported by ADB’s  Aimag and Soum Centers Green and Resilient 
Regional Development Investment Program  (ASDIP).   
 
96. Sub-activities include:  
• Review of current livestock policy, investments and related public/private programmes which could 
inadvertently contribute to land degradation by incentivizing maintenance of large herds (e.g. dzud relief 
programmes, insurance schemes, etc.)  
• Drafting of p olicy transformations to support sustainable use of natural resources and climate- resilience in the 
livestock sector and submission for approval by appropriate ministerial party


---
*Page 24*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 68 
 
 • Informed by results of Activity 1.1, conduct scenario analyses to inform resil ient land and water management 
and livestock sector, and related (e.g. finance sector) policies  
• Sensitization on climate change impacts on natural resources and the livestock sector for decision- makers to 
enable the necessary reforms  
 
Output 2: Scaling up climate- resilient water and soil management practices for enhanced small scale herder  
resource management  
(GCF grant: USD  11,103,118, Co -financing: USD 26,200,000)  
 
97. To address the challenges presented by climate change, there is an urgent need to conserve and rehabilitate the 
ecosystem services upon which Mongolia’s rural economy, traditional culture, and rich biodiversity depend. This Output 
is focused on investments needed to protect land and water resources and the cooperation mechanisms necessary 
sustainable management of shared resources, using traditional community level agreements informed by best 
practices.  The project will also invest in infrastructure measures such as wells, community water harvesting ponds and tanks as well in land management measures such as fences and fodder cultivation to reduce the impact of prolonged 
dry spells and slow onset disasters.  Building on best practices, the Output will foster sustainable use of land and water 
resources by herder communities, while making critical investments to protect catchment areas and overstressed land.  
 
Activity 2.1. Enhance cooperation among herders on sustainable use and stewardship of shared land and water 
resources  (formalized through Resource User Agreements ) 
98. Community based Resource User Groups (RUGs) will be the key point of focus for the implementation of activities 
under this Output.  All herder households in four target provinces are expected to benefit from the project. The project 
will focus on identifyi ng and working with already existing user groups established through the past interventions, at 
the same time create new ones wherever there is need. The Green Gold project has already successfully established 
and capacitated user groups in Khovd and Zavkhan and initiated activities in Dornod in 2016 –  three of the four target 
aimags for this project.  These will be strengthened and others established in uncovered areas. Given the remoteness 
and distance between households, RUGs per soum are expected to hav e 15- 20 herder households each. The proposed 
project will support RUGs in developing or compiling Resource Use Agreements (RUA) for an integrated approach 
towards shared sustainable land and water use.  RUAs will be guided by soum development plans support ed under 
Output 1, which will consider climate change impacts on land and water resources as well as carrying capacity.  The 
Resource User Agreements will define:  
 
• Climate risk informed practices for pastures (and forests where appropriate)  
• Climate risk in formed practices for water use and management, including ownership and use of engineered 
wells, hand wells and water harvesting investments and  
• Small scale community infrastructure, and related commitment for operations and maintenance  
 
99. The RUAs would def ine the stocking rates within a resilient carrying capacity, management principle to ensure 
rangeland health, and the rights of access, rights of exclusion and rights of tenure by the RUGs who enter the 
agreement. Based on lessons learned from ongoing prog rammes including the Green Gold and IFAD projects, 
incentives will be developed to discourage overgrazing and encourage sustainable use and finance community 
investments. This includes supporting the establishment of a risk management facility, cost -shared between herders 
and the local government, for disaster preparedness and response, and to further finance pasture and water 
management activities, and to establish or rehabilitate wells. Any existing land use agreements on rangelands will be 
extended to encompass all seasonal pastures and clearly specify herders’ responsibilities.  
 
100. In partnership with local government officials and community representatives will help register the RUGs with 
local authorities, define their operating procedure and legitimize their user rights and responsibilities.  Cadres of 
facilitators will be trained to continuously engage with the community to establish RUGs and then continue through the 
other activities described below.  
 
101. Sub-activities include:  
• Formalize and/or strengthen Resources User Groups  
• Development, consolidation and registration of resilienc e-based Resource Use Agreements (RUA) (including 
Watershed Agreements)  
 
102. Enhanced cooperation among herders will ensure greater sustainability in the use of natural resources. In 
addition, however, investments are needed to protect catchment areas (Activity 2.2), establish haymaking and pasture 
reserve areas (Activity 2.3) and improve water access (Activity 2.4) in response to the impacts of climate change. 
Adaptation measures supporting conditions and availability of water and pasture resources are based on the best


---
*Page 25*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 68 
 
  
29 Cost support by local government: w ells - 5% + O&M, hand wells  - 30% + O&M, natural spring protection – 30% + O&M. Similarly, local 
government shall be responsible to allocate 15% of investments related to catchment reforestation, haymaking and pasture reserves, plus 3 
years nursing.  
30 Cultural sensitivity will be respected when selecting the type of fencing supported by this project. Mongolian traditional belief systems 
oppose the piercing of the ground for fencing.  practices generated through relevant interventions by UNDP and  other development partners. Immediate needs were 
identified during the project development phase through consultation with local governments and communities. These 
will be implemented through active cost -sharing by both Government and local communities. P roject will support 
technical oversight and professional entities will be contracted for the actual investments. Not only the local herder 
communities are expected to contribute their labor, they will be monitoring the process jointly with local Government  
entities.  Following local law, costs of such investments are to be shared by the local government 29; and full operations 
and maintenance (O&M) costs related to wells are borne by the local government.  The related co- financing for this 
investment is capt ured in the letter from MET and MOFALI (see Annex  13a).  For further information related to 
operations and maintenance, please see the related plan in Annex 21 , related commitment letters have also been 
provided in Annex 13b.   
 Activity 2.2. Reforestation of critical catchment areas to protect water resources and ecosystem services  
103. The project will support ecosystem based measures to promote climate risk informed use and management of 
land and water resources. Riparian degradation is a major contributor to vulnerability of water provisioning ecosystem 
services. The project will invest in catchment reforestation and replanting native vegetation along riparian areas and 
degraded lands to minimize undermining and increase water retention and grassland producti vity. Where appropriate, 
enclosures 30 along riparian areas to enhance and restore watershed health.  Enclosures will be placed strategically to 
restore function to severely degraded riparian areas in areas of high biological value, including wetlands.  Wit hin 
enclosures, the project will regenerate native woodland and grassland species.  
 
104. Interventions will focus mainly on forest restoration at river headwaters where there was previous tree cover. Best 
practices will be applied to reforestation efforts.  Fo r instance, where trees need to be actively planted or sown, 
indigenous trees have shown to be generally better conservers of water than exotics. Spacing will depend on species 
and purpose. Stakeholder consultations in the target aimags indicate the need f or 2500ha of reforestation in catchment 
areas.  This includes: Khovd, 1200ha; Dornod 400ha, Sukhbaatar 300ha; and Zavkhan 600ha. Estimated costs are USD2.982million.  USD2.535million is requested from GCF with the balance to be provided by local government s. In 
accordance with the national law, local government shall be responsible to allocate 15% of the total cost as well as 3 years of nursing.  
 
105. GCF resources will also support the development of guidance materials and related training to herder for effective 
management of catchment areas going forward.  Roles and responsibilities will be defined and enforced through the RUAs.  
 
106. Sub-activities incl ude: 
• Validate identified investments through RUAs  
• Implementation of Rangeland User Agreements  
- 2500ha catchment reforestation  
• Development of guidance materials and delivery of training to herders on effective and optimal management 
of catchment areas  
 
Activity 2.3. Establish haymaking and pasture reserve areas, and emergency fodder storage facilities to reduce volatility 
to livelihoods related to climate change induced extreme events  
107. Otor is a traditional practice of migration to specially -reserved remo tely located pasture areas in preparation for 
winter or in times of winter disasters like dzud or other extreme events.  This practice is consistent with sustainable 
land management practices.  In  order to avoid excessive winter losses, the project will su pport implementation of the 
pasture management plans of RUAs related to haymaking and pasture reserves, including use and exclusion 
agreements and infrastructure measures to increase capacity and resilience of herders to cope with climate change 
impacts and manage pastoral risks. Infrastructure investments will include collective activities such as the fencing of 
hayfields for winter pasture conservation and fodder preparation, construction of winter shelters for livestock, and fodder 
storages structures.  
 
108. Stakeholder  consultations indicate the need to protect pastures in all four of the target aimags: Khovd 1200 ha 
(USD 907K), Dornod 400ha (USD 756K), Sukhbaatar 720ha (USD 538K), Zavkhan 900ha (USD1M).  48 storage 
facilities across the four aimags will als o be supported, for a total of USD600K.  The total requested from GCF is 
USD1.7M, with the balance to be covered by local governments, as well as costs related to maintenance.


---
*Page 26*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 68 
 
  
31 Mongolian Law on reinvestment of natural resource use fees for the protection of the environment and the restoration of natural 
resources, 2012   
109. Rangeland Use Agreements for the sustainable management of pasture will enforc e seasonal rotational grazing 
and resting schedules, long term agreements for the maintenance of rangeland health and plans to adjust and reduce 
stocking rate to rangeland carrying capacity agreed between RUGs and soum governments.  And GCF resources will 
support guidance material and related training  
 
110. As haymaking and pasture reserves are included in RUAs, sub- activities are similar and linked to the above 
Activity.  These include:  
• Validate identified investments through RUAs  
• Implementation of Rangeland User Agreements  
- 3,720ha of haymaking or pasture reserve areas  
- 48 emergency fodder storage facilities  
• Development of guidance materials and delivery of training to herders on effective and optimal management 
of pasture reserves  
 
Activity 2.4. Improve water access through protection of natural spr ings, construction of new water wells, rehabilitation 
of existing wells and water harvesting measures  
111. With limited number of functioning wells, herders increasingly rely on water sources such as rivers for their 
livestock, adding pressure to catchment areas.  Under Activity 2.4, where ground water extraction is found feasible and sustainable based on the results of Output 1, the project will rehabilitate existing wells (including solar -powered pumps 
when appropriate) for regulated water extraction as per the Water Use and Management Plans. In cases where grazing 
land is underutilized due to the lack of water sources, the project will support establishment of 125 new groundwater 
wells and rehabilitation of 165 abandoned wells, for an estimated cost of USD 2M.  The main criteria of site selection 
for newly established or rehabilitated wells is highest reduction of pressure on grazing land and increasing carrying 
capacity of pasture. Shortage of water sources can be a key factor in underutilizing grazing land in good condition. 
Ownership of the wells will remain with local Governments as per Law on Water, but herder groups can obtain 
possession right and sign User agreement to ensure operation and maintenance thereof.  
   
112. Where gully erosion is taking place, the project will invest in construction of small -scale erosion controls to 
rehabilitate and maintain riparian habitat including water harvesting with 18 earthen weirs based upon successful 
international approaches designed to slow flow rates, retain soil, and restore/maintain natural flow and vegetation, for 
an estimated cost of USD 453K. Similarly, the project will support protection of 88 natural springs for an estimated cost 
of USD 83K. Soum officials will be responsible for ensuring enclosures are respected and enforcing any restrictions.  
 
113. Further, in the western Altai Mountain ranges and Great Lakes Valley there are opportunities to undertake 
ecosystem -based adaptation measures that are low cost and supportive to primary ecosystems based on traditional 
know ledge and practices enhanced by modern knowledge. To ensure glacier melt is efficiently used to support water 
security, water harvesting in high altitudes will be replicated upon through best practices  established by the EbA project.  
There are a number of  abandoned ancient irrigation and water supply networks that are transformed into almost a 
natural landscape, which can be restored at low cost and reused without requiring new studies of soil conditions and 
water sources, as well as costly engineering des ign work for water channels and reservoirs and large investments for 
construction.  
 
114. Sub-activities include:  
• Ensure appropriate, climate -informed siting for investments, based on Output 1  
• Implementation of resiliency -based Watershed Agreements through Public Private Community Partnerships  
- 88 natural springs protected 
- 290 wells rehabilitated or constructed  
- 18 water harvesting structures   
 
115. Upon the project closure, RUAs typically spanning over 10- 15 years, are expected to be extended formally 
betw een resource user groups and local Governments. Amendments may reflect changes based on the lessons 
learned through the previous phase. Specific activities in RUAs will be funded by herders themselves. Moreover, RUGs will be able to access the fee for using natural resources collected by Local Governments, 30- 80% of which is expected 
to be invested back to restoration of natural resources
31.


---
*Page 27*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 68 
 
  
32 http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press -release/2017/10/17/2016- poverty -rate-in-mongolia- estimated -at-296-percent   116. RUAs will be registered at the national level in a database established by ALAGaC. They will be developed in 
accordance with procedures established by ALAGaC, and with the participation of all relevant local government entities. 
The plans will include the identified key investments and seek funding from public resources (e.g. local budgets, soum 
development budget, pasture management fund).  
 
Output 3:  Build herder capacity to access markets for sustainably sourced, climate -resilient livestock products   
(GCF grant: USD  5,645,864, Co -financing USD 15,800,000)    
 
117. The climate- informed planning and policy transformations supported by Output 1, and the investments and 
cooperation on shared use of natural resource supported under Output 2, will contribute to protection of catchment 
areas and pasture land.  Interventions are needed however to also support behavior change by herders – enabling 
herders to move away from practices that are not compatible with the changing landscape and increasingly volatile due 
to climate change.  With climate change, most herders in the target aimags face the following challenges: 1) reduced 
grassland and water resources for livestock, resulting in undernourished or unhealth animals, and therefore decreased 
value of livestock products, 2) herders struggle to market livestock products, leavi ng them with neither the capital nor 
the incentive to invest in sound herd management focused on quality and manageable quantity, and 3) herders fail to 
insert themselves into value chains which would provide consistent off -take because they are unable/dis incentivized to 
supply consistent, sustainably sourced products of high quality.   
 
118. The Output will be implemented in close collaboration with the National Mongolian Livestock Programme.  As co-
financing investment, the Programme has committed to addressing factors that burden herder livelihoods and stifle the domestic and international markets for livestock products, namely animal health and livestock traceability. GCF will complement this investment, with industry wide initiatives to raise awareness and build capacity related to sustainably -
sourced climate resilient products.   
 
Activity 3.1. Identify public -private- community partnership for sustainably sourced climate resilient livestock products  
119. Market analyses, as well as stakeholder consultations, have highlighted interest and potential for sustainably 
sourced, climate resili ent livestock products from both local and international buyers. This Activity is focused further 
exploring that potential, raising awareness of the private sector about the products available. To begin this process, the proposed project would engage exper
ienced private entities and/or CSOs as service providers to support the 
identification, selection and facilitation of these partnerships. Consistent with recommendations from the private sector during project development, Investment Fairs will be organized  linking herders and organized herder groups and/or 
cooperatives with buyers, and meat and fiber processors.  These will be conducted in the four aimags selected for the project and enable herder groups to display their products, and provide for site visit s for the private sector commodity 
associations to meet with herders, as well as meetings with aimag level government officials, development projects 
and civil society organizations active in this sector.  
  
120. The project will support public -private -community  partnerships; these would be commodity -specific agreements 
between a private entity (or consortium of private entities) and an HPO to promote backward vertical integration and 
develop viable value chains. The proposed project will assist these partnerships with the identification of profitable 
strategies, coordination of activities and support to HPOs in improvements in the sustainability of value chains that 
promote climate- adaptive herder practices and sustainable use of land and water resources. Recalibration of herder 
size with the carrying capacity of specific geographic ecosystems will be promoted as one of sustainability 
considerations.  Once finalized, the agreements would be validated by a multi -stakeholder committee set up by the 
project for this purpose to ensure consistency with the project objective. The project will develop a legal template for 
these agreements detailing roles and responsibilities including financial and in- kind support from all concerned parties 
(herders, local government, pro ject, other). A unified screening tool will be developed for the validation of these 
agreements.  
 
121. The target aimags of the proposed project are in the Western and Eastern regions, which have consistently been 
among the poorest in the country (36% and 43.9% respectively); and studies have shown that gains related to poverty 
rates particularly in rural areas are fragile -  vulnerable to minor socio- economic difficulties and weather conditions 32.  
With buyers committed through the partnership agreement, herders can have assurance that the risk of losses related to change is mitigated.  
   
122. Sub-activities include:  
• Consultations with private sector to assess the type/level of information needed to further engagement and 
investment in climate -resilient livestock products


---
*Page 28*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 68 
 
 • Promotion and conduct of livestock investment fairs to identify public -private -community partnership (PPCP) 
opportunities  
• Based on identified opportunities, facilitation and finalization of PPCP agreements  
 
Activity 3.2 . Establishment and training of Herder Producer Organizations (or cooperatives)     
123. This Output builds on the Resource User Groups and the Resource User Agreements established in Output 2 to 
form and channel project interventions via Herder Producer Organizations (HPOs) (similar to herders’ cooperatives). 
These will be collective action enterprises that are formed by one or more RUGs coming together to collectively engage 
with the private sector, where demand and supply are consistent with the overall project approach of climate -resilient 
planning and sustainable land and water use.   
 
124. Based on the needs agreed above, the project will facilitate the setting up of Herder Producer Organizations 
(HPOs). A readiness assessment will be developed and conducted prior to a formal establishment of an HPO to gauge 
existing decision- making and communi ty governance mechanisms, as a pre- condition for a fair and equal involvement 
of all interested members of the community to participate in the HPOs. The Resource User Groups (RUGs) the project 
will set up and strengthen under Output 2 will be essentially g eographically based extended family unit of 15- 20 
households on average. These RUGs will be aggregated to set up Herder Producer Organizations through the 
application of organizational models and intensive sensitization and training programs. The strategy will be sufficiently 
flexible to not only promote adaptive cooperative models but also to embrace other forms of business -oriented collective 
action and producer groupings that contribute to economic development and the well -being of herder households. 
These can include producer associations, Limited Liability Companies (LLCs), partnerships, other standard legal 
entities, and even loose temporary relationships to address specific issues or activities (in this document all such forms 
of corporative organizat ions will be referred to as Herder Producer Organizations - HPOs).  
 
125. Training will be provided to the HPOs on the commodities detailed in the public -private- community agreements, 
including production, post -harvest processing, post -harvest value addition an d on- site storage. The project will also 
support the HPOs to plan and prepare business proposals including cost -benefit analysis for future resource 
mobilization and partnership building for sustainably sourced livestock products.  
 
126. Sub-activities include:  
• Readiness assessment to gauge existing decision- making and community governance mechanisms, as a pre-
condition for a fair and equal involvement of all interested members of the community to participate in the HPOs  
• Market specific tr aining in production, post -harvest processing, post -harvest value addition and on- site storage 
• Small upfront investments to support business needs (e.g. equipment to assess microns for wool and 
cashmere)  
• Impact evaluation of project interventions on herder  households  
 
Activity 3.3. Improve traceability for sustainably sourced, climate resilient livestock products  
127. GCF funding will provide technical assistance to develop the knowledge base required to improve traceability for 
sustainably sourced, climate res ilient livestock products to access higher value domestic and international markets.  
This will entail surveying and analysis the premium range for various products and understand their market position, 
workshops to facilitate private off -takers with herder groups to bridge the supply and demand of these high- end products 
and drafting legal documents into the PPCP agreements detailing the roles of each stakeholder. GCF funding will also 
be used to develop a demo product of a traceable cashmere that tracks t he movement of a sustainably sourced, high-
quality cashmere bail from herder’s handoff to transport personnel to factory intake point all the way to a buyer. Once 
this produce traceability system is proven, government co- finance will be used to purchase eq uipment at mass scale 
and IT infrastructure to replicate the produce traceability design to wider groups of herders.        
 
128. The traceability demo will ensure offline and online options for herders without reliable connectivity. GCF funding 
will be used to provide technical assistance to train the government and selected HPOs on using the system. The overall results and performance of the system will be recorded. A pipeline of other products will be identified and prioritized accordingly. This will assist the herders to have a range of high- end products with stable buyers and therefore 
diversifying their income sources and reduce 
climate impact on their livestock portfolio. The community usage of 
traceable products will also encourage the behavior of increase livestock quality and gradually decrease the overall low quality, climate vulnerable livestock.    
 
129. Traceability of sustain ably sourced products is critical to support herders to ultimately get a premium for 
sustainably sourced products.  A universally accepted definition of “sustainably sourced”, however, is lacking. To that 
end, the project will collaborate closely with ongoing and planned efforts related to branding and certification in Mongolia 
and globally. For instance, through collaboration with Sustainable Fibre Alliance (SFA) on cashmere traceability, the


---
*Page 29*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 68 
 
 principles of certification of sustainability sourced cashmere i ntroduced by SFA have been further developed. The 
approach applies a practice- based standard that reviews the quality of a) animal husbandry and b) rangeland 
stewardship using 23 assessment criteria. Trained independent examiners review the community pract ices every year 
using a traffic -light system to incentivize continuous improvement in practices to gain accreditation. The certificate is 
valid for three years. Every year the producer/herder organizations undergo external assessment. If, during the three-
year period, the compliance score improves compared to the initial assessment result, the herder organization may 
request that their accreditation is extended for another three- year period. The inventory of the accredited herder groups 
and organizations would then be incorporated into the (blockchain) database, which helps trace the source of raw cashmere for the producers and end users. It is being tested for cashmere at first and the same principle will apply for 
other types of commodities. The project wi ll facilitate the process of third- party certification process through capacity 
building.  
 
130. Sub-activities include:  
• Surveying and analysis of traceability of sustainably sourced climate resilient livestock products  
• Review/Drafting standards for climate- resilient products certification process  
• Drafting agreements in PPCP to support traceable products development  
• Develop a demo traceable livestock product  
• Analyze and document traceability system results, disseminate for knowledge sharing  
 
Activity 3.4. Generation and dissemination of knowledge products to support private- sector engagement and herder 
enfranchisement in climate- resilient and sustainable production in Mongolia  
131. Realization of the three above Activities will build capacity of herder households and related cooperatives to 
ensure (i.e. branding and certification) that livestock products were sustainably sourced and are climate resilient, while co-financing (e.g. National Mongolian Livestock Progr
amme) will support herders to meet international health and 
hygiene standards related to livestock. In combination, these investments will provide the necessary assurances to 
private- sector investors that there is an enabling environment in the four aimags  to produce a consistent supply of 
quality primary and value- added products for domestic and, in time, international customers.  
 
132. This Activity is focused on building the evidence base of benefits of sustainably sourced, climate resilient 
products.  Knowledge products and communications materials will be developed for different audiences, including 
herders to provide assurance for behavior change, the private sector to mobilize partnerships and responsible 
investment, and the public to influence demand.  
 
133. Sub-activities include:  
• Generate knowledge products detailing best practices for innovative financing mechanisms (e.g. sustainable sourcing platforms, impact investment fund)  
• Promotion of project achievements to raise awareness of private sector and/or po tential investors and 
consumer/public awareness about need for sustainable practice  
 
134. Across Outputs, the project will ensure synergies and complementarity with related programmes. ADB’s Aimag 
and Soum Centers Green and Resilient Territorial Development Investment Program applies a similar model related to 
land management, value chains and herder livelihoods. Sharing of lessons learned and best practices would benefit both projects  and ensure success of upscaling and replication efforts. Further, the ADB pr oject supports access to 
financing and credit risk guarantee for agri -business companies and agri -cooperatives. Related successes and best 
practices could further inform the sustainability plan or exit strategy of the project.  As the 
UNDP project will be 
implemented for a shorter duration, a solid basis set through UNDP project at the target areas with herders, herder 
producer organizations and local government will be taken over by ADB’s Tranche 2 and 3 investments in ensuring 
sustainability and access to financing and markets by herder communities  and enabling mitigation benefits (methane 
reduction) through reduction of livestock number that exceeds the carrying capacity of pastureland.  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words , approximately 3 pages plus diagrams ) 
135. The Executing Entity will be Mongolia, represented by the Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET).  The 
project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementing Modality (NIM), according to the Standard Basis Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of Mongolia (singed in 1976), the Country Programme Action Plan (CPAP), and as polic
ies and procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP (see 
https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=245&Menu=BusinessUnit ). 
 
136. The national executing entity –  also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology –  is 
required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures, including


---
*Page 30*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 68 
 
 NIM guidelines. These inclu de relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement, environmental and social safeguards, 
and other performance standards. In legal terms, this is ensured through the national government’s signature of the 
UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP project document which will be signed by 
the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds. The (national) Implementing Partner for this project is be the 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET), which is accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the 
monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of UNDP 
resources. MET will lead the implementation for Outputs 1 and 2 and will assign MoFALI, NAMEM  (part of MET ) and 
NEMA as key Responsibility Parties. UNDP will provide support services in both technical and operations support for 
Output 3 whereby UNDP will assume the responsibility for mobilizing and applying effectively the required inputs and 
partnerships to r each its expected deliverables.  For this Output, UNDP will assume the overall management 
responsibility and accountability for project implementation and ensure close cooperation with the MoFALI as the critical 
government counterpart in its implementation.   
 
137. The justification to engage UNDP as Service Provider is as follows: successful implementation of Output 3 
requires close collaboration and coordination of technical inputs from the MET, MoFALI, local governments, FAO, 
domestic and international private sector companies, industry associations and cooperatives. Given the complexity of 
partnerships envisaged under the Output 3 and the need to continuously build trust for these partnerships to succeed, 
UNDP will be the best entity to engage various partners from both public and private sector, either following competitive 
procurement process or other partnership arrangement .  Such support services and the cost involved, shall be detailed 
in LOA for UNDP support services.  As the support services will be provided by UNDP, usual UNDP regulations, rules 
and procedures apply.  
 
138. In addition, the Government of Mongolia may request UNDP to provide direct project services for this project. 
The UNDP and Government of Mongolia acknowledge and agree that those services are not mandatory, and will be 
provided only upon Government request and specified in the Letter of Agreement. If requested, the direct project 
services would follow UNDP policies on the recovery of direct project costs relating to GCF funded projects.  
 
139. The Project Board will be the highest decision- making and coordination body for the project. It will be jointly co-
chaired by the MET, MoFALI and UNDP represented by the State Secretaries and Deputy Resident Representative, respectively.  The Program Board will comprise, at minimum, a representative from the MET, UNDP, MoFALI, NEMA, 
Governor Offices of 4 target aimags, NAMEM, livestock sector and related commodity industry associations and 
representatives of direct beneficiaries.  To facilitate collaboration between the UNDP and ADB project s, an MOU will 
be signed between the organizations and ADB is welcomed as an observer to the Project Board.  Observer status may 
be extended, as the situation demands, to representatives of other UN agencies, civil society organizations, academia 
and other stakeholders upon invitation of the Program Board. The Project Board will adopt its statute of procedures 
(Terms of Reference) in the first Project Board meeting.   
 
140. The Project Board will ensure that activities under all three outputs of the project comply with the strategies, 
principles and overall approach outlined in this proposal. The Project Board is responsible for making decisions by 
consensus.  Its responsibil ities including recommendation for UNDP and Implementing Partner approval of project 
plans, substantive revisions and acceptance of the project progress reports. In order to ensure UNDP’s ultimate 
accountability, Project Board decisions should be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure management 
for development results, the best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international 
competition. In the case where a consensus cannot be reached, the final decision shall rest with UNDP. Project reviews by the Board will take place at least twice a year, or as necessary when raised by the Project Manager or one of the 
Board members. The Board must be consulted by the Project Manager for decisions where there are substantial 
changes required to the Annual Workplan as per deviation tolerances set by a donor or UNDP, whichever is lower.  
 
141. UNDP’s overall role as an Accredited Entity is to provide oversight and quality assurance through its Headquarter, 
regional and Country Office units.  This role includes: (i) Day -to-day oversight supervision; (ii) Oversight of project 
completion; and (iii) Oversight of project reporting.  It also includes oversight role in relation to reporting and knowledge-management.  The ‘project assurance’ f unction of UNDP is to support the Project Board by carrying out objective and 
independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management milestones are managed and completed. Project assurance has to be indepen dent of the Project Management; therefore, the 
Project Board cannot delegate any of its assurance responsibilities to the Project Manager, CTA or Project Directors. A UNDP Program Officer, or M&E Officer, typically holds the Project Assurance role on behal f of UNDP. The ‘senior 
supplier’ role of UNDP is to represent the interests of the parties which provide funding and/or technical expertise to 
the project (designing, developing, facilitating, procuring, implementing). The senior supplier’s primary function within 
the Board is to provide guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the project. The senior supplier role must have 
the authority to commit or acquire supplier resources required. If necessary, more than one person may be required for


---
*Page 31*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 68 
 
 this rol e. Typically, the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity, UNDP and/or donor(s) would be represented under this 
role. 
 
 
 
142. Project management arrangements:  
 
 
 
143. Specific Roles of the Project Board  
• The Board shall set strategic direction, reinforce government leadership of the program and coordinate all 
interventions;  
• Provide guidance and agree on possible countermeasures/management actions to address specific risks;  
• Authorizes the Annual Work Plan (prior to approval by UNDP);  
• Conduct bi -annual meetings to review the Project Progress and provide direction and recommendations to 
ensure that the agreed deliverables are produced satisfactorily according to the approved Annual Work Plan;  
• Provide ad- hoc guidance when project manager’s is unable to come to a decision;  
• Review and approve all activities that are supported by the program based on the program objectives, work plan and availability of funding;  
• Provide technical advice to create synergy and uniformity between program supported activities and policy;  
• Guide and support program delivery at sectoral level;  
• Provide support in resource mobilization to support program funding gaps;  
• Monitoring and evaluation of program activities through periodic meetings and occasional site visits;  
• Receive reports on all activities supported by the program to serve as an additional basis to assess and monitor the program performance and delivery.  
 
144. The National Project Coordinator (NPC) will lead the Project Management Unit and run the project on a d ay-to-
day basis on behalf of UNDP and MET within the constraints laid down by the Project Board. The NPC function will 
end when the final project terminal evaluation report and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP has 
been completed and submitt ed to UNDP.  S/he is responsible for day -to-day management and decision- making for the 
project and has the responsibility is to ensure that the project produces the results specified in the project document, 
to the required standard of quality and within t he specified constraints of time and cost. The annual work plan is 
prepared by the NPC and reviewed and endorsed by the Project Board. However, the final approval is provided by the Regional Technical Advisor, Global Environmental Finance Unit of UNDP as p art of the quality assurance role. The 
NPC is also responsible for managing and monitoring the project risks initially identified and submit new risks to the 
Project Board for consideration and decision on possible actions if required and update the status  of these risks by 
maintaining the project risks log according to the NIM Guidelines.


---
*Page 32*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 68 
 
  
33 Westphal, Michael I.; Hughes, Gordon A.; Brömmelhörster, Jörn, Economics of climate change in East Asia. Mandaluyong City, 
Philippines: Asian Development Bank, 2013.   
145. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will implement the project as per the work plan approved by the Project 
Board. One National Project Director will be appointed by each the MET and MoFALI, tasked with oversight to 
implement Output 1 and 2 respectively. They will ensure coordination and mobilize project implementation support from 
their respective ministries and partner organizations, and manage inter -sectoral coordination  required in project 
implementation.  In addition, the project will have key staff tasked with the following: safeguards and gender, 
communications, M&E, training, finance, procurement and admin support. When fully staffed, the total number of key staff an d support staff in the PMU will be approximately twenty.  In addition, the PMU will recruit consultants as needed.  
 
146. As aimag level extensions of the PMU, four Project Coordination Offices (PCUs) will be set up. These offices will 
be responsible for the fie ld implementation of the project. Each PCU will be headed by a coordinator and will consist of 
a team trained to facilitate RUGs and RUAs across the aimag and a team trained to set up HPO and facilitate market 
access. An engineer or a technical expert will  be recruited to design and place infrastructure under Output 2. In 
additional the PCU will retain procurement and admin support.  
 
147. Regarding the flow of funds, UNDP will transfer funds to the Ministry of Finance as per agreed work plan with the 
Implementing Partner. Based on the work plan agreed by the Implementing Partner , the Ministry of Finance will then 
further allocate funds to Responsible Parties for implementation. See flowchart below for the flow of funds.  For Output 
3, UNDP will not transfer funds to the Ministry of F inance. As UNDP provides support services to MET, budget related 
to Output 3 will be managed directly by UNDP as per requested services formalized in LOA.
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding reques t (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
148. Climate change is significantly impacting the livestock sector, both through the drying effects that climate change 
is having on the natural resources upon which herders rely, as well as the dzud events which are increasing in 
frequency. In response, the government allocates budgetary resources through targeted government programmes to 
minimize losses and to protect the population and economic assets. Despite these investments, the performance of 
government programs is often sub- optimal, disconnected and ge ographically scattered.  Considering the scale and 
complexity of the problem in a large country such as Mongolia, support is needed the government does not have the 
resources to provide end- to-end support such as the approach proposed in this project.  Wit hout intervention, recovery 
and relief costs will continue to grow, while the underlying challenges remain.   
  
149. Government investment in adaptation has been increasing within the framework of relevant National 
Programmes, including those on l ivestock, cashmere and water, with only 10-20% of the investment secured through 
external/donor assistance.  Costs of adaptation, however, are formidable. A study conducted by the Asian Development 
Bank posits that the minimum and maximum costs of adaptation across clim ate scenarios span a range from USD50 
million to USD560 million per year for Mongolia with the highest maximum relative cost of adaptation (8.5% of baseline 
expenditure) compared to other East Asian countries33. The Mongolia NDC estimates that based on cur rent adaptation


---
*Page 33*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 68 
 
 undertakings and gaps, Mongolia will need approximately USD 3.4 billion in technology and capacity building to meet 
the adaptation shortfall by 2030. The required investments estimated for the livestock, water and disaster management 
sector s are USD46 million, USD2.4 billion and USD65 million respectively.  
 
150. GCF resources will complement government investment to ensure that planning related natural resources 
management and the livestock sector are informed by climate change, and that policies take a longer term towards 
climate resilient development.  Through analytical products and technical support will inform public investment in 
improved coordination, mobilization of communities to invest in managing natural resources, encouraging herders to 
invest in land and water management, and through positive externalities, incentivize private sector investments beyond 
the project lifetime.  The project brings together a number of interventions extensively tested, piloted and proven into 
an innovative  package that provides end- to-end solutions to overcome barriers faced by herder households in Mongolia.  
 
151. GCF funds will be critical to support with the upfront costs of setting up systems to build climate resiliency into 
these initiatives starting with the application of climate information in planning sustainable landscape interventions then 
bringing interventions to scale and finally connecting the sector to markets for the development of climate resilient value 
chains.  The project is also designed to support enterprise development and mobilize SMEs and private sector 
investments. By crowding in public and private sector financing and mobilizing community -level investments, GCF 
resources will help lay the critical foundation for transformational change.   
 
152. Taking into consideration factors such as a) the nature of benefit arising out of the project, b) climate change 
being the key driver, c) weaker economic nature of the target population, d) Mongolia’s current economic situation, e) 
the persistent risks and IMF’s recommendations and f) the catalytic nature of the GCF grants, the following is noted:  
 
• There is significant co- financing from GoM (70%) and there is no incremental ability to stretch their contributions 
owing to budgetary and fiscal consolidation reasons as mentioned above.  
• The nature of the benefits does not accommodate repayment of capital in whatever form or serviceability of a loan instrument.  
• The nature of the beneficiaries and the level of essentiality of the service does not accommodate repayment 
of capital in whatever form or serviceability of a loan instrument.  
• Hence, GCF is recommended to reduce / close the existing financing and knowledge gaps and barriers to improve resilience of Mongolia’s herder population to climate induced impacts o
n water and pasture land 
resources by bringing in catalytic capital in the form of GCF grants.  
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
153. The proposed project has been designed in close consultation with and involvement of relevant government 
agencies and technical line departments, international development partners such as ADB, SDC, IFAD and FAO, and 
national private sector groups. These c onsultations and discussions, combined with tried and tested models for 
improved and resilient land and water management that are detailed in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2) provide the 
project with a sound approach and suite of interventions which are implemented with strong community participation 
and engagement of local officials.  Building on this foundation, the project ensures that the investments as well as the 
results of the interventions are sustained beyond the project period and in the longer -term through the elements of 
project design and implementation.  
 154. With the technology and training provided to NAMEM by the project, the agency will continue to be able to serve 
the country with accurate climate change modelling and forecasting. This capacity will remain with the agency for the 
lifetime of the technology . Likewise, the technology and capacity building provided to NEMA will act as a pilot to be 
replicated in aimags not covered by this project.  
 
155. GCF resources will invest in building capacities for climate- resilient, integrated solutions following a landsca pe or 
ecosystem approach based on river basins, soums and rangelands. The project promotes planning and coordination 
across government officials and communities to overcome the sectoral and piecemeal approach to land and water 
management that had been adop ted in the past. Project outputs will also contribute to enhancing organizational 
capacity of herders to plan for and implement climate- risk informed local land and water management solutions, adopt 
technologies and systems for climate- smart production and integrate climate information and advisories ensuring their 
financial and human resource viability post -project. Considering that the project anchors all land and water management 
investments through agreements negotiated between herder groups and local g overnment, the project promote explicit 
ownership of these investments. By doing so, the project will not only ensure that the investments respond to beneficiary 
needs but also ensure that community organizations, including youth and women’s groups, will h ave sufficient technical


---
*Page 34*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 68 
 
 and financial capacity to keep improving system design and operations, even as climate variability increases and 
seasons become more unpredictable.  
 
156. The agreements will also include O&M provisions with contribution from both the c ommunity and the local 
government. These agreements will last beyond the project period and will be designed in a way that the communities 
can hold the local government accountable and vice versa. The type of investments proposed are not technically 
complex, therefore the materials required for O&M will be readily available.  
 157. Through Output 3 the project intervention is to essentially provide the required viability gap funding to activate 
market forces. Upon project completion, the Herder Producer Organizations as a unit and the members as individuals 
will have organizational and marketing capacity to continue to engage with private sector in a manner that continues to be profitable for both parties. Likewise, once the value chains are established and funct ional, market incentives should 
serve to reinvest for their maintenance.  
 
158. The project leverages domestic co- financing in the form of government financing that supports baseline funding 
of the proposed interventions as well as co- mingling of resources to support project implementation. Co- investments 
for the project include investments from the National Mongolian Livestock Programme focusing on animal health and value chain development, and from MET towards rehabilitation and O&M in the projec t targeted river basins and s oums. 
 
 
159. There are a number of measures to support future finance for sustainability of GCF investments, as well as further 
replication and upscaling.  Climate information, as well as data related to the current and projected st atus of land/water 
resources and herder livelihoods, will be tailored to support these and ensure that climate risk and adaptation measures are fully integrated into programming.   
 
Sustainable Management of Land and Water Resources  
National and sub- nation al planning budgets  
160. Given  the public goods nature of land and water resources, public finance is critical to ensure sustainability and 
further upscaling.  Public planning currently does not fully integrate climate risk into plans. From the use of natural resources only, MNT 543 bi llon (USD 200 million) in fees are collected in 2015 alone and are primarily available to local 
governments to re- invest back to restoration and rehabilitation measures.  Taking climate impacts into consideration, 
the project will help ensure that these co nsiderable resources are used for their intended purpose to implement effective 
EbA measures.  
 
BIOFIN & Mongolia Conservation Trust Fund (MCTF)  
161. BIOFIN supports countries with a methodology that provides innovative steps to measure current biodiversity 
expenditures, assess financial needs, identify the most suitable finance solutions and provides guidance on how to implement these solutions to achi eve their national biodiversity target.  In Mongolia, BIOFIN phase 1 studies revealed 
key measures to successfully conserve and sustain biodiversity a long- term sustainable financing solution should be 
established based on the right policies and incentives , strong governance and institutional management, community 
participation, and private sector involvement. One of the proven international best practices to develop such long- term 
sustainable financing solution is to establish Mongolia Conservation Trust F unds (MCTF), which can attract resources 
from both international and local resources, increasingly focusing on private sector funding.  
 
162. While the BIOFIN assessment suggested a specific biodiversity fund, this recommendation may be incorporated 
into the existing Environment and Climate Change Fund in Mongolia.  The fund seeks “to ensure effective and efficient 
allocation of funds for the protection and rehabilitation of natural areas most valuable to human and wildlife well -beings, 
and sustainable utilization of its resources based on robust findings of environmental and field surveys, and through 
innovative technological applications and enhanced non- governmental participation in the monitoring policy 
implementations by raising public awareness and knowledge on environmental education and policies.”  
 Sustainably Sourced Livestock Products  
National Mongolian Livestock Programme  
163. Livestock is a critical sector in Mongolia, and it is increasingly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.  The 
livestock programme will be reviewed in 2021 and is expected to continue in a form of different programmes, including 
National programme to  support intensified livestock husbandry and a Programme on Sustainable livestock 
development. In 2018 alone, MNT64.9Bln (~$24.3Mln) was invested for implementation of the Livestock programme. 
At the same time, interventions implemented within the Animal health (2016- 2020) and Cashmere programme s (2018-
2021) are aligned with the Livestock programme objectives and funds allocated to these will be additional to the 
livestock programme.  MoFALI is a key partner in the project and the GCF project will collabora tion closely with the


---
*Page 35*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 68 
 
 Livestock Programme – supporting climate informed planning, as well as ensuring this significant public investment is 
guided towards sustainability and climate resilience going forward.  
 
Cashmere Program & Mongolia Multi -Stakeholder S ustainable Cashmere Platform  
164. 30% of the world’s cashmere comes from Mongolia.  It is critical to the Mongolian economy, and this is especially 
relevant given the degrading quality of the commodity , due to climate impacts and other factors  including poor practice s. 
The Government of Mongolia’s Cashmere Program seeks “to increase the level of deep processing up to 60%, 
increasing the production of final end garments and exports of such goods, and an international level competitive 
capacity of such products.”  This investment in local processing could yield significant gains, in line with the 
government’s development goals of gain more value in processing, rather than focusing on raw materials. This, in 
combination with the National Mongolian Livestock Programm e, which focuses on animal health (relevant to meet 
phytosanitary standards for export) are expected to over time reduce the number of livestock.  The GCF proposal will 
support these programmes with tailored climate information and related capacity strengt hening to ensure climate-
informed planning and public investment going forward.   
 
165. Further, the traceability work  will help to ensure sustainably sourced products for which there is a premium,  can 
be appropriately tracked and verified to respond to the increasing consumer demand as well as political pressure (e.g. 
Fashion Pact) for sustainably sourced products related to the fashion industry. UNDP’s work on applying blockchain 
technology in cas hmere traceability was found feasible and will be essential to continue the initiative.   
 
166. Supported by UNDP, stakeholder consultations have begun for the establishment of the Mongolia Multi -
Stakeholder Sustainable Cashmere Platform.  The platform is a national level umbrella mechanism, committed to 
collective action towards producing cashmere i n a way that is “respectful to the environment, expands social and 
economic benefits for herders and their communities and ensures animal welfare.”  The platform brings together leaders 
from industry, herders, government, civil society and development part ners.  Private sector parties which have formally 
supported establishment of the platform thus far include: Theory, Tommy Bahama, UPW, Next Retail, Tiger of Sweden, 
The Schneider Group, H&M Group, NOYA Fibres, Lindex and Garnet Hill.     
 
167. The platform seeks to establish Mongolia as a global leader in sustainable cashmere.  For this to happen, GCF 
project will collaborate closely with the platform to ensure herder and environmental needs are considered in their 
deliberations and vice versa t o ensure herders are able to meet the sustainability standards to be defined by the platform 
(i.e. at present there is no universal definition of sustainably sourced cashmere).  This platform will help support the 
critical link to markets that herders and SMEs along the supply chain need to commit to producing sustainably sourced 
products.    
 
Impact Investment Fund    
168. Exploratory work is ongoing by UNDP to support the establishment of an inclusive business investment fund 
linking equity deployment to sustainable environmental and social outcomes.   Initial research and consultations indicate 
the potential for a $20 milli on 10- year closed- ended fund to catalyze capital and provide technical assistance towards 
sustainability in the livestock sector and climate- resilient livestock products.   The fund would support key value chains, 
including, principally, fibres, feedstuffs and fodder, leather and hides, storage/warehousing, packaging, 
logistics/distribution, veterinary services. The focus is on both domestic and export opportunities.   Such a vehicle can 
prove pivotal in supporting herders to access markets for sustainably sourced, climate- resilient livestock products.    
 169. The establishment of an impact investment fund would serve to demonstrate the viability and profitability of 
investing in Mongolia’s livestock sector and would further drive additional private sector investment. It is believed that 
by improving the value chain by investing in it will unlock pent -up domestic and international demand for high quality 
and sustainably produced raw materials, and semi -finished and fully finished products.   Doing so will hav e the additional 
benefit of reliving some pressure on publicly funded development interventions and technical assistance.   Initial 
indications are that there is significant interest among development finance institutions, multilateral development banks, 
large apparel manufacturers for funding an impact investment fund.  Potential investors include private sector actors, 
development financing institutions (DFIs), multilateral development banks (MDBs), foundations, family offices, and high 
net-worth individual s.   
 
170. Establishment of a responsible investment fund would leverage the activities included in Output 3 and embed 
their long- term sustainability by first demonstrating the viability and profitability of investment in Mongolia’s livestock 
sector, and crowdi ng in private sector investment in additional funds thereafter. In this way, the untapped domestic and 
international demand for raw materials and products derived from the five value chains listed can be translated into concrete investment opportunities wh ich reduce the need for publicly -funded development interventions and technical 
assistance.


---
*Page 36*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 68 
 
  
  
171. UNDP will also collaborate  closely with ADB and its Aimag and Soum Centers Green and Resilient Regional 
Development Investment Program (ASDIP)  ensuring synergies and complementarity .  ASDIP will establish the Green 
Inclusive Regional Agribusiness Fund (GIRAF) using a blended finance strategy, leveraging ADB and GCF funding to 
attract additional investments from commercial banks and nonbank financial institutions, small -, medium, and even 
large enterprises, agricultural cooperatives, and the government. The fund will address th e financing constraints 
preventing agriculture cooperatives and agribusiness enterprises in the aimag and soum centers of Mongolia from capturing the full benefits of a well -functioning, inclusive, and climate- resilient livestock agribusiness value chain. Based 
on lessons learned and emerging best practices in agriculture finance,   it is a response to the financing gap referred to 
as the missing middle, defined as the unmet capital needs of small -scale agriculture producers and SMEs, which has 
become signif icantly evident in the targeted aimags and soums. The fund will use a blended finance strategy to support 
financial inclusion and effectively link sustainable and resilient rangeland management to green, competitive, and 
economically diversified investment s in the livestock agribusiness value chain. It will promote the use of innovative 
finance, including agriculture value chain finance, credit guaranty mechanisms, and performance- based grants, in 
unlocking and expanding access to finance by the missing middle through alternative options for addressing risk -
adverse finance conditions, high collateral requirements, unaffordable interest rates, and rigid repayment terms.


---
*Page 37*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 68 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
23,101,276  USD  
GCF financial instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  N/A N/A N/A N/A 
(ii) Subordinated loans  N/A N/A N/A N/A 
(iii) Equity  N/A   N/A 
(iv) Guarantees  N/A N/A   
(v) Reimbursable grants  N/A    
(vi) Grants  23,101,276     
(vii) Result s-base d payments  N/A    
(b) Co -financing information  Total amount  Currency  
56,200,000  USD  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism (MET)  Grant  20,000,000  USD  N/A N/A N/A 
National Emergency 
Management Agency (NEMA)  Grant  3,000,000  USD  N/A N/A N/A 
Ministry of Food, Agriculture 
and Light Industry (MoFALI)  Grant  33,200,000  USD  N/A N/A N/A 
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
79,301,276  USD  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max.  250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page ) N/A  
C.2. Financing by component  
172. The total budget for the proposed project is USD 79.301 million – USD 23.101 million in GCF resources and USD 
56.200 million in co- financing.   
 
173. Of the USD 79.301 million of project costing, 71% of the necessary budget resources or USD 56.200 million is 
co-financed by the Government of Mongolia (GoM). Taking into consideration the challenges faced in attracting loans, 
significant hurdles in involving private commercial actors and the poor affordability of target population for climate 
services, GCF grants are the best suited mechanism.  This grant will act as catalytic capital that will crowd in further 
private investments. The GoM is bringing substantial resources to the project demonstrates its commitment to improve 
climate resilience of the herder communi ty as an essential service to the population. In addition, the project proposal 
involves crowding in public and private sector financing and mobilizing community -level investments into the activities. 
GCF funding through this project will also facilitate s ustained public and private participation. Not only does GCF’s grant 
contribution catalyze 70% of the project budget, but also builds significant capacities which in turn is expected to attract 
livelihood enhancing private capital investments.  
  
MoFALI  MET  NEMA  NAMEM  Aimag Govt  Total  
A. Co -financing during the Project Period  
Cash  33.200  20.000  3.000  N/A N/A 56.200  
Total A  33.200  20.000  3.000  0 0 56.200


---
*Page 38*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 68 
   
 B. O&M, including post -project period  
O&M  N/A N/A N/A 0.560  1.583  2.143  
Total B  0 0 0 0.560  1.583  2.143  
Total (A+B)  33.200  20.000  3.000  0.560  1.583  58.343  
 
Co-financing:  
174. The Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET) has committed USD 20 million (cash) grant for technical capacity 
for climate -informed planning, sustainable natural resources management, ecosystems based adaptation and project 
management. Related to Outputs 1, 2, 3 and project management , the co- financing will support:  
• Improvement of policy and regulatory framework for climate resilient development planning and ecosystem 
based natural resources management – USD 1 million  (Activity 1. 3, 3.4) 
• Natural spring protection – USD 0.5 million (Activity 2.2)  
• Implementation of Integrated Water Resources Management Plans through 14 River Basin Administrations in four target provinces –  USD 3 million  (Activity 1.2, 2.1)  
• Water catchment protection and reforestation –  USD 3.5 million  (Activity 2.2)  
• Establishment of hydro- meteorological stations in target provinces –  USD 4 million  (Activity 1.1)  
• Capacity development for hydro- meteorology service professionals –  USD 1.5 million (Activity 1.1,  3.4)  
• Financing of climate change adaptation measures through Environment and climate change fund – USD 5.5 
million  (Activity 2.3, 2.4)  
• Project management support –  USD 1 million  
 
175. The
 National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) has committed USD 3 million (cash) grant to support 
emergency preparedness and response resulting from enhanced seasonal forecasts under Output 1 and 2, specifically:  
• Implementation of capacity improvement for the central and local level NEMA to coordinate and plan responses 
to slow onset natural hazards – USD  1.5 million  (Activity 1.1)  
• Establishment of emergency supply storage facilities in target provinces – USD 0.8 million (Activity 2.3)  
• Financing for early warning system operation –  USD 0.7 million (Activity 1.1)  
 
176. Critical to the success of the project will be close implementation with the National Mongolian Livestock 
Programme.  The Programme will address challenges in the country related to a) animal health and meeting 
international hygiene standards for livestock  products and b) supporting the necessary planning and policy 
transformation to ensure livestock numbers do not exceed the carrying capacity of the land –  incentivizing sustainable 
practices in the livestock sector and enabling access to markets for Mongol ian livestock products. The Ministry of 
Agriculture and Light Industry (MoFALI) has committed USD 33.2 million from the National Mongolian Livestock 
Programme as co-financing  to Outputs 1, 2, 3 and project management, namely for:  
• Livestock vaccination prog ramme against sheep pox, bovine PPR, pleuropneumonia, bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy and Foot and Mouth Disease. USD 1.71 million annually and USD 12 million for the project 
duration (Activity 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.1, 3.2,  3.3, 3.4) 
• Establishment of groundwat er wells for improved pastureland management –  USD 2 million for the project 
target provinces  (Activity 2.4)   
• Animal breeding services through 68 centers in four aimags –  USD 1.3 million (Activity 2.1)  
• Livestock traceability improvement, ear -tagging and da tabase – USD 5 million  (Activity 3.3)  
• Livestock fodder production –  USD 4.8 million (Activity 2.3)  
• Establishment of hay and fodder reserves in target provinces –  USD 1.3 million (Activity 2.3)   
• Pastureland improvement and rodent control measures in target provinces – USD 3.5 million (Activity 2.2)  
• SME financing support to agriculture producers –  USD 1.3 million in target soums  (Activity 3.1)  
• Project management support –  USD 2 million  
 
177. The proposed budget for the GCF project is presented below.  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
(USD)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
(USD)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
 Improving 
Adaptive 1. Integrate 
climate 16,436,744  5,236,744  Grants  11,200,000  Grants  MoFALI, 
MET, NEMA


---
*Page 39*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 68 
   
 Capacity and 
Risk 
Management of 
Rural 
Communities in 
Mongolia  information 
into land and 
water use 
planning at 
the national 
and sub-
national levels  
2. Scaling up 
climate -
resilient water 
and soil 
management 
practices for 
enhanced 
small scale 
herder 
resource 
management  37,303,118  11,103,118  Grants  26,200,000  Grants  MoFALI, 
MET, NEMA  
3. Build 
herder capacity to access markets for 
sustainably 
sourced, 
climate -
resilient 
livestock 
products   21,445,864  5,645,864  Grants  15,800,000  Grants  MoFALI, 
MET  
Project 
Management 
Costs  4,115,550  1,115,550  Grants  3,000,000  Grants  MoFALI, 
MET  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  79,301,276  23,101,276  56,200,000  
 
Parallel financing:  
178. The project will also ensure synergy and complementarity with related interventions.  
 
179. ADB’s  Aimag and Soum Centers Green and Resilient Territorial Development Investment Program (ASDIP) is 
currently under review by GCF. The integrated project brings together rangeland, agri -business and urban areas -  
linking green urban development, resilient an d low -carbon rangeland management, and sustainable green 
agrobusiness value chain into an overall green and resilient agro- territorial development framework.  The first tranche 
will apply similar measures related to rangeland management and support to herder livelihoods in the Bayan- Ulgii, 
Khovd and Uvs aimags. The ADB project scope further explores access to financing and credit risk guarantee for agri -
business companies and agri -cooperatives.  
 
180. The Ensuring Sustainability and Resilience (ENSURE) of Green Landscapes in Mongolia project, funded by the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF) commenced activities in 2019.  The biodiversity project will support complementary 
activities related to rangeland management and sustainable value chains in the Zavkhan aimag. Implementation of the 
GCF project will ensure complementarity with the GEF project, thereby maximizing impact of combined resources.  
 
181. GCF will complement ongoing work through the ENSURE project and UNDP to establish a multi -stakeholder 
cashmere platform, which will clear and disseminate market information of sustainable cashmere in a transparent and 
inclusive manner. Platform objectives include:  
• To formulate and implement a collective action plan that addresses the root causes limiting the sustainab ility 
of cashmere in Mongolia;  
• To influence and harmonize government policy that ensures a strong and coherent legal and institutional 
framework for sustainable cashmere in Mongolia;  
• To establish partnerships and coordinated investments and actions that ac celerates current efforts;  
• To position Mongolia as a global leader for sustainable cashmere.


---
*Page 40*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 68 
   
  
182. Activities include coordination among all suppliers, intermediaries and buyers, determining/providing 
sustainability definition, measurement and traceability solutions, and proposing buyer engagement mechanisms and 
incentives for herders. The draft roadmap has been disseminated among all stakeholders for their feedback.  The 
Platform Steering Committee is expected to represent seven organizations: Mongolian Wool and Cashmere Association (MWCA), Mongolian National Federation of Pasture Users Group (NFPUG), MOFALI, MET, UNDP, the European 
Union (EU) and a domestic cashmere company. Six working groups will also be established to focus on a) consensus 
on sustainability,  b) market access c) capacity building d) incentives and financing (one sub- group on access to finance 
and one sub- group on developing an investment vehicle e) enabling environment and f) technology.  
 183. In addition, and related to the above though representing a wider range of livestock products, exploratory work is 
ongoing by UNDP to support the establishment of a responsible investment fund.  Initial research and consultations 
indicate the potential for  a USD 20 million 10- year closed -ended fund to catalyze capital and provide technical 
assistance towards sustainability in the livestock sector and climate- resilient livestock products.  The fund would support 
key value chains, including: meat, dairy, abat toirs, feedstuffs and fodder, agro- processing, fibers (cashmere, wool, etc.), 
leather and hides, storage/warehousing, packaging, logistics/distribution, veterinary services, catering. Focus is on both 
domestic and export opportunities.  Such a vehicle can prove pivotal in supporting herders to access markets for sustainably sourced, climate- resilient livestock products.   
 
184. Critical to the success of both the platform and the fund, is traceability of climate -resilient livestock products, to 
that end, GCF will upscale the traceability blockchain technology, piloted by UNDP and the Sustainable Fibre Alliance (SFA)
34.  
 
185. The overall focus of project is particularly timely, given ongoing developments in the fashion industry.  The 
Fashion Pact was presented duri ng the G7 in Biarritz, France (2019). The Pact lists a set of commitments, including:  
Supporting climate adaptation and resilience through sustainable sourcing of key raw materials, Regenerative 
approaches to agriculture that restore soil and grasslands and optimize biodiversity on farms, Eliminate the sourcing from intensive feed- lot based farming and supporting production systems that optimize the animals’ time on natural 
pasture aligned with the adoption of animal welfare standards across the industry, S upporting material and process 
innovations that have no negative impact on key species and ecosystems, Ensuring that practices do not contribute to 
the loss or degradation of natural forests, and Supporting actions throughout supply chains that restore nat ural 
ecosystems and protect key species. 32 companies representing approximately 150 brands have already joined the 
Fashion Pact - indicating a growing potential for further private investment in sustainably sourced livestock products 
such wool, cashmere a nd leather, which are supported by the GCF project.  
 
186. Further, the mitigation co- benefits of the project can contribute to the Fashion Industry Charter for Climate Action 
(COP 2018) –  Prompted by the UNFCCC, it includes a target of 30% GHG emission reductio ns by 2030 and a 
commitment to analyze and set a decarbonization pathway for the fashion industry drawing on methodologies from the 
Science- Based Targets Initiative. The Charter includes over 70 signatories including Stella McCartney, Adidas, Gap, 
PVH, Ker ing, Burberry, Guess, and Inditex.  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
187. Capacity building is an important part of the project.  Capacity building tailored to different groups is captured in 
each of the Outputs. Under Output 1, training is provided to NEMA, NAMEM and MoFALI on analyzing climate 
information and applying it to pl anning (approx. USD 3.5 million).  Under Output 2, technical support and guidance is 
provided to RUGs in developing RUAs and O&M of related investments (approx. USD 1 million).  And under Output 3,  
training and support will be provided to HPOs to develop P PCP Agreements  and related t o provide training services in 
Production, Post Harvest Processing and Value Addition (approx. USD 800,000).    
 
188. There are two significant investments in technology transfer . Under Output 1, the project will p rocure a high 
performance computer for analysis and forecasting (USD 1.5 million, incl installation and training of NAMEM engineers ).  
NAMEM has confirmed an appropriate space and regular personnel to operate and maintain the computer, as well as 
 
34 The Sustainable Fibre Alliance (SFA) is a non- profit international organisation working with the extended cashmere supply chain, from 
herders to retailers, with a “to promote a global sustainability standard for cashmere production in order to preserve and re store grasslands, 
ensure animal welfare and secure livelihoods”.


---
*Page 41*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 68 
   
 USD  60,000 -80,000 per y ear for related costs.  Regarding lifetime of the technology, this would depend largely on 
diligence related to O&M. As an indication, NAMEM’s current system has been in operation for 15 years.  Under Output 
3, the project will support the scaling up of trac eability for sustainably sourced livestock products , including the use of 
innovative technologies  such as blockchain (USD 600,000).


---
*Page 42*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 68 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
189. The direct beneficiaries of the project will be 26,000 herder households (130,000 people) in the four target aimags. 
As Output 1 national policy, indirect beneficiaries include all 160,000 herder households (800,000 people). The project 
will directly benef it 4.5% of the Mongolian population and indirectly 26%.  
 
190. 47% of the people in the four target aimags are herders by livelihood. Across Mongolia 50% of the herders live 
below the poverty line with high rates of indebtedness. Considering the four aimags sel ected for the project are some 
of the furthest from the capital, the poverty rates are higher than the national average by 4% in the western provinces 
and almost 10% in the eastern region.  Some of these families are single parent, female headed households . A gender -
balanced approach will be taken and inclusion of female- headed households will be encouraged in all activities.  
 
191. As the project will directly benefit 26,000 herder householders, the project is expected to improve food security 
to some extent in all households concerned. Although on average herder families consume sufficient calories, severe 
weather events cause lives tock mortality which results in food insecurity. Food security of households will be enhanced 
by increasing income, by reducing livestock mortality through land and water management investments and by 
providing climate forecast and developing capacities to  prepare and respond.  
 
192. The core of the project is to improve the resiliency of the livestock sector through ecosystem based adaptation 
principles. The Resources Use Agreements supported by the project will be agreements within and between herder 
groups an d local government to manage rangeland resources in an ecologically sustained manner sustainable manner 
informed by the integrated river -basin management plans, downscaled into soum level development plans. The project 
will make a substantial contribution towards developing the sector from its current subsistence level with high volatility 
towards a resilient system that is able to withstand economic and climate shocks through conserved ecosystem 
services, enhanced social capital and increased economic and livelihood security.  
 
193. Output 1 and 2 further focus on the strengthening of institutional and regulatory systems for climate- responsive 
planning and development. In Output 1 GCF funds will invest in the national meteorological agency to enhance their 
capaci ty to forecast and inform development planning. MET, MoFALI, NEMA and aimag and soum governments will 
gain practical training and install climate responsive planning processes when they revise their development plans 
based on the climate forecasts develope d by the metrological agency with GCF support. Through project interventions, 
Rangeland Use Agreements for the sustainable management of pasture will be implemented with local governments 
and ALAGaC.  
 
194. The net outcome of project interventions will be strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate 
risks. The enhanced climate forecasting capacity, improved planning process, the implementation of improved land and 
water management, enhanced infrastructure and improved market access and value cha in development will all 
contribute to enhancing the adaptive capacity of herder households.  
 
195. The government of Mongolia and several international development partners have invested in the building of the 
hydrological and meteorological monitoring network i n Mongolia. As the Feasibility Study shows, currently an 
adequately functioning network provides data and information to NAMEM. The project will invest in the generation of 
seasonal and long- term climate forecasting information and provide practical hands -on training in climate informed 
decision -making. Based on the training received the project will implement climate resilient water and land management 
practices in four aimags.  
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
Potential for scaling up and replication  
196. Interventions to address watershed and land degradation, protect herder livelihoods and develop value chains 
have been successful, but done in isolation.  The GCF project brings together successful approaches, and applies a 
climate lens to address the chal lenges and barriers that inhibit climate resilience for Mongolia’s most vulnerable sector 
and communities. With MET as the Implementing Partner, project interventions will support climate- informed natural 
resources management and integrated water resources  management. Similarly, though close collaboration with the 
National Mongolian Livestock Programme, the proposed project will support integration of climate change into broader 
livestock planning.


---
*Page 43*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 68 
   
 197. This is the first project in Mongolia that promotes an end -to-end approach from climate forecasting to climate 
informed planning to implementation of ecosystem- based adaptation for land and water, to value chain development 
and market access to policy reform. Hitherto projects have focused on components in isolation whereas this proposed 
project targets all key aspect required to transform the sector from its current state to climate resiliency. At the 
watershed and rangeland level, the projects build on pr evious projects but adds a climate change planning component 
and ecosystem based adaptation components. The Resource Use Agreements which in previous projects focused on 
mostly management approaches, in this project will be complemented by climate resilient infrastructure development 
as well.  
 
198. Building on methodologies pilot tested by other projects, this project builds climate resilience of the sector through 
community mobilization and ownership. The project lifts key barriers to sustainable rangeland management by forming 
Resource User Groups and by facilitating Rangeland and Water Use Agreements which instill ownership and 
accountability. Adherence to these agreements are further incentivized through investments in critical infrastructure 
that further consolidates climate resilient and sustainable land water use. These can be considered to second- stage 
innovative approaches to developing climate resiliency in contexts such as these where proven innovation is applied 
at a larger scale.  
 
199. Another paradigm s hifting component of this project is the public -private- community partnerships approach 
proposed in Output 3. Through this approach, the private sector will assume a pivotal role in the development of a 
climate resilient livestock sector in Mongolia and in promoting adaptation amongst marginal livestock herders. Output 
3 is built on these agreements facilitated by the project between private sector and herder cooperatives or Herder 
Producer Organizations. The project will support herders in moving away from being price takers for products falling in 
value, towards being entrepreneurs with quality livestock products, not only sourced in a manner consistent with the 
changing landscape, but also consistent with private sector demand for such products. This is t he critical element 
towards transforming livestock herders in Mongolia from subsistence pastoralists to profitable producers. This 
transformation in turn provides these herders the coping capacity to continue to adapt to future climate change.  And 
by link ing to the exploratory work in establishing a responsible investment fund, supported by UNDP, the proposed 
project ensures a market for sustainable livestock products.   
 
200. This proposed project consolidates, integrates and scales up methodologies piloted by  the GoM and other 
development partners. Therefore, this project provides the critical step required for scaling up and replication of a suite 
of integrated activities required to transform climate resiliency in the livestock sector in Mongolia.  
 
Potential for knowledge and learning  
201. The project facilitates improved knowledge generation, creation and sharing for collective and iterative learning 
among herders, development partners, technical agencies and their field officers. It will generate substantive knowledge 
on climate- informed land and water management, and on collaborative and participative multi -stakeholder processes. 
By updating integrated river basin management plans, developing river basin climate risk and adaptation profiles and 
options,  and soum level resilience- based watershed plans, the project will develop a number of knowledge products 
including guidelines for integrated water resources planning, and O&M manual for upkeep of infrastructure. These 
products complement training of HPOs and other community organizations to evaluate risks and design locally suited 
adaptation measures. Knowledge generation and learning will address technical and infrastructure issues; support the 
production of climate resilient livestock products and enhanc e capacities of local communities and government 
agencies to operate and maintain technologies and sustain practices beyond the project lifetime.  
 
202. Knowledge products and awareness raising products will be developed for different audiences, to inform 
investment by private sector, as well as to influence demand for sustainably sourced, climate resilient livestock 
products.  By coordinating closely with the responsible investment fund- related work supported by UNDP, the proposed 
project will ensure value chains and resulting livestock products are consistent with buyer demand.  An impact 
evaluation will document changes to landscapes, water resources and herder household revenue resulting from project 
interventions. Results will be analyzed to inform project implementation, with successes, best practices and lessons 
learned shared for further replication and upscaling.   
 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
203. The aim of developing public -private- community partnerships is to promote climate friendly and climate resilient 
markets for Mongolian livestock products. However, these partnerships are not in isolation they link back t o the Herder 
Producer Organizations which link back to Resource Use Agreements and Resource User Groups. These links are not 
passive as the kind of public -private -community partnerships promoted by the project will require the backward 
traceability and col lective action by herder groups thereby providing an incentive for herders to remain engaged with


---
*Page 44*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 68 
   
 these groups and in these agreements. Once barriers to marketable livestock sector are removed through traceability, 
better animal health and quality enhancement, continued private sector engagement is likely.  
 
204. In the four target aimags, the project will serve to lift some of the barriers preventing Mongolia from accessing 
markets for livestock products. The changes enacted by the project and the transfer of knowledge to government 
departments and other development partners will promote the effective and sustained participation of private and public 
sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development beyond the project.  
 
Contribution to regulatory framework  and policies  
205. The project is well timed and transformational given the approaching end to the ongoing phase of the National 
Mongolian Livestock Programme in 2021.  The Programme sought to improve herd structure, while reducing overall 
livestock numbers by 16% by 2021 from 2008 levels. Discussions and preparatory work have begun for the next phase 
of the livestock programme, which will have a greater focus on climate smart livestock management and sustainability, 
and similarly will seek to improve herder structure, while reducing herd size. This builds on work started under the 
Fourth Priority Area of the ongoing programme: Develop livestock production that is adaptabl e to climatic and ecological 
changes with strengthened risk management capacity.  This project will support climate- informed development of the 
national programme, which would be a successor to the ongoing National Mongolian Livestock Programme. . This 
includes  herd size and herd structure targets, which are not only within carrying capacity of the land and do not 
overstress water resources, but also informed by the projected impacts of climate change on natural resources ,     
 
206. Importantly, the project will also support government to address key policy and regulatory barriers hindering 
climate resilience of the livestock sector. As described in Section C.2, the following are the main drivers incentivizing 
herders to expand livest ock ownership resulting in the doubling of livestock numbers over the last 25 years and reducing 
their adaptive capacity due to ecosystem degradation and other reasons:  
• Government subsidies – public transfer payments and credit are tied to number of lives tock owned  
• Lack of individual or group land tenure –  land is owned by the state therefore a public non- exclusive good.  
• Lack of markets – with unrestricted access to pasture and with the lack of access to markets off -take is far 
below replacement rate.  
• Economic model for livestock value chains dominated by payments based on volume  
 
207. The project will directly address these maladaptive policies and incentives through Activity 1.3 to support policy 
transformation. The key policies to be addressed are the draft  Law on Pastureland, collecting pasture use fee, risk 
insurance mechanism, as well as other laws and regulations that are either in force or are being considered which 
inadvertently incentivize large herd numbers, or de- incentivize adaptive herding practic es and unsustainable land and 
water use.  
 
Collaboration with ADB to maximize impact  of complementary efforts  
208. This project will implemented in close collaboration with ADB’s Mongolia: Aimag and Soum Centers Green and 
Resilient Regional Development Investment Program (ASDIP). The ASDIP program has four outputs:  
(i) Climate- resilient, low carbon, and attractive Aimag and Soum Centers developed: Targeted Aimag and Soum 
centers become more resilient, offer better living condition, and support the development of green and inclusive 
agri-business value chain;  
(ii) Rangelands managed for climate resilience, high carbon sequestration, and sustainable herding: Rangeland 
health and resilience is improved, and support herders to produce healthier livestock and quality animal -based raw 
material, and have higher income;  
(iii) Low carbon, climate resilient and inclusive value chains created and strengthened through accessible finance: 
Agribusiness value chain is inclusive, support sustainable rangeland management, performant and access to 
financing and credit risk guarantee for agri -business companies and agri -cooperative is ex tended (financial 
intermediation loan [FIL] component); and  
(iv) Capacity building and policy development for green territorial development improved: Capacity building, 
institutional strengthening, policy improvement, and project implementation support. T he program will be 
implemented for 10 years over three tranches.  
  
209. Like the UNDP project, ASDIP Output (ii) also applies an integrated approach to better rangeland management 
and herder livelihoods in Mongolia,  applying the same best practices . Through Ou tputs (i) and (iii) , ASDIP takes a step 
further, bringing in green urban development  and access to finance. By developing climate- resilient, low carbon, and 
attractive aimag and soum centers, ASDIP addresses a key challenge related to lack of facilities and services that 
prevents  herders  from staying near the aimags  and instead migrating t o Ulaanbaatar .  Improved access to finance 
under ADB’s Output (iii) will benefit herders, herder cooperatives, SMEs and in general the livestock agribusiness value 
chain – of relevance to herders and cooperatives supported by both projects as well as the v alue chain on which they


---
*Page 45*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 68 
   
 depend. ASDIP’s Output (iii) complements both UNDP (e.g. supporting SMEs for sustainably sourced products) and 
the National Mongolian Livestock Programme, which is co- financing under UNDP project (e.g. ADB providing incentives 
to reduce livestock numbers, National Mongolian Livestock Programme has animal reduction targets). Further details 
of ASDIP (iii) are  as follows : 
1) Financing for small - and medium- sized enterprises (SMEs), including herders’ agricultural cooperatives, and 
herders engaged in sustainable rangeland management and urban- rural linkages, and the reinvigoration of the 
livestock agribusiness value chain;  
2) Financing for medium- sized to large enterprises and herders involved in sustainable rangeland management 
and urban- rural linkages, and the integration as well as economic diversification of the livestock agribusiness value 
chain;  
3) A credit guaranty f acility to provide credit risk mitigation for financial institutions participating in the project and 
to facilitate the acceptability of collateral substitutes to be developed as part of the project’s agribusiness value 
chain financing schemes; and  
4) Gre en innovation grants to provide business incentives designed to commercialize innovations leading to a 
greener, more inclusive, and competitive livestock agribusiness value chain.  
 
210. Below is UNDP’s Theory of Change diagram, with indication of where ADB’s Outputs apply. The barriers identified 
by UNDP are relevant as well to ADB’s O utputs (ii) and (iii).   
 
 
 
211. The climate information supported under Output 1 of the UNDP project can benefit all of ADB’s activities. 
Specifically, UNDP will collaborate with ADB on the following sub- activities to ensure information considers rural 
development and value chain development needs:  
 
1.1.3. Support development of guidelines for climate risk informed land, water and livestock planning to be adopted 
at the national and aimag level  
1.1.4. Support to MoFALI to integrate climate change and risks and plan for long- term climate resilient development 
at the national and aimag level (dissemination and application following Development Planning Law)  
 
212. Similar ly, under Activity 1.3. Analytical products to support policy and regulatory transformation promoting 
sustainable land and water management and resilient herder livelihoods , UNDP will work with ADB to identify and 
develop tailored products which could inform green development.   
 
213. These links have been broadly illustrated in the below diagram:


---
*Page 46*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 68 
   
  
 
214. The complementary nature of the two projects , and the overlapping project duration periods,  presents a timely 
opportunity to maximize impact through collaboration. To facilitate this, 1) UNDP and ADB will enter into an MOU to 
coordinate efforts and sequence project interventions , and 2) ADB is invited as an observer on UNDP’s Project Board 
(see also,  B.4. Implementation arrangements).      
  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
215. Environmental Co -Benefits: The main value proposition of the project is to promote climate change adaptation 
through the sustainable management of land and water management. Anchored in an ecosystem based approach 
(EbA), the proposed project will drive the improvement of management approaches across water catchments 
supporting a significant portion of Mongolia’s herding populations and globally important ecosystems. The interventions 
will result in significant short and long- term benefits from setting in pl ace comprehensive EbA programming across 
some of the world’s most remote landscapes.  
 
216. Both Output 2 and 3 of the proposed project, informed by Output 1, will lower grazing pressure on vulnerable 
steppe and mountainous ecosystems bringing livestock numbers closer to carrying capacity thereby a) improving 
regeneration of fragile pasture land and reducing competition with wild ungulates, b) improving water quality for endemic 
fish species, and c) maintaining internationally important migratory bird habitats.  
 
217. Without the proposed interventions, resource degradation will further continue to cause loss of ecosystem 
services, a decrease in vegetation density and available biomass, soil erosion through wind and associated dust storms 
that also affect neighboring countries. With the proposed project interventions, hydrological regimes will be stabil ized 
(runoff, discharge, infiltration, storage, recharge, and associated silt and sediment loads etc.). Healthy, natural 
vegetation will be able to sustain biodiversity, improve pasture quality and biomass, erosion and desertification control, 
as well as b etter control of wildfire.  
 
218. By promoting better pastureland management and reducing desertification, the proposed project will generate 
significant carbon sequestration gains.  Contributing 40% of Mongolia’s GHG emissions, methane is the second major 
type of GHG due to a high number of livestock ( 70.9 million as of 2019 ). Most of the country’s methane (85%) is 
generated by enteric fermentation in digestive tracts of animals and discharged by the animals. Methane is 23 times


---
*Page 47*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 68 
   
 more potent than carbon dioxide as a GHG35.  As such, implementation of a sustainable livestock management 
measures will result in significant reduction of GHG in the country.  
 
219. As per estimations made by appl ying IPCC guidelines, good land management practices would result in estimated 
carbon sequestration potential of 0.85 tCO 2 per hectare for a medium- degraded pasture for a typical soil type in 
Mongolia. Therefore, with the ~28.3 million ha of pastureland in four target aimags (Land use report, 2016), estimated 
annual carbon sequestration potential can be as high as ~24Mln tCO 2 per annum. Following a more conservative 
estimation, the sequestration potential is approximately 3.6 Mln tCO 2 per annum or 72 MtCO 2 for the 20 year project 
life.  
 
220. Economic Co- Benefits: About 14% of Mongolia’s GDP or about USD1 billion is generated by the livestock sector. 
Comparatively, with roughly the same number of animals, other countries generate significantly more economic output 
from the sector. The project w ill implement a comprehensive process to address animal health through vaccination 
programmes (co- financing) and improving pasture management, support traceability for sustainably sourced, climate 
resilient livestock products and build herder capacity to access related markets. This will result in significant economic 
co-benefits to the wider economy through multiplier effects of not only enhancing the economic wellbeing of the herder 
groups but also throughout the value chain and to the country. The lessons learned from this project, when replicated 
throughout Mongolia, will further expand economic co- benefits.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
221. The overall poverty rate in Mongolia was 2 8.4% in 201 8, with a higher rate of 3 0.8% in rural areas.  The poverty 
rate in rural areas declined by 11.7 percentage points in 2014 from the 2012 levels, but resumed back by 10.1 
percentage points in 2016 –  indicating the fragility of those earlier gains and vulnerability of those near the poverty line 
to minor socio- economic difficulties and weather conditions36.  The 2016 Household Socio- Economic Survey shows 
that those who were just above the poverty line in 2014 have slipped back into poverty in 2015- 201637. 
 
222. Herder households make up th e majority of the rural population.  Livestock accounts for 90% of the agriculture 
sector and represents 85% of all 332 soum economies in the 21 provinces of the country.  Herder households in the 
target aimags are particularly vulnerable.  Th e target aimags of the proposed project are in the Western and Eastern 
regions, which have consistently been among the poorest in the country.   
 
Region  Poverty Rate  
2010  2011  2012  2014  2016  2018  
Western  52.7 40.5 32.2 26.0 36.0 31.8 
Khangai  51.9 49.1 38.5 25.3 33.6 30.8 
Central  29.9 28.1 28.2 22.2 26.8 26.1 
Eastern  42.3 40.0 33.4 31.4 43.9 37.4 
Ulaanbaatar  31.2 25.8 19.9 16.4 24.8 25.9 
                                                                                    Source : National Statistical Office (NSO) & World Bank (201 9) 
 
223. Prominent extreme disaster events affecting Mongolia are droughts and dzuds (episodes of extreme cold and 
heavy snow). Studies indicate drought as the most serious extreme disaster affecting the country in the last 50 years 
showing an increasing trend in the area affected by drought from 1951 to 201238. As for snow, a long duration of snow 
cover of a certain depth can result in a dzud disaster event in Mongolia due to the predominant pasture herder based 
livelihoods. With increasing climate variability, government officials and herder representatives indicate that the 
frequency of dzuds has increased39. 
 
224. Droughts in combination with the dzud lead to major losses of livestock, impacting herder livelihoods. For 
example, almost 30% of livestock perished as a consequence of the dzud of 2010, affecting livelihoods for more than 
200,000 households, representing approximately 1,000,000 people in a country of 2.8 million. If climate change is 
associated with greater annual variability in climate conditions, the frequency of dzuds may increase, notwithstanding 
 
35 Preserving Mongolia’s Pastures to Counter Climate Change. ADB article, 2014 https://www.adb.org/features/preserving- mongolia- s-
pastures -counter -climate -change   
36 http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press -release/2017/10/17/2016- poverty -rate-in-mongolia- estima ted-at-296-percent   
37 http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press -release/2017/10/17/2016- poverty -rate-in-mongolia- estimated -at-296-percent   
38 Wang, L., Yao, Z -J., Jiang, L., Wang, R., Wu, S -S., & Liu, Z -F. (2016). Changes in Climate Extremes and Catastrophic Events in the 
Mongolian Plateau from 1951 to 2012. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 55(5), 1169- 1182. DOI: 10.1175/JAMC -D-14-
0282.1 
39 Discussions with Ministry of Agriculture officials and with representatives of the four aimags.


---
*Page 48*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 68 
   
 the overall increase in average temperatures. Higher tem peratures and greater seasonal variation in precipitation may 
exacerbate the degradation of pastureland, on which herders rely.  
 
225. Adaptation needs are expected to increase significantly as climate change impacts increase.  A study conducted 
by the Asian Dev elopment Bank posits that the minimum and maximum costs of adaptation across climate scenarios 
span a range from $50 million to $560 million per year for Mongolia with the highest maximum relative cost of adaptation 
(8.5% of baseline expenditure) compared to other east Asian countries40. The Mongolia NDC estimates that based on 
current adaptation undertakings and gaps, Mongolia will need approximately USD 3.4 billion in technology and capacity 
building to meet the adaptation shortfall by 2030. The required investments estimated for the livestock, water and 
disaster management sectors are USD 46 million, 2.4 billion and 65 million respectively. Comparatively the World Bank 
estimates the 2016 government budget deficit to reach 18% of GDP41.   
 
226. Not only do loca l capital markets lack depth, but risk transfer and risk sharing markets are almost non- existent, 
particularly in rural areas. In effect the Government directly bears virtually the entire liability for covering the costs of  
climate change related extreme events. Considering Mongolia’s climate change projections, and current national 
development trends, protecting development gains through risk transfer and sharing is an increasing priority. However, 
development of risk transfer markets has been significantl y impeded by low data accessibility and quality and an 
uncertain base from which to start.  
 
227. GCF funding will support technical capacity building for national and key provincial officials on climate change 
adaptation and on risk mapping and planning. Part of this work will also focus on raising the capacity of Government 
staff with regards to risk and probability assumptions in the context of climate change. This will include identifying the 
impacts and enhanced approaches for risks where recovery/rehabilit ation is possible and highlighting impacts for which 
recovery and rehabilitation is not possible and alternative strategies are required.  
 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
228. In the NDC submitted by Mongolia priorities for adaptation are based on” a detailed analysis of the expected 
impacts, potential solutions and challenges, and of possible synergies between adaptation and mitigation activities”. In 
its vision for adaptation,  NDC highlights animal husbandry, water resources management and natural disaster 
management.   
 
229. For livestock management, the NDC states the need to “maintain ecosystem balance through improving pasture 
management”. It suggests doing so by; reducing rate of pasture degradation, regulating headcounts to match with 
pasture carrying capacities, regulating pasture use, increasing community participation in proper use of pastures, their 
monitoring and conservation, and by building early warning systems for drought and dzuds to prevent animal loss.  
  
230. For water resources the NDC stresses the need “to ensure proper use of water resources, and to strengthen 
integrated water resource management in river basins” through IWRM and multi -stakeholder relations (sic), 
strengthening human resource capacity, imple menting ecosystem based technologies and by supporting ecosystem 
services.  
 
231. In the context of natural disaster management, the NDC emphasizes the need to strengthen early warning system 
for natural disasters by establishing early detection and prediction systems, disaster risk assessments at local and sub-
national levels and by improving forecast quality through increasing computing and storage capacity.  
 
232. As a party to the UNFCCC, Mongolian Parliament approved the National Action Program on Climate Change  
(NAPCC) in 2000 and updated it in 2011. The goals of the program are to ensure environmental sustainability, 
development of socio- economic sectors adapted to climate change, reduction of vulnerabilities and risks, and mitigation 
of GHG emissions as well as promoting economic effectiveness and efficiency and implementation of ‘green growth’ 
policies.  The goals of this proposed project are fully aligned with NAPCC and strategic objective 2 entitled with “Ensure 
environmental sustainability and reduce socio- economic vulnerabilities and risks through strengthening the national 
climate change adaptive capacity”.  
 
233.  NAPCC Strategic objective 2 includes the following broad categories of activities in the first phase: early warning, 
disaster response systems, integrated water and basin management plans, water efficiency and re- use of waste water, 
water harvesting, water resources assessment in the most vulnerable regions and coordinated development strategies 
 
40 Westphal, Michael I.; Hughes, Gordon A.; Brömmelhörster, Jörn, Economics of climate change in East Asia. Mandaluyong City, 
Philippines: Asian Development Bank, 2013. 
41 Mongolia Economic Brief September 2016 (htttp://www.worldbank.org/Mongolia)


---
*Page 49*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 68 
   
 and policies, reduce land degradation and desertification , measures to reduce livestock vulnerability and risks, irrigated 
agriculture through the use of drought resistant crops, and water saving and soil protection technologies. In the second 
phase NAPCC will expand on phase 1 activities including: water harves ting structures, IWRM in major basins, 
measures against land degradation and desertification, policies for livestock management adapted to climate change, 
and early warning systems for natural disasters.  
 
234. Mongolia’s 2nd National Communication to UNFCCC highlights the livestock sector as the key sector requiring 
adaptation assistance. It recommends a number of adaptation measures including all measures proposed in this 
project. Some of the corresponding measures suggested in the submission include: building capacity of livestock 
managers, introduction of technology for the processing of livestock raw materials, support to household and community 
based enterprise, regulation of animal numbers, development of pasture appropr iate management systems, imposing 
legislation on pasture leasing, utilization and ownership, ensuring sustainable pasture utilization through improving 
pasture water availability, and the setting up of pastureland irrigation system.  
 
235. A Technology Needs Assessment for Climate Change in Mongolia conducted by the Ministry of Environment 
indicates the following in order of priority for the livestock Sector:  
 
Technology  The main climate change adaptation benefits  
Seasonal to inter -annual 
prediction and early warning 
system  
 Improving climate change prediction and research capacity  
Reducing economic losses caused by climate related disasters  
Strengthening capacity to plan and implement climate change adaptation measures  
Increased resilience to natural disasters  
Planting of forage perennials 
resistant to drought and cold 
winter for fodder production  Improving vegetation cover and biodiversity  
Reducing pasture degradation  
 
Selective breeding of livestock  
 Improving livestock qualit y and new breeds resilient to climate change and local context  
Controlled animal numbers and composition  
Producing supplement feed for 
winter and spring  Efficient use of pasture plants  
Increased resilience of livestock to dzud and drought  
Rain and snow water 
harvesting for herder groups  
 Efficient water resource usage  
Improving vegetation cover if water is used for forage planting  
Better resilience to drought and drier climate  
Producing supplement forage 
with bacterial enzymes for 
livestock  Efficie nt use of pasture plants  
Increased resilience of livestock to dzud and drought  
Decreased methane release from ruminant animals  
Sustainable Pasture  
Management  
 Efficient use of pasture  
Decreased pasture degradation  
Increased animals resilience  
Livestock disease management  Better control livestock diseases specially vector - borne.  
Increase resilience of livestock to diseases  
 
236. In Mongolia’s Sustainable Development Vision 2030 highlights the need to “ensure appropriate number and herd 
structure in the total livestock, have no less than 60% of Mongolia’s territory as free of animal disease, for trade and 
quarantine, confirmed by the World Organization for Animal Health, develop veterinary services that are compliant with 
animal health standards for the export of livestock and livestock products to the neighboring countries, and increase 
the head of pure breed cattle to 200,000 in int ensive livestock farming”.  
 
237. There are a number of governing policies and programmes supporting development of a climate resilient livestock 
sector. Those that are currently implemented along with relevant interventions and targets can be summarized as the 
following:  
  
State policy on food and agriculture sector 2015- 2025  
238. Overall objective is to develop self -sustaining and high production livestock subsector that is resilient to climate 
change. Specific interventions include incentivizing the use of long -distance and underutilized pastures, planting fodder 
plants, establishing water sources, as well as fencing of reserve pastures by herders and herder user groups. It also 
incorporates actions to increase the pastureland carrying capacity by promoting sustainable management and 
rehabilitation of pasture and applying pasture user agreements with local communities. Furthermore, the interventions 
include overall increased productivity of animals through enhanced animal breeding services, animal disease control, 
as well as increased coverage of vaccination and vaccine production. Specific targets include:  
• Reduce overall number of livestock and adjust the number, type and composition of livestock based on 
assessment of pasture carrying capacity and status


---
*Page 50*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 68 
   
 • Com position of cattle from 6.7 to 10% and processed meat 16,800 tonnes to 200,000 tonnes compared to 
2014.  
State policy on herders 2009- 2020  
239. The policy aims at improving the prosperity of herder households by implementing several strategic priority areas:  
• Create favorable legal, economic and business environment which enables decent living and working 
conditions for herders, prevention of poverty in herders through employment and social security;  
• Improve livestock production and develop an adequate marketing network;  
• Make changes in the lifestyle and livelihood of herders through supporting development of self -assisting and 
self-governing civil society structures, enhancement of herders’ knowledge and skills.  
 
National Mongolian Livestock Programme 2010- 2021 
240. It aims to develop a livestock sector that is able to adapt to climate change and social development trends and 
create an environment where the sector is economically viable and competitive in the market economy, to provide a 
safe and healthy food supply to the population, to deliver quality raw materials to processing industries, and to increase 
exports. There are five specific objectives to improve livestock sector governance, animal breeding and veterinary 
service standards, to develop climate and risk resilient livestock sector and create favorable marketing conditions. 
Within the objective to develop climate and risk resilient livestock sector, the interventions include:  
• Improved pasture management through establishment of regulatory  framework for pastureland management 
and introduction of pasture use fee, improved pasture use planning system, keeping optimal herd structure and 
size to pasture carrying capacity, as well as improved rodent and pest control;  
• Increased hay and fodder pr oduction through both promoting natural hay making and good quality fodder 
plantations;  
• Improved livestock water supply through establishment and rehabilitation of groundwater wells and rain and 
snow water harvesting;  
• Create livestock risk management capacity by improved monitoring of changes, developing risk insurance 
system, developing innovative training methods and train herders on adaptation to climate and ecological 
changes including breeding of livestock for meat production  
 
241. For the implementation of the programme, the Government pledges to allocate 3% of the state budget annually. 
Specific targets by the year 2021 include:    
• Increase the number of large livestock camel 0.3%, horse 3.1%, cattle 8%, and sheep 2.70%. Reduce number 
of goat by 14.1%.  
• Increase meat export volume to 50,000 tons.  
• Be free from animal diseases, including brucellosis, glanders, anemia, leucosis and brucellosis and achieve a 
low risk status for contagious bovine pleuropneumonia, foot and mouth disease and sheep pox  
• Establish 2,686 new wells  
 
Mongolian Agenda for Sustainable Livestock (MASL)  
242. The MASL action plan seeks to support the sustainable development of the Mongolian livestock sector as 
economically efficient while implementing sustainable pasturelan d management, enhancing food security and safety 
and social inclusiveness, and strengthening stakeholder partnerships and participation.  Its objectives include:  
• to restore, rehabilitate and utilize pastureland and water resources sustainably and responsi bly, to adapt to 
climate change, and to mitigate climate change impacts  
• to improve the efficiency and productivity of livestock production in various livestock product value chains, 
and to develop export -oriented livestock production  
• to develop veterinary  and animal breeding services, and to improve food security and safety  
• to support rural development, to reduce poverty and income inequality, and to improve the social service 
delivery and quality  
• to develop partnerships between stakeholders including prof essional associations, research organizations, 
non-governmental organizations, herder organizations, cooperatives and international organizations, and to 
support public -private partnerships  
 
National sub- programme to support productivity of animal husbandry 2016- 2018  
243. The objective of the sub programme is to increase income of herders and farmers and add value to livestock 
products through promoting export -oriented livestock sector development  and transferring innovative technologies in 
the sector. The indicators include:  
• increase in agriculture sector contribution to a national economy


---
*Page 51*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 68 
   
 • decrease in infectious animal disease outbreak   
• increase in animal productivity and  
• increase in livestock  sector exports  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
244. The effectiveness of proposed solutions has been successfully piloted by a number of projects at varying scale. 
This project builds on those best practices of cost -effectiveness and efficiency of delivery. Traditional cooperative 
approaches are being employed, which have also proven successful for management of shared natural resources.   
 
245. The project brings together key ministries, MET and MoFALI, acknowledging the link between natural resources 
and herder livelihoods and the need for cross sectoral collaboration, to maximize the impact of combined resources 
and efforts to achieve the project objective.  As the project is consistent with Government priorities; all activities are 
cost-shared with an overall ratio of approximately 2:1. Costs related to O&M have already committed by the local 
governments to ensure long term sustainability of the investments.   Project costs, including the GCF grant, co- financing 
and O&M costs were considered in conducting the economic analysis during project design. Given the costs and 
estimated benefits (see Annex 3a), the net present value (NPV) of the project is USD 30 million upon using a 10% 
discount rate, with an internal rate of return (IRR)  of 21%.  Three sensitivity test cases were examined: (i) total cost 
decreased by 20%; and (ii) total benefits decreased by 20%; and (iii) total cost increased by 20% and total benefits 
simultaneously decreased by 20%. In all test cases, the project remains economically feasible with results ranging from 
10% to 15% .   
 
246. The project will also ensure cost -efficiency and effectiveness through complementarity with related efforts. From 
May 2018, the Government of Mongolia started implementing a GCF readiness grant project entitled Building capacity 
to advance National Adaptation Plan Process in Mongolia jointly with UNEP. To help advance the NAP process in the 
country, the readiness grant will aim at enhancing institutional and technical capacity of key actors, establishing a robust 
climate information system and developing sustainable NAP financing and implementation strategy with clear M&E 
framework. As the readiness grant interventions will inform the medium-  and long- term adaptation priorities of the 
country, there is a good potential for the two initiatives to compl ement one another for improved effectiveness. The 
timing of the projects will allow the projects to mutually benefit from the generated knowledge.  
 
247. One of such areas is a policy reviews process through the readiness grant (1.2.5) to enable cross sectoral 
integration of climate adaptation, to which UNDP project review of livestock sector policy enhancement will feed in.  
While the readiness grant will focus on national level planning and climate integration, the proposed UNDP project will 
address challenges at sub- national level as well. To address the need for enhancement of climate information system, 
the GoM/UNDP livestock sector adaptation project will help improve weather/climate projection software and computing 
facilities to enable NAMEM to develop long -term climate projection. NAMEM personnel capacities will be enhanced on 
climate modelling as well. The readiness grant activity 2.1.2 (upgrade/expand observation networks), 2.1.3 (train 
NAMEM staff) and 2.1.4 (update climate scenarios with new data) will  be complementary.   
 
248. Through the readiness grant, adaptation measures will be prioritized with detailed cost -benefit analysis (3.2.1) 
with consideration of sector and geographic/regional specifics, which will help validate UNDP project interventions at 
target sites. UNDP project interventions with private sector on reducing risks in livestock commodity value chains will 
be an important addition to the NAP financing plan and strategy to result from the readiness grant. There are potentials 
to join efforts on climate awareness raising, where UNDP interventions will target local Government officials and 
communities, as well as agro- hydrometeorology, livestock sector and emergency management professionals.   
 
249. In addition, ADB ’s proposal to GCF entitled The Green Aimag and Soum Centers Regional Development 
Investment Program (ASDIP) is linking green urban development, resilient rangeland management and sustainable 
agrobusiness value chain support into an overall green and resilient agro- territorial development framework. It is 
expected to be a 10 year multi -tranche financing facility. Target sites for ADB’s first tranche include Khovd province, 
which is also targeted by this UNDP project. At the same time, interventions on grazing land management and 
agricultural value chain within the framework of both projects will be implemented to ensure complementary to increase 
impacts. UNDP project will benefit from ADB’s inter soum Green and Resilient Agro- Territorial Clusters in supporting 
livestock commodity value chains more effectively, whereas the ADB project could benefit from better forecasting and 
planning capacity enhanced through the UNDP project.  In addition to Khovd, beneficiaries in other three target 
provinces of UNDP project ar e expected to be supported by ADB’s tranche 2 and 3 investments, especially in 
agrobusiness value chain and credit risk guarantee facilities.


---
*Page 52*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 68 
   
 Best Practices  
250. The project benefits from the lessons learned and best practices of previous and ongoing efforts.  
 
251. The Sustainable Land Management for Combating Desertification project (SLM Project)42 implemented by 
MoFALI and MEGDT successfully piloted and scaled up sustain able land management practices based on a 
collaborative management approach from 2008 to 2012. This project was implemented in 13 soums of 4 aimags. The 
objective of the project was to strengthen the enabling environment for sustainable land management by building 
capacities  in appropriate government institutions and user groups and demonstrating good practice in SLM through on-
ground interventions that are integrated with national economic and social development policies. Core activities were 
in land/pastu re management, water management, combating desertification measures (including sylvopasture), 
strengthening institutional capacity, community based natural resource management, and alternative income 
generation.  
 
252. In collaboration with other development par tners, the SLM project developed a guideline for the development of 
the Soum level annual pasture land management plan. This strengthened the capacity for collaborative management 
among the Soum government land officers and organized herder groups, a key e lement for sustainable pasture land 
management in Mongolia. The SLM project also supported the establishment of a Center for Desertification Research 
and introduced SLM as a degree course at the National University of Mongolia, thus improving national research 
capacity for SLM and combating desertification.  
 
253. The project successfully piloted a series of practices for sustainable pasture use, (re) -introducing rotation and 
resting, fodder production, rehabilitation of water sources, protection from soil erosi on, establishment of wind- breaks, 
intercropping, and cultivation of trees and bushes. The project’s technical reports inform on species for fodder 
production windbreaks, soil protection feasible for different zones, and the project published a series of ed ucational 
pamphlets for agricultural extension. These resources can be drawn on in sustainable land management activities 
under the proposed project.   
 
254. Knowledge on herders’ institutions for pasture management and income generation, and on apex organizations 
for processing and marketing, has been much expanded in recent years, with contributions by other projects supported 
by the UNDP, World Bank ( Sustainable Livelihoods Project , now phase 3), SDC (Green Gold Project), and IFAD 
(Project for Market and Pasture Management Development ); all of which share approaches of collective action by 
herders. The government’s Herder Policy and the Law on Cooperatives likewis e seek to promote collective action and 
community organization. The concept of the Law on Pastureland has been approved by the Government in May 2016 
after pending almost a decade.  
 
255. The Ecosystem Based Adaptation Approach to Maintaining Water Security in Critical Water Catchments in 
Mongolia project promote d user groups and community participation to implement local adaptation measures, and 
successfully introduc ed measures in water resources protection and efficient use. Target areas were the two main 
critical and unique landscapes - Turgen and Khahiraa river basins in Western Mongolia, and the Ulz river basin in the 
Eastern Steppes. The main objective of the project was to maintain the water provisioning services supplied by  
mountain and steppe ecosystems by internalizing climate change risks within land water  resource management. The 
mid-term evaluation report 43 (2015) points out several highlights of the project with regard to its successful piloting of 
water management measures and its contri bution to policy implementation:  
 
• The project is one of few innovative projects taking a rigorous ecosystem approach to climate risks and is at 
the same time in full coherence with the climate change adaptation strategy of the country.  
• Integrated strategi es/management plans for target landscapes and river basins have been developed and are 
under implementation already in 3 aimags and 17 soums. Highlights of achievements are the endorsements of 
3 PA proposals at aimag levels.  
• The project has been instrument al and successful in integrating climate risk issues into RBAs, it has supported 
IWRM as a participatory approach in water management, and civil society monitoring of RBAs through RBCs.  
• The project applies a multitude of adapted physical techniques which e nhance climate resilience on community 
level. The highlight of the component is its full integration into the ecosystem approach, by using the location 
of water infrastructure as an incentive to move herders away from overgrazed area, in this way achieving a 
better water -pasture -livestock balance.  
 
42 Funded by UNDP, the Government of the Netherlands, and the Swiss Development Agency  
43 UNDP/GEF Ecosystem Based Adaptation Approach to Maintaining Water Security in Critical Water Catchments in Mongolia Project –  PIMS 
4505, 17 Feb 2015


---
*Page 53*
---

D  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 68 
   
 • Ecological, economic, social and political sustainability is high, potential risks have already been prevented 
through the project strategy or successfully mitigated.  
 
256. Best practices developed by the EbA project, as well as the SLM project, are well documented, in Mongolian and 
English language, and can be used as guiding materials when designing on- the-ground measures under Output 2.  
 
257. The Green Gold project, funded by SDC, and active 2013- 2016, was implemented in the western region of 
Mongolia (Zavkhan, Uvs, Khovd, Bayankhongor and Bayan- Ulgii, Gob- altai, Arkhangai). The project aimed to contribute 
to improved livelihood of herders and households by ensuring the sustainable management of rangelands and securing 
better access to technological knowledge management and markets.  Through the project implementation and 
interventions, CBO of herders (PUGs) were promoted for sustainable use of ran geland resources and for improved 
economic opportunities. As of 2014, 960 PUGs and 67 herders’ marketing cooperatives have been formed in 96 soums 
in the western provinces, involving 53,000 households (30% of all herder households). Under the project 
imple mentation, 130 PUGs (23 soums) rehabilitated 5.6 million ha of degraded rangelands. A total of 6,200 ha of hay 
fields were fenced for improved yields and production. Eighty hectares have been cultivated for fodder productions. 
Annual sales for livestock pr oduction (meat, milk, hide, wool) have reached to MNT 1.6 billion.


---
*Page 54*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 68 
   
 
 LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project /programme ’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes  
as a whole, including in respect of any  co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
☐ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
  
 
44 As per suggestion by GCF Sec, estimate CO2 sequestration from sustainable land management not included, to elimina te risk of double 
counting with ADB/GCFproject  E.2. Core indicator targets 
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided ( mitigation 
and cross -cutting  only)  Annual  N/A t CO 2 eq44 
Lifetime  N/A t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions ( mitigation and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project financing  79,301,276   USD     
(b) Requested GCF amount  23,101,276  USD  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  _____  t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO 2eq (d = a / c)  _____   Choose an item. / t 
CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed 
(e = b / c)  _____   Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources ( mitigation  and 
cross- cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged  56,200,000   USD  
(g) Public source co -financed  56,200,000   USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  _____   Choose an item.  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b ) 2.433   
(j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b)  2.433  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  _____  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex )  Direct  26,000 households ( 130,000  people)  
50% or 65,000  female  
Indirect  160,000 households (800,000 peopl e)  
50% or 400,000  female   
 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  4.5% of total national population  
47% of the population in target aimags  
130,000 people, 50% or 65,000 female  
Indirect  26% of total national population  
100% of herder households  
800,000 people, 50% or 400,000 female


---
*Page 55*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 68 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Expected Result s Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods 
of the most vulnerable people, communities and 
regions  A1.2 Number of males and 
females benefiting from 
the adoption of diversified, climate resilient livelihood options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, tourism, etc.)  Project 
reports , site 
visits, RCT 
survey, 
consultation
s 
MoFALI and 
MET 
progress 
reports 
against 
national 
progammes  
 0 65,000 
people 
(32,500 
male, 
32,500 
female)  
(direct)  
 130,000 
people 
(65,000 male, 65,000 
female) (direct)  
 Herders adopt 
adaptive 
practices, and attribution for changes in 
environmental conditions and 
access to 
markets is 
possible.  
Government 
commitment to 
climate -
informed and climate -resilient 
planning; 
climate 
information is adequately integrated into livesto ck 
planning and needed reforms 
are approved.  0 
(indirect)  800,000  
people 
(400,000 male, 
400,000 
female)  
(indirect)  
A4.0 Improved resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem 
services  A4.1 Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems protected and 
stregnthened in response 
to climate variability and 
change  Impact 
evaluation, 
reports, site 
visits, RCT 
survey, 
consultation
s 
MET State 
of the Environment report 
(biennial)  0 7 
watershed
s and 
18.22M ha  14 
watershe
ds and 
36.44M 
ha Investments 
identified during 
proposal 
development 
are validated by 
RUAs  
E.4. Fund -level  outcomes  
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term ) Final 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems for climate -
responsive planning and 
development  A5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
climate resilience and their 
effective implementation  Reports, 
stakeholder 
consultation
s 
MET  and 
MoFALI 
policy 
transformati
on draft 
documents  0 3 3 Climate 
information will be 
integrated into 
planning and 
reforms will be 
approved, as per 
commitment 
expressed by 
MET and MoFALI


---
*Page 56*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 68 
   
  
45 Climate informed policy transformation scorecard – 4 policy transformation document drafted, 3 policy transformation document reviewed 
by stakeholders and comments integrated to the extent possible, 2 stakeholders endorse policy transformation and documents presented for 
approval by Cabinet/Parliament, 1 policy transformations approved by Cabinet/Parliament (Note: endorsement and approval of policy transformations will be supported by the project, but are out side the control of the project.  Therefore the targets are set at 3. Disincentives, 
however, must be addressed through policy transformations in order for interventions to succeed and related progress should be reviewed at the midterm)
 
46 Climate informed planning scorecard – 4 climate information tailored to MET and MoFALI and related adaptation guidelines available, 3 
evidence of climate information integrated into strategies and policies, 2 evidence of climate information integrated into approved planning with corresponding financing allocated, 1 adaptation investments ongoing
 
47 Rangeland health s corecard – 4 land severely degraded, 3 land moderately degraded, 2 land slightly degraded, 1 land not degraded 
48 Note: It could take several years for degraded l and to improve, therefore a conservative target within the project duration has been selected.  Climate 
informed 
policy 
transformati
on 
scorecard45 
A6.0 Increased generation 
and use of climate 
information in decision-
making  A6.1 Use of climate 
information 
products/services in 
decision-making in climate 
sensitive sectors  Reports, 
stakeholder 
consultation
s, evidence 
of policy 
transformati
ons 
MET State 
of the 
Environment 
Report 
(bienni al) 
4th National 
Communicat
ion (MET)  
MET/MoFAL
I strategies, 
planning and 
policy 
transformati
on 
documents  
Climate 
informed 
planning 
scorecard46 0 4 1 Climate 
information will be 
integrated into 
planning and 
reforms will be 
approved, as per 
commitment 
expressed by 
MET and MoFALI  
Government 
commitment to 
climate -informed 
and climate-
resilient planning.  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  A7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, communities, 
businesses and public -
sector services of Fund-
supported tools 
instruments, strategies and 
activities to respond to 
climate change and 
variability   Surveys, 
reports,  
RCT 
surveys, site 
visits  
Rangeland 
health 
scorecard47 
using data 
collected 
annually by 
MET from 
NAMEM 
rangeland 
monitoring 0  0  Improv
ement 
of 
score 
for 
30% of 
rangel
and 
covere
d by 
project
48 Herders adopt 
adaptive 
practices, and 
attribution for 
changes in 
environmental 
conditions and 
access to markets 
is possible.


---
*Page 57*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 68 
   
  sites (e.g. 
above 
ground 
green mass, 
underground 
soil carbon 
content, 
photo-
monitoring)  
E.5. P roject/programme  performance indicators  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final 
Output 1:  Integrate climate 
information into land and 
water use planning at the 
national and sub-national 
levels   Number of tailored 
products and plans 
applying climate 
information  
 
 Reports, 
stakeholder 
consultation
s 
 
MET and 
MoFALI 
strategies, 
policy and  
planning 
documents  
 0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 tailored 
climate 
products 
for 
natural 
resource
s 
manage
ment 
(MET) 
and the 
livestock 
sector 
(MoFALI)  
 
 
1 
analytical 
documen
t  to 
guide 
develop
ment of a 
national 
program
me as a 
successo
r to the 
Mongolia
n 
Livestock  
Program
me, 
detailing 
climate 
informed 
livestock 
herd size 
and herd 
structure 
targets  
 2 
tailored 
climate 
product
s for 
natural 
resourc
es 
manage
ment 
(MET) 
and the 
livestoc
k sector 
(MoFAL
I) 
  
1 
analytic
al 
docume
nt  to 
guide 
develop
ment of  
of a 
national 
program
me as a 
success
or to the 
Mongoli
an 
Livestoc
k 
Progra
mme , 
detailing 
climate 
informe
d 
livestoc
k herd 
size and 
herd Climate 
information is 
sufficiently 
downscaled for 
application in sub-
national planning  
 
Government 
commitment to 
climate -informed 
planning and 
planned policy 
transformations 
towards 
sustainability in 
the livestock 
sector


---
*Page 58*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 68 
   
  
49 The National Mongolian Livestock Program includes the following transformations “to develop a livestock sector that is adaptable to 
changing climatic and social conditions and create an environment where the sector is economically viable and competitive i n the market 
economy” where Output 1 will support in integrating climate information 1) Create a legal framework for regulating pasture and protect at least 
30% of land as state, aimag and soum level otor reserve area for use during times of hardship, 2) Link animal numbers and types of herd with 
pasture carrying capacity and limit the number of animals in areas where pasture capacity is already exceeded, and implemented related 
economic incentives to maintain this provision, and 3) Create a legal framework  on pasture use fees collected from herders and people with 
livestock, based on regional characteristics and type of herd and use some portion of it for improving pasture condition.  structur
e 
targets  
0 0 3 policy 
transfor
mation 
docume
nts 
informe
d by 
climate 
change 
impact 
on land 
and 
water 
resourc
es49 
0 2 aimag 
plans  
 4 aimag 
plans  
34 soum 
plans   
 68 
soum 
plans  
6 climate 
risk and 
adaptatio
n profiles 
for 
river/lake 
basins in 
project 
area 12 
climate 
risk and 
adaptati
on 
profiles 
for 
river/lak
e basins 
in 
project 
area 
Increased institutional 
capacity (MET, MoFALI) 
for climate -informed 
natural resources and 
livestock planning and 
management  Surveys, 
tracer 
studies  
 Survey to 
be 
conducted 
prior to 
any 
training  Average 
increase 
of scores 
by 30% 
from 
baseline Average 
incre ase 
of 
scores 
by 60% 
from 
baseline Climate 
information is 
sufficiently 
downscaled for 
application in sub-
national planning  
Government 
commitment to 
climate -informed 
and climate-
resilient planning


---
*Page 59*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 68 
   
  
50 Adaptive practices by herders scorecard –  4 majority of herders not engaged in cooperatives, 3 majority of herders engaged in cooperatives, 
2 majority of herders sign on to RUAs, 1 majority of herders applying RUA measures and practices (e.g. protecting identified land and water 
resources, planning natural resources use in cooperation with other herders, applying rotational herding practices, etc.)  Output 2:   Scaling up 
climate -resilient water and 
soil management practices 
for enhanced small scale 
herder resource 
management  Number of structures built 
and/or rehabilitated  
 Reports, site 
visits, 
consultation
s 
 
MET and 
MoFALI 
reports  
 
Aimag 
reports  
 0 1000ha 
catchmen
t 
reforestati
on 2500ha 
catchme
nt 
reforesta
tion Central and local 
government co-
financing is 
available to 
support 
investments.   
Investments are 
consistent with 
RUAs.  44 natural 
springs 
protected  
 
 88 
natural 
springs 
protecte
d 
143 wells 
rehabilitat
ed or 
construct
ed 285 
wells 
rehabilit
ated or 
construc
ted 
9 water 
harvestin
g 
structures  
 18 water 
harvesti
ng 
structure
s 
1,445ha 
of 
haymakin
g or 
pasture 
reserve 
areas  2,890 ha 
of 
haymaki
ng or 
pasture 
reserve 
areas  
Herders apply adaptive 
practices to use of natural 
resources (e.g. rotational 
herding practices, RUAs)  Reports, site 
visits, RCT 
surveys, 
consultation
s  
 
MET and 
MoFALI 
reports 
against 
national 
programmes  
 
Provincial 
government 
reports  
 
Adaptive 
practices by 
herders 
scorecard50 
 0 4 1 Herders adopt 
adaptive 
practices, and 
attribution for 
changes in 
environmental 
conditions and 
access to markets 
is possible.


---
*Page 60*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 68 
   
  
51 Scorecard – 4 -Herders have received sensitization/training pressure on natural resources dues to climate change and livestock, 3 - 
RUAs include climate informed livestock herd siz e and herd structure targets, 2 –  support provided to herders to incentive progress towards 
targets (Outputs 1, 3), 1 – measurable progress made towards livestock herd size and herd structure targets  RUAs include targets for 
climate informed livestock 
herd size and herd 
structure targets51 RUA 
monitoring  
 
Annual 
MoFALI 
livestock 
census  
 
 0 4 1 Herders adopt 
adaptive 
practices, and 
attribution for 
changes in 
environmental 
conditions and 
access to markets 
is possible.  
 
Output 3:  Build herder 
capacity to access markets 
for sustainably sourced, 
climate -resilient livestock 
products  
 
 % of HPO herders able to 
secure contracts with 
buyers for sustainably 
sourced livestock 
products, thereby 
enhancing livelihoods 
through improved market 
access  Reports, site 
visits, RCT 
surveys 
consultation
s 
 
Evidence of 
contracts  
 
Aimag 
reports  0 0% 50% Willingness of 
herders to join 
HPOs  
Herders adopt 
adaptive 
practices, and 
attribution for 
changes in 
environmental 
conditions and 
access to markets 
is possible.  
 
E.6. Activities  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1.1. Enhanc e technical 
capacity for long-term climate 
resilient development planning, and medium -term 
response planning capacity
 Under this activity, the project 
will invest in developing the computing and human resources capacity at NAMEM to accurately forecast mediu m 
term and long- term weather 
and longer -term climate 
change impacts. The project will train personnel at the central level and in the four aimag to use this information in disaster management and long-term development 
planning.  
 
 1.1.1. Validation of 
speci fications for NAMEM 
technical capacity and computing equipment  
1.1.2. Strengthen the 
technical and human 
resources capacity within NAMEM to produce seasonal to long term climate models  
1.1.3. Support development of 
guidelines and tools (incl 
water availability, operational pasture yield/fodder and dzud impact models) for impact 
based forecasting (IBF), climate risk informed land, water and livestock planning to be adopted at the national and ai mag level 
1.1.4. Support to MoFALI and 
MET to integrate climate change and risks and plan for 
long-term climate resilient 
development at the national, 
aimag level (dissemination Acquisition and i nstallation of 
weather/climate 
forecasting/prediction software and computing facilities to enable NAMEM to develop long-term models and deliver 
forecasts.  
 
Development of training material; training of human resources capacity at NAMEM  
 Guidelines for  IBF, climate risk 
informed land, water and livestock planning  Training on climate change impacts, risk assessments and cross -sectoral planning  
 
Technical expertise for 
integration and application of 
climate information 
 
Guidelines and procedures for 
seasonal  planning and 
coordination of national and


---
*Page 61*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 68 
   
 and application following 
Development Planning Law)  
1.1.5. Support to NEMA 
planning, applying projected 
seasonal extreme weather 
events   
1.1.6. Support application of 
seasonal forecasts to national 
and aimag level systems and 
planning/budgeting to respond 
to extreme events (e.g. 
drought, dzud) , incl forecast 
based forecasting  
1.1.7. Strengthen technical 
capacity in the State 
Emergency Commission 
(under NEMA) in emergency 
planning, incl guidelines and procedures for seasonal 
planning, and coordination of 
national and international responses and related finance  
 international responses to 
extreme events  
 
 
 
1.2. Integration of climate 
change and climate-informed 
carrying capacity into aimag and soum level development plan (incl. Integrated River Basin Management Plans (IRBMP))
 Integrated River Basin 
Management Plans are either underway or completed for 12 river/lake basins pertinent to this project. The planning process starts with these IRBMPs, develops River Basin climate risk and adaptation profiles and options , and then downscales 
that to Soum level development plans and Resource User Agreements at 
the herder level.  
 1.2.1. Develop River Basin 
climate risk and adaptation 
profiles and options  
1.2.2. Development of soum 
level resilience -based land 
and water use and 
management plans  
 Technical expertise to support 
downscaling data and 
integration into sub-national 
plans  
Technical expertise to support 
assessment and development of climate risk and adaptation profiles for the IRBMP for the 12 river/lake basins in pr oject 
area 
 Training to local government in climate change impact, vulnerability and risk 
assessments and planning.   
Technical expertise to support 
development of climate-
informed suom level land and 
water use management plans  
1.3.   Analytical products to 
support policy and regulatory 
transformation promoting 
sustainable land and water 
management and resilient herder livelihoods  
 Under this activity, the project 
will provide policy advice and technical support to
 key staff 
at relevant Ministries  and 
Parliament to improve the legal framework and develop 
climate resilient policies.  1.3.1. Review of current 
livestock policy, investments 
and related public/private 
programmes which could 
inadvertently contribute to land degradation by incentivizing m aintenance of 
large herds (e.g. dzud relief 
programmes, insurance 
schemes, etc.)  
1.3.2. Informed by results of 
Activity 1.1, conduct scenario analyses to inform resilient land and water management 
and livestock sector, and Stakeholder consultations  
Technical expertise 
Knowledge/analytical products 
to support policy 
transformations  
Policy transformation draft documents  
Workshops/st akeholder 
consultations to support cross -
sectoral planning


---
*Page 62*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 68 
   
 related (e.g. finance sector) 
policies  
1.3.3. Drafting of policy 
transformations to support sustainable use of natural 
resources and climate-
resilience in the livestock 
sector and submission for 
approval by appropriate 
ministerial party  
1.3.4. Sensitization on climate change impacts on natural resources and the livestock sector for decision- makers to 
enable the necessary reforms  
 
2.1. Enhance cooperation 
among herders on sustainable use and stewardship of shared land and water resources  (formalized through 
Resource User Agreements ) 
 Community based Resource 
User Groups (RUGs) will be the key point of focus for the implementation of activities under this Output.  The project activities on the ground will be planned and implemented based on Resource Use Agreements developed by RUGs whic h will include the 
following components; Rangeland Use Agreement, Watershed use and management agreements, 
and a Community 
Infrastructure development 
and O&M agreements.   
The project will facilitate, help 
register the RUGs with local authorities, define t heir 
operating procedure and legitimize their user rights and responsibilities as required. The RUGs will lead the development and management of land and water resources as per the 
Resource Use Agreements.  
 2.1.1. Formalize and/or 
strengthen Resources User 
Groups.   
2.1.2. Development, consolidation and registration of resilience-based Resource 
Use Agreements (RUA) by 
RUGs (including Watershed Agreements)  
 Stakeholder/community 
consultations  
Technical expertise to support 
RUA process  
RUAs  (including Waters hed 
Agreements  
 
 
2.2.  Reforestation of critical 
catchment areas to protect 
water resources and 
ecosystem services  
 
 Climate change is having a 
drying effect on Mongolia, 
placing catchment areas at risk. To protect these areas, 
the project will support 
reforestation of degraded 
areas.  Indigenous species 
will be prioritized as they have been proven to be more resilient t o conditions in 
Mongolia.  Training will be 
provided to herder on the role 
of catchment areas in the 
ecosystems, the risks 
presented by livestock and 2.2.1. Validate identifie d 
investments through RUAs  
2.2.2. Implementation of 
Rangeland User Agreements  
• 2500ha catchment 
reforestation  
2.2.3. Development of 
guidance materials and delivery of training to herders on effective and optimal O&M for catchment areas
 Stakeholder consultat ions 
Technical expertise, Contractual services for 
implementation of investment  
Reforestation of 2500ha  
Guidance materials for effective 
and optimal O&M for catchment 
areas  
 
Workshops/Training to RUGs 
for investment and O&M


---
*Page 63*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 68 
   
  
52 As haymaking and pasture reserves are included in RUAs , this sub- activity is linked to 2.2.1  roles and measures for 
maintenance.  These will be 
formalized through the RUAs.  
2.3. Establish haymaking and 
pasture reserve areas, and 
emergency fodder storage facilities to reduce volatility to livelihoods related to climate 
change induced extreme events
 Limited haymaking and 
pasture reserve areas coupled 
with increasingly harsh winters, are affecting animal 
health and winter survival 
rates.  The project will 
promote both structural and ecosystem based measures to promote fodder and water 
security including use and 
exclusion agreements and 
infrastructure measures and in measures to increase the capacity and resilience of herders to cope with climate change impacts and manage 
pastoral risks.  
 2.3.1. Validate identified 
investments through RUAs52 
2.3.2. Implementation of 
Rangeland User Agreements  
• 3,720ha of haymaking or 
pasture reserve areas  
• 48 emergency fodder 
storage facilities  
2.3.3. Development of 
guidance materials and delivery of training to herders on effective management of pasture reserves
 Stakeholder consultations  
Investment and technical expertise for implementation of 
investment  
• 3,720 ha of haymaking or 
pasture reserve areas  
• 48 emergency fodder 
storage facilities  
Technical expertise to develop 
guidance materials for pasture 
management  
Guidance materials for effective 
management of pasture reserves  
 Workshops/Training to RUGs for investm ent and O&M  
 
2.4. Improve water access 
through protection of natural springs, construction of new water wells, rehabilitation of existing wells and water 
harvesting measures 
 A key challenge in reducing 
pressure on overstressed land 
and water resources is the lack of options for water resources – forcing herders 
around the same available sources. Informed by the data under Output 1, the project will construct 125 new wells, rehabilitate 165 existing wells and protect 88 natural springs.  
Water harvesting measures, 
such as community water 
harvesting ponds, with also be supporting as well as 
rehabilitation of 3 irrigation 
schemes.  
 
 2.4.1. Ensure appropriate, 
climate -informed siting for 
investments, based on Output 
1 
2.4.2. Implementation of resiliency -based Watershed 
Agreements through Public Private Community Partnerships  
• 88 natural springs 
protected  
• 285 wells rehabilitated or 
constructed  
• 18 water harvesting 
structures  
 
2.4.3 Restoration of 3 ancient 
irrigation schemes applying 
ecosystems based adaptation 
measures and traditional knowledge  
 Stakeholder consultations  
Documentation supporting site 
selection 
Technical expertise, 
Contractual services for 
implementation of investment  
Investments:  
• 88 natural springs 
protected  
• 285 wells rehabilitated or 
constructe d 
• 18 water harvesting 
structures  
• 3 ancient irrigation schemes  
 
3.1. Identify public -private -
community partnerships for 
sustainably sourced, climate 
resilient livestock products  GCF resources will be used to 
provide technical assistance 
to herder groups st rengthen 
their capacities meet private sector needs related to sustainably sourced climate resilient livestock products, 
and to enter into partnerships 
with private sector.  
 
 3.1.1. Consultations with 
private sector to assess the 
type/level of information 
needed to further engagement and investment in climate-resilient livestock products  
3.1.2. Promotion and conduct of livestock investment fairs to identify public -private-
community partnership (PPCP) opportunities  Stakeholder consultations  
Communications materials  
Workshops/fairs  
Technical expertise 
PPCP agreements


---
*Page 64*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 68 
   
 3.1.3. Based on identified 
opportunities, facilitation and 
finalization of PPCP agreements  
 
3.2. Establishment and 
training of Herder Producer Organizations (or 
cooperatives)  Based on the needs of the 
PPCPs agreed above, the 
project will facilitate the setting up of Herder Producer Organizations (HPOs). Support will include general 
business and market specific 
training in production, post -
harvest processing, post -
harvest value addition and on-
site storage specific to the 
commodity value chain.  
 
 3.2.1. Readiness assessment 
to gauge existing decision-
making and community governance mechanisms, as a pre- condition for a fair and 
equal involvement of all 
interested members of the 
community to participate in 
the HPOs  
3.2.2. Market specific training 
in production, post -harvest 
processing, post -harvest 
value addition and on-site storage  
3.2.3. Small upfront investments to support business needs (e.g. equipment to assess microns for wool and cashmere)  
3.2.4 Impact evaluation of project interventions on herder 
households  
 Readiness assessment  
Technical expertise 
Workshops/Training   
Small investments to support 
herder livelihoods  
Impact evaluation/surveys to 
assess impact of project on 
herder livelihoods  
 
3.3. Improve traceability for 
sustainably sourced, climate-
resilient livestock products  Support National Mongolian 
Livestock Programme to 
improve traceability for sustainably sourced, climate -
resilient livestock products.  
 
 3.3.1 Surveying and analysis 
of traceability of sustainably 
sourced climate resilient livestock products  
3.3.2 Review/Drafting 
standards for climate -
resilience products 
certification process  
3.3.3 Drafting agreements in PPCP to support traceable products development (linked to Activity 3.1.3.)  
3.3.4 Develop a demo 
traceable livestock product 
(informed by 3.3.1)  
3.3.5 Analyze and document 
traceability system results, 
disseminated for knowledge 
sharing  Technical exper tise 
(traceability, blockchain 
application)  
Stakeholder/Private sector consultations  
 
 
 
3.4.  Generation and 
dissemination of knowledge 
products to support private-
sector engagement and 
herder enfranchisement in climate -resilient and 
sustainable production in 
Mongolia  The project will support the 
knowledge and information 
needs of innovative market -
driven financing mechanisms for climate change adaptation to catalyze impact financing, and commercial funding from 
financial markets.  
 3.4.1. Generate knowledge 
products detailing best 
practices for innovative 
financing mechanisms (e.g. 
sustainable sourcing platforms, impact investment fund)  
3.4.2. Promotion of project achievements to raise 
awareness of private sector Knowledge products  
Stakeholder/Private sector 
consultations  
Communications materials (incl 
website, print material, 
TV/radio, social media, virtual 
reality video)


---
*Page 65*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 68 
   
 and/or potential inves tors and 
consumer/public awareness 
about need for sustainable practice  
 
E.7. Monitoring, rep orting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
258. Project -level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP , the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy .   
 
Oversight and monitoring responsibilities:  
259. The primary responsibility for day -today project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project Manager. 
The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The Project 
Manager will inform the Proj ect Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties during implementation, 
including the implementation of the M&E plan, so that the appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. 
The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and 
accountability in monitoring and reporting project results.   
 
260. The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UND P Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project -level M&E requirements as outlined 
in the UNDP POPP . Addit ional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troubleshooting support will be provided 
by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders including the NDA 
Focal Point will be involved as much as possible in project -level M&E.   
 
261. A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all relevant parties 
to:  (a) re -orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence 
project implemen tation; (b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and 
communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; (c) review the results framework and discuss reporting, 
monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibili ties and finalize the M&E plan; (d) review financial reporting procedures 
and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; (e) plan and schedule Project Board 
meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project  Manager will prepare the inception report no later than 
one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the 
UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board.    
 
262. The Project Manager, the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective 
input to the annual Annual Performance Report (APR) for each year of project implementation.  The Project Manager 
will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually well in advance of the 
APR submission deadline and will objectively report progress in the APR. The annual APR will be shared with the project 
board and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Off ice will coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other 
stakeholders to the APR. The quality rating of the previous year’s APR will be used to inform the preparation of the next 
APR. The final project APR along with the terminal evaluation report an d corresponding management response will 
serve as the final project report package.  
 
263. An independent mid- term review (MTR) (i.e. Interim Evaluation in GCF terminology) process will be undertaken 
and the findings and responses outlined in the management response will be incorporated as recommendations for 
enhanced implementation during the final half of the project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process and 
the final MTR report will follow the standard templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . 
The final MTR report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Advis or, and will 
be approved by the Project Board. The final MTR report will be available in English.  
 
Additional GCF evaluation requirements:   
264. An independent terminal evaluation (TE) (i.e. Final Evaluation in GCF terminology) will take place no later than 
three months prior to operational closure of the project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE 
report will follow the standard templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . The final TE 
report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor, and will be approved by 
the Project Board. The TE report will be available in English.  
 
265. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project term inal evaluation in the UNDP Country Office 
evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management response to the 
public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC). Once uploaded to the ERC, the UNDP Independent Eval uation Office


---
*Page 66*
---

E  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 68 
   
 will undertake a quality assessment and validate the findings and ratings in the TE report, and rate the quality of the TE 
report.   
 
266. The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex -post evaluations.  
 
267. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be included in the UNDP project document.  
 
268. UNDP will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the reporting period in acc ordance with the AMA and 
Funded Activity Agreement (FAA). UNDP has country presence and capacity to perform such functions. In the event of 
any additional post -implementation obligations over and above the AMA, UNDP will discuss and agree these with the 
GCF Secretariat in the final year of the project and will prepare a post -implementation monitoring plan and budget for 
approval by the GCF Board as necessary.  
 
Additional Information:  
269. An impact evaluation (within the project duration) will be designed and conducted under Output 3, to assess project 
interventions. Results will be documented and used to inform implementation, as well as further programming. The 
evaluation will also contri bute to the evidence base related to interventions to address climate challenges on land and 
water resources and climate- sensitive herder households.


---
*Page 67*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 68 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages)   
As the proposed project builds on the successes of previous and ongoing programmes, it benefits from related best practices a nd 
lessons learned.  Its design, therefore, reduces exposure to design and implementation related risks.  In addition, UNDP’s 
relationship with government partner agencies is well established, with financial and programme monitoring systems in place t o 
provide on-going technical and other oversight. As such, risks for the project are considered mainly low or medium. In addition, the 
proposed project has been formulated based on consultations at national and aimag level, and the project design has been revi ewed 
by stakeholders at all levels, including a sample of community representatives. That notwithstanding,  a number of potential risks 
have been identified and have been detailed below along with mitigation measures.    
 
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Long term sustainability of interventions to protect/rehabilitate land and river basin areas , O&M of technological investment .  The 
probability and impact have been set at medium given the importance of O&M for sustainability of investments.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project design phase included thorough consultation, investments are therefore in line with needs of stakeholders.  
Commitments have been made for both co-financing and maintenance of investments highlighting ownership and ensuring sustainability of investments (e.g. physical structures, computing equipment, etc.). 
 Further, the project will build on traditional 
practices of user groups, building partnerships and fostering collaboration for shared benefits of land and water resources.  While  
the project will support establishment of new user groups where needed, in most cases the project will support already existi ng 
groups. Training will be provided to ensure value of natural resources and ecosystems benefits are understood.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Low 
Description  
Loss of soil material and sedimentation to the surface and/or groundwater systems from site due to earthwork activities  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
An Erosion, Drainage and Sediment Control Plan will be developed prior to any activities, and closely monitored.  
 
Rainfall and melt water runoff can have a significant impact on the ability to manage environmental impacts, particularly in terms of 
managing dr ainage, erosion and sedimentation. Therefore, activities which involve significant disturbance of soil or operating with 
drainage lines and waterways should be undertaken with the likely weather conditions in mind. It is also important to ensure that all 
required erosion and sediment control mechanisms are in place before works commence.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Project interventions do not have intended impacts, because behavior that is not conducive to the project objective continues . The 
probability and impact have been set at  medium, as the risk is related to herder behavior , and overgrazing by livestock is a serious 
challenge in Mongolia.  
Mitigation  Measure(s)  
Support will be provided through Output 3 to support climate-resilient and environmentally -responsible value chains and 
strengthening access to related markets.  Data and training will be provided to herders that will help inform choices relat ed livestock 
management.  The Activity 1.3 will support policy review and development of transformative policies disincentivizing large herds. 
Further, t his project will be implemented in close collaboration with ADB, whose project includes financial incentives and support


---
*Page 68*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 68 
   
 services conditionality which make the reduction in animal numbers attractive for herders .  Related activities can be linked with the 
RUGs goal to keep appropriate herd structure and number to reduce pressure on gazing land.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Livestock numbers continue to grow, further pressuring land and water resources . The probability and impact have been set to 
medium given upward trend of livestock numbers, despite animal reduction efforts.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Government of Mongolia acknowledges the challenge of growing livestock numbers to sustainable land and water management 
going forward, particularly considering the drying trend climate change is having on the country and related impacts on the natural 
resources upon which herders rely.  The National Mongolian Livestock Programme Phase I include d targets to establish protected 
areas as well as to significantly reduce the total livestock in the country.  Activities include investments in animal health and fodder 
production which will help animals survive the increasingly harsh winters (thereby making the need to maintain large herders no 
longer necessary) and vaccination programmes to enable export of livestock products.  Priority 1 of the Programme is to “ensure the 
sustainable development of the livestock sector and create a legal environment that will promote economic turnover.  The proposed 
GCF project will be implemented closely with the National Mongolian Livestock Programme, with support provided to climate -
resiliency focused activities for herders, and includes the generation of analytical products to support reform for policies/ programmes 
which inadvertently contribute to large livestock numbers (i.e. subsidies, commercial credits).  In addition, the ADB ASDIP 
programme will provide incentives to herder to reduce livestock numbers.  ADB’s project can benefit herders in both projects.  
The Programme has fallen short of its first phase targets, however the Government of Mongolia has invested significant ly in the 
Programme, and herder livelihoods and the livestock sector are priority sustainable development areas for the Government of Mongolia.  Related co-financing has been identified for the proposed GCF project in the amount of USD33.2million.   
Support to critical policy transformations, needed to support the behavior change needed by herders, have been planned under the 
project in the first half.  Review of the project progress in this regard will be monitored closely.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Low 
Description  
Staff turnover or lack of technical capacity within implementing partners and responsible parties  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Implementation arrangements have been discussed and agreed with government, informed by capacity assessments.  Where necessary, UNDP is able to provide support related to direct implementation.


---
*Page 69*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 68 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
270. A Social and Environmental Screening assessment was undertaken to identify and address any potential social 
and environmental risks that could arise from project activities. The proposed project has been screened against the 
UNDP’s Social and Environmental  Standards Procedure and deemed a Moderate Risk (World Bank/International 
Finance Corporation Category B) project.  As such, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (EMSF) has 
been prepared, and has is included as part of Annex 6 .   
 
Environmental  considerations  
271. The project is likely to have some short -term, small -scale environmental impacts during implementation, but will 
ultimately have considerable, long- term environmental benefits (See Section E.3.1).  
 
272. Holistic planning in the form of soum- level resilience based watershed management plans will enable 
consideration of multiple activities over extended periods of time and therefore minimize adverse cumulative impacts.  
The project is not expected to have any long- term or substantive adverse environmental impacts relative to the 
rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure or the construction of water supply facilities. In fact, the conservation of 
water resources in the natural environment emphasized by project activities is expected to lead to significant 
environmental co- benefits associated with improved agricultural -pastoral practices and land use under climate change 
conditions. Any adverse environmental impacts are expected to short -term and limited to the construction of hydraulic 
works. Activities include both structural and ecosystem based measures to promote water security and may include: 
fencing of springs; small dams/ponds (water reservoirs) and water harvesting structures; planting of fodder crops; 
establishing windbreaks; soil protec tion (from erosion); rehabilitation of water resources; establishment of deep wells; 
rehabilitation/establishment of shallow wells.  The formation of user groups and producer groups, along with 
implementation of agreements, will result in better use and management of resources, this in turn will limit the risk of over exploitation.  
 
273. The project makes provision for a complaint’s register along with a two- tiered Grievance Redress Mechanism 
consistent with the UNDP’s Stakeholder Response Mechanism: Overview and Guidance (2014) and World Bank Group Safeguards Policies.  The Grievance Redress Mechanism has further been designed in consideration of the specific 
local context and draws on existing processes and procedures for the resolution of complaints and grievances in 
Mongolia. The Grievance Redress Mechanism established goals and objectives along with eligibility requirements to make a complaint and/or grievance.  It has been designed that all parties will act in good faith throughout the process 
and more impor
tantly, that is will be arbitrary in nature in trying to achieve mutually acceptable resolutions for all parties.  
The Grievance Redress Mechanism also provides for the covering of costs for legitimate complaints or grievances so 
as individuals and/or grou ps are not disadvantaged by bring complaints to the attention of MET.  Furthermore, 
environmental complaints by communities and people affected by the project can be submitted to UNDP’s Social and Environmental Compliance Unit (SECU).  SECU will respond to claims that UNDP is not in compliance with applicable 
environmental and social policies. Complaints can be submitted by e- mail to 
project.concerns@undp.org   or the UNDP 
website.  Project -affected stakeholders can also request the UNDP Country Office for access to appropriate grievance 
resolution procedures for hearing and addressing project -related social and environmental complaints and disputes.  
Environme ntal and social grievances will be monitored and reported in the Annual Project Report.  
 
Social considerations  
274. The project targets the very vulnerable and poor, for whom there is little scope to pay for the capital costs 
associated with the interventions.  Activities, such as watershed management plans, rangeland use agreements and 
policy reform, will be undertaken in a participatory manner so that community concerns and needs can be heard and 
taken into account.  This engagement will increas e ownership in outcomes.  
 
275. Taken together, the interventions will help to reduce volatility (and thus loss from climate shocks), diversify 
household income, reduce pressure on rangelands resources, and mitigate the potential for future conflicts over 
dwindl ing resources. This will contribute to improving the socioeconomic conditions of vulnerable households through 
reducing livelihood pressures. By its simultaneous focus on improving rural household livelihoods, lowering climate risks, and implementing appropriate location- specific, adaptation measures, the project brings together the crucial 
elements needed for improving social circumstances in the targeted areas.  
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )


---
*Page 70*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 68 
   
 276. The project is designed to integrate gender sensitive planning and implementation, particularly for female herders 
and female- headed households.  A gender analysis and action plan was prepared with specific recommendations that 
are expected to reduce house hold vulnerability to climate change while ensuring a key role for women in the 
implementation process. These include:  
• Collection of sex -disaggregated data,  
• Enabling gender -sensitive decision making, access and control over resources (particularly for vulnerable people)  
• Gender analysis of loan system in Mongolia to identify any indirect discrimination against minority groups,  
• Increasing women’s participation and leadership in community activities.  
 
277. Capacity -building: The project’s local training programs will help to ensure balanced political participation and 
decision -making of women and men. In addition, the project will seek to ensure that women are well represented within 
RUGs, State -level committees and task forces as well as within the local project management team. This will contribute 
to the integration of gender -considerations in all parts of the project management, including in the monitoring and 
evaluation.  
 
278. Please refer to the Gender Assessment and Action Plan for further details (Annex 8). 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page)  
279. The financial management and procurement of this project will be subject to UNDP financial rules and regulations 
available here. Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme 
and Operations Policies and Procedures available here. UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as 
outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures 
(POPP). The policies  outline formal procurement standards and guidelines across each phase of the procurement 
process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP. See here. 
 
280. The project will be implemented following the NIM guidelines available here. UNDP will ascertain the national 
capacities of the implementing partner by undertaking an evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash 
Transfers to Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonized Appro ach to Cash Transfers -  HACT ). All projects will be 
audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit guidelines and poli cies.  
 
281. The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP Programme 
and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP). The NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and adopted by 
UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and regulations.  
 
282. The national executing entity, MET, also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology, 
is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures (including 
the NIM Guidelines). In legal terms, this is ensured through the national Government’s signature of the SBAA, together 
with a UNDP project document which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds. Both 
of these documents require compliance. Prior to signature of the project document, all national Implementing Partners 
need to have undergone a Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) assessment by UNDP to assess capacities 
to impl ement the project. During implementation, UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance 
with its policies and procedures, and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and 
project confirmation to be agreed with the GCF. This may include, but not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks, 
facilitation and participation in project board meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and 
audits at project level on the resources received from UND P.  
 
283. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of four processes: (1) macro 
assessments; (2) micro assessments; (3) cash transfers and disbursements; and (4) assurance activities. Assurance 
activities include planning, periodic on- site reviews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled audits and 
special audits. During micro- assessment, there can be weaknesses identified for which actions are required to 
addresses the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addres sed it will mean that the level of assurance 
activities will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that implementing partner will have to be reviewed 
if necessary. All details are available here. 
 
284. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and together 
with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA. According to the current audit policies, UND P will be appointing the 
auditors. In UNDP scheduled audits are performed during the project cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the 
basis of UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds were used for the appropriate


---
*Page 71*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 68 
   
 purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial audit or an internal control 
audit.  
 
285. All GCF resources will be provided to the implementing partner, less any agreed costs recovery amount. Under 
UNDP’s NIM, UNDP a dvances case funds on a quarterly basis to the Implementing Partner (Executing Entity) for the 
implementation of agreed and approved project/programme activities, in accordance with UNDP Standard Policies and 
the NIM Guidelines. The Implementing Partner reports back expenditures via a financial report on quarterly basis to 
UNDP. Any additional requirements will be as in accordance with the AMA and when it is agreed.  
 
A draft procurement plan (which will be further discussed and revised prior to UNDP Project Document signature) is 
provided in Annex  10. 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including al l annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclos ure polic y, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 72*
---

H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 68 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☐ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)   
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study  
☐ Annex 3a Economic analysis  
☐ Annex 3b  Economic analysis (Excel)  
☐ Annex 3c  Financial analysis  
☐ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan  
☐ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones  
☐ Annex 6 a Social and Environmental Screening (SESP)  
☐ Annex 6b  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
☐ Annex 6 c Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) report  
☐ Annex 7a  Stakeholder consultations report  
☐ Annex 7b  Stakeholder engagement plan  
☐ Annex 8  Gender assessment and action plan  
☐ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☐ Annex 10  Procurement  and HR  plans  
☐ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan  
☐ Annex 12  AE fee request  
☐ Annex 13a  Co-financing commitment letters   
☐ Annex 13b  O&M letters   
☐ Annex 14  Term sheet  
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval    
☐ Annex 16  Maps indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information N/A  
☐ Annex 18a  Appraisal report  
☐ Annex 18 b Baseline project evaluation reports  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity N/A  
☐ Annex 20  HACT assessment reports  
☐ Annex 21  Operations and maintenance plan  
☐  Responses to GCF comments on Funding Proposal  
☒  Responses to iTAP comments  
☐  Responses to iTAP assessments


---
*Page 73*
---

H   Annex  1 – NDA no -objection letter  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
Map  
NDA No – Objection  Letter  No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 75*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or 
programme 
title  Improving Adaptive Capacity and Risk Management of Rural Communities in 
Mongolia  
Existence of 
subproject (s) 
to be 
identified 
after GCF 
Board 
approval  No 
Sector 
(public or 
private)  Public  
Accredited 
entity  United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) 
Environment
al and social 
safeguards 
(ESS) 
category  Category B  
Location – 
specific 
location (s) of 
project  or 
target 
country or 
location (s) of 
programme  Khovd, Zavkhan, Dornod and Sukhbaatar provinces (aimags) of Mongolia  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s 
website  Friday, May 22, 2020  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and Mongolian  
Explanation 
on language  Mongolian is the only official national language in Mongolia . 
Link to 
disclosure  English:  
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/mongolia/Publications/FP -UNDP -120320 -
5873 -Annex%206b%20ESMF.pdf   
 
Mongolian:  
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/mongolia/Publications/FP -UNDP -120320 -
5873 -Annex%206b%20ESMF_mon.pdf   
 
Other link(s)  UNDP Mongolia website:  
https://www.mn.undp.org/content/mongolia/en/home/library/improving -
adaptive -capacity -and-risk-management -of-rural -communi.html   
 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism website:


---
*Page 76*
---

https://www.mne.mn/?s=undp   
 
Mongolian Environment Civil Council website  and Facebook page:  
http://mecc.mn/?p=14906&fbclid=IwAR2OVRbSEQYlxYWdfBl6RL126d4MNOqj
EcvHcPlmttxNCbDMTOjAZnR1y3c   
https://www.facebook.com/mecc.mn/?ref=br_rs  
 
Remarks  An ESIA  consistent with the requirements for a Category B  project is contained in 
the Environmental and Social Management Framework ( Annex 6a of the FP ). 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s 
website  Friday, May 22, 2020  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and Mongolian  
Explanation 
on language  Mongolian is the only official national language in Mongolia . 
Link to 
disclosure  English:  
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/mongolia/Publications/FP -UNDP -120320 -
5873 -Annex%206b%20ESMF.pdf   
 
Mongolian:  
https://www.mn.undp.org/content/dam/mongolia/Publications/FP -UNDP -
120320 -5873 -Annex%206b%20ESMF_mon.pdf    
Other link(s)  UNDP Mongolia web site:  
https://www.mn.undp.org/content/mongolia/en/home/library/improving -
adaptive -capacity -and-risk-management -of-rural -communi.html  
 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism website:  
https://www.mne.mn/?s=undp   
 
Mongolian Environment Civil Council website and Facebook page:  
http://mecc.mn/?p=14906&fbclid=IwAR2OVRbSEQYlxYWdfBl6RL126d4MNOqj
EcvHcPlmttxNCbDMTOjAZnR1y3c   
https://www.facebook.com/mecc.mn/?ref=br_rs   
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B  project is contained 
in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (Annex 6a of the FP) . 
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS)  (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s 
website  N/A  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  N/A  
Explanation 
on language  N/A  
Link to 
disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement Policy 
Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)


---
*Page 77*
---

Description of 
report/disclos
ure on 
accredited 
entity’s 
website  Social and Environmental Safeguards Procedure (SESP)/ Friday, May 22, 2020  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and Mongolian  
Explanation 
on language  Mongolian is the only official national language in Mongolia . 
Link to 
disclosure  English:  
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/mongolia/docs/FP -UNDP -120320 -5873 -
Annex%206a%20SESP.pdf   
 
Mongolian:  
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/mongolia/Publications/FP -UNDP -120320 -
5873 -
Annex%206a%20SESP_mon_translated%20by%20Sengelmaa_Chief%20Simulta
neous%20Interpreter_976 -99776690.pdf   
  
Other link(s)  UNDP Mongolia website:  
https://www.mn.undp.org/content/mongolia/en/home/library/improving -
adaptive -capacity -and-risk-management -of-rural -communi.html  
  
Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET) website:  
https://www.mne.mn/?s=undp  
 Mongolian Environment Civil Council website and Facebook page:  
http://mecc.mn/?p=14906&fbclid=IwAR2OVRbSEQYlxYWdfBl6RL126d4MNOqj
EcvHcPlmttxNCbDMTOjAZnR1y3c   
https://www.facebook.com/mecc.mn/?ref=br_rs    
Remarks  The SESP is a UNDP document that is used for identifying social and environmental 
risks and mitigation measures. It does not replace or conflict with GCF ESS 
requirements and policies.  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, May 22, 2020  
Place  Ministry of Environment and Touris m  
Government building II  
United Nations Street 5/2  
Chingeltei District  
Ulaanbaatar 15160  
Mongolia  
 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of 
accredited 
entity’s Board 
meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s 
Board meeting  Tuesday, June 23, 2020  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 78*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 78 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment  of FP141 
Proposal name:  Improving Adaptive Capacity and Risk Management of Rural 
communities in Mongolia  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Country/(ies):  Mongolia  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks . 
Strengths  Points of caution  
Overgrazing is a pervasive problem across 
Mongolia and the primary cause of watershed and 
grassland degradation. Interve ntions to address 
watershed and land degradation, protect herder 
livelihoods and develop value chains have been successful but done in i solation and the objective 
has been so far been elusive. The project brings together the successful approaches  and applies a 
climate lens to address the challenges and 
barriers  that inhibit climate resilience for 
Mongolia’s most vulnerable sector and 
communities.  The accredited entit y need s to work closely 
during implementation to further ensure the compatibility, coherence and synergies with the 
other on -going efforts on the gr ound.
 
The Government of Mongolia contributes to a 
considerable amount of co- financing  regardless of 
its economic slowdown and budgetary 
constraints .  
2. The Board may  wish to  consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XXIII , titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment  
2.1 Project background  
3. The impacts of a drastically warming climate are already being felt in Mongolia, where 
temperature has increased by 2.1  °C over the past 70 years. Average precipitation is declining,  
and extreme weather events are more frequent, posing challenges to its  vast pastureland and 
livestock production that are already fragile after decades of unsustainable herding practices. 
Accelerating degradation of pastureland due to climate change keeps herders trapped in a 
vicious cycle: with less pasture to graze their animals, they lose their stock and income. And in 
turn, many herders compensate for the losses by increasing herd size, putting even more


---
*Page 79*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 79 
 
 
pressure on the already vulnerable land. A recent study show s that 70 per  cent of Mongolia’s 
national rangelands, which makes up more than 80 percent of its territory, has degraded  and 
plant composition has changed.   
4. This project seeks to strengthen the resilience of resource -dependent herder 
communities in four aimags vulnerable to climate change by bringing  together climate -informed 
natural resources management and sustainable livestock practices. It will create proper 
foundations for a parallel project led by Asian Development Bank  that aim s to close the gap 
between grant financing and market financing, there by further ensuring sustainability and 
impact beyond this project intervention.  
5. The total project cost is USD 79 million, all in  the form of grants. GCF financing amounts 
to USD 23 million , and considerable resources (USD 56 million) have been secured from th ree 
ministries of  the Government of Mongolia : the Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET ) 
(USD 20 million), the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA ) (USD 3 million) and 
MOFALI (USD 33.2 million).  
6. The environmental and social safeguards classifica tion of the project is category B , as 
informed by the screening performed by UNDP.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component  1: Integrate climate information into land - and water -use planning at the national and 
subnational levels (t otal cost: US D 16.3 million; GCF  cost:  USD 5.1 million, or 31  per cent ) 
7. This component supports the integration of climate information into Mongolia’s land 
and water sector governance and planning . It will focus on  developing the technical capacity to 
forecast  medium -to-long term climate change and its impact on water and land resources , 
there by integrat ing it into its climate -resilient planning. In addition to strengthening the 
government and planning at the national level, t he generated information will be also  
incorporated into the develop ment of  climate risk and adapt ation profiles of river basins , which 
could further guide aimag s and soum s in drawing up  soum -level development plans and 
resource use agreements (RUAs). These plans and RUAs  (to be implemented und er output  3; see 
below for more information ) serve as a road map and basis to guide herder household  
behaviour by defining and agreeing on grazing boundaries  of common rangelands  and adopting 
community -based rules to enforce grazing plans and schedules  that are sustainable and climate -
resilient.  
8. The AE provided a detailed analysis of its national hydromet system,  and the existing 
computing and storage capacity is assessed as sufficient for using the data for current 
application s (i.e. daily to weekly weather forecasts) . However, investment is needed to improve 
the accuracy of monthly and seasonal forecasts and generate the climate models needed to 
inform longer -term climate -informed planning.  GCF  proceeds under this output  would be used 
specifically to fill this gap  and will invest to upgrade the  computing and storage capacity  to 
allow  for more accurate projections , thus better inform ing planning and adaptation measures . 
The GCF contribution in th is component is critical and will benefit  all relevant sectors 
nationwide , beyond the water and land management  sectors that  are the focus of this project.  
9. Moreover, GCF  will devote its resources to enabl ing the generated information  to reach  
last-mile beneficiaries  by supporting impact -based  forecast ing efforts to allow for  forecast -
based financ ing and its upscaling . 
Component  2: Scaling up climate -resilient water and soil management practices for enhanced 
small -scale herder resource management (Total: US D 37.4 million; GCF  cost:  USD 11.2 million , or 
30 per cent )


---
*Page 80*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 80 
 
 
10. This output is focused on investments needed to protect land and water resources and 
the cooperation mechanisms necessary for the sustainable management of shared resources, 
using traditional community -level agreements informed by best practices .  
11. Historically, accountability for the livestock wells was not well defined , especially as 
livestock was privatized, state cooperatives were dismantled and herder households became 
private businesses. This lack of accountability and operations and maintenance (O&M)  has 
caused  a drop in functioning wells , which leads to  increasing pressure on  rivers, streams and 
ponds (and related ecosystems ), combined with  the drying of water sources due to climate 
change . This project will invest in infrastructure measures such as community water harvesting 
ponds and tanks  as well as catchment reforestation at river headwaters . The project will 
partially support the upfront costs of restoring the wells, to be shared with co -finan ciers . The 
ownership of the rural wells for animal watering p urposes is to be  made clear and will belong to 
the government , with  the O&M  role formally assigned to herders and herder groups residing 
around those wells. The local government authorities have already determined that the costs for 
the O&M of these physical structures are to be supported through this project.  
12. The project will also invest in land management measures , such as fences and fodder 
cultivation , which aim to reduce volatility to livelihoods related to climate change- induced 
extreme events . Rangeland u se agreements  for the sustainable management of pasture will 
enforce seasonal rotational grazing and resting schedules, long -term agreements for the 
maintenance of rangeland health and plans to adjust and reduce the stocking rate t o rangeland 
carrying capacity agreement between resource user groups ( RUGs ) and soum governments.  
13.  Building on best practices, this o utput will foster the sustainable use of land and water 
resources by herder communities, while making critical investments to protect catchment areas 
and overstressed land . 
Component 3 : Build herder capacity to access markets for sustainably sourced, climate -resilient 
livestock products (t otal cost: US D 21.5 million; GCF  cost:  USD 5.7 million , or 26.5  per cent ) 
14. Addressing overpopulation of livestock requires interventions that support behavio ur 
change  among  herders . The  interventions  should enable  herders to move away from practices 
that are not compatible with the changing landscape and increasingly volatile due to climate 
change . In particular,  measures will be put in place that increase the value per animal so as to 
compensate for the reduction in the number of livestock. This output will be implemented in 
close collaboration with the National Mongolian Livesto ck Programme. It will identify public -
private community partnership s for sustainably sourced climate -resilient livestock products by 
organizing investment fairs that link herders and herders’ groups with buyers and meat and 
fibre processors. 
15. GCF resources will be devote d to industry -wide initiatives for  financing awareness -
raising  and capacity -building  related to sustainably sourced  climate -resilient products .  
Component 4 : Project management ( total cost: US D 4.1 million; GCF  cost:  USD 1.1 million , or 26.8  
per cent ) 
16. Total project management costs (PMC s) amount to  USD 4.1 million , to be financed by 
GCF and  the Government of Mongolia. The total PMC s and the split between GCF and co -
financiers comply with the GCF Policy on F ees for A ccredited Entities .  
III. Assessment of performance against i nvestment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                    Scale: Medium


---
*Page 81*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 81 
 
 
17. The funding proposal  has high impact potential with a clear climate rationale. The 
project is expected to increase  the adaptive capacity of almost one  million beneficiaries 
(130,000 direct  and 800,000 indirect) by strengthening  national resource management and 
generat ing climate information a nd forecasting . The core of the project is to improve the 
resilienc e of the livestock se ctor using ecosystem- based adaptation principles  and interventions 
that will reduce exposure to climate risks. The project will invest in the generation of seasonal 
and long -term climate forecasting information that benefits the whole country and maximize s 
the benefit s of end  users through impact -based forecasting and forecast -based financing.  
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                     Scale: Medium -high  
18. The project promotes climate -informed institutional planning , natural resources 
management and integrated water resources management . It will directly address key barriers 
that hinder the climate resilience of the livestock sector. The changes enacted by th e project and 
the transfer of knowledge will promote the effective and sustained participation of private and 
public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development beyond the project  term . The 
project creates conditions for future private sector/  public -private partnership  investment by 
promoting climate friendly and climate -resilient markets for Mongolian livestock products that 
link back to the herder producer organizations , RUAs  and resource user groups . Continued 
private sector engagement will likely result in better animal health and enhanced quality . The 
funding proposal has medium- high paradigm shift potential.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                   Scale: High  
19. The project has a high sustainable development potential due to its key focus on the 
sustainable management of land and water . This will result in significant economic co -benefits 
to the wider economy of the herder groups and throughout the value chain , and to the country  
as a whole.  The project has the long -term effect of fulfilling  a pre -condition f or a strengthened 
agricultural business value  chain and restored rangeland.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                    Scale: Medium -high  
20. The project addresses the resilience of animal husb andry and rangeland management , 
which are key sectors and vulnerable to climate change and more frequent extreme weather 
events in combination with the dzud . The project targets some of the poorest and most 
vulnerable parts of the count ry, including vulnerable population s. These vulnerable groups are 
in rural areas , and herder households make up the majority of the rural population , including  
the target aimags , which ar e among the poorest in the country . GCF funding will support 
technical capacity -building  on clim ate change adaptation and  risk mapping and planning  for 
national and key provincial officials. The funding proposal has medium -high scoring for n eeds of 
the recipient.  
3.5 Country ownership                          Scale: High  
21. The fundin g proposal has high country ownership , as it is fully aligned with the 
Government  of Mongolia ’s policy objectives and included in the country program me. There is 
considerable co -financing and commitment; o f the USD 79.301 million in project cos ts, 71 per 
cent of the necessary budget resources  comes from  co-financ ing from  the Government of 
Mongolia . Mongolia’s Second  National Communication to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change  highlights  the livestock sector as the key sector requiring


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 82 
 
 
adaptation assistance and the country’s need to maintain ecosystem balance and s trengthen 
integrated water resource management .  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                             Scale: Medium  
22. The project promotes complementarity with related efforts and best practice s. There is 
no revenue -generating potential. The proposed project is cost -effective, generating an economic 
internal rate of return of 20.8  per cent  over 20 years, well above the UNDP 10  per cent  social 
discount rate. Most of the b enefits come from reduced losses from dzuds as a result of  the 
improved management of better climate information and water and soil management practices. 
The outputs of the project are either public goods or  improvements to the  management of  
common -pool re sources , which are appropriate for grant funding . The projects leverage 
considerable country contributions  through the 71  per cent co -financing . The funding proposal 
has medium efficiency and effectiveness.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and  policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
23. Environmental and social risk category . The accredited entity (AE) has screened the 
project using its social and environmental standards procedure and assessed  the project as 
having  moderate risk equivalent to c ategory B. The Secretariat confirms the classification , and it 
is within the risk level at which the AE has been accredited. The project’s activities , such as the 
rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure or the construction of water supply facilities , are 
expected to have potential limited adverse environmental and/or social risks and impacts, 
which are generally site- specific  and largely reversible, and can readily be addressed through 
mitigation measures. Moreo ver, the project is expected to deliver long -term environmental 
benefits through the development of water management plans and the implementation of water 
resource conservation techniques that lead to better agricultural -pastoral practices of  the 
beneficia ries.  
24. Safeguards instruments and disclosure . The AE has prepared an e nvironmental and 
social management framework (ESMF) for the project and has  disclosed  it in both English and 
the local language. The AE has assessed the potential risks and impacts of the project and has 
included performance criteria, management measures , responsible parties, budget s for 
implementation as well as monitoring and reporting processes and procedures in the ESMF. The 
ESMF also includes key environmental and social indicators on  climate, ecology, ground and 
surface water, erosion and sediments, waste management, air quality and noise. It further  
contains  social impact management measures and  guidelines for the  management of emergency 
situations. The screening procedure includes checks against the national laws for required instruments and  the scoping of issues for activities using the social and environmental 
standards procedure  of the AE . Environmental and social management plans will be developed 
based on risks identified and will be expanded to include any other specific documents that 
need to be prepared.  
25. Environmental and social risks , and impacts and management . The project will be 
implemented in accordance with national laws and regulations, and  it does not envisage  any 
rese ttlement of people , such as loss of homes or similar infrastructure. The project will also 
utilize either government -owned land or land where consent is provided by the landowner (s) 
for infrastructure  measures . The project will also construct structures su ch as dams and weirs 
that are considered small and low -risk, and shall include provisions for appropriate erosion and 
sediment control in all stages of the project.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 83 
 
 
26. To address potential issues in relation to impact s on indigenous peoples, the AE 
conducted a review that included consultations. Referencing the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, 
the review found that the four target provinces are the areas where a majority of ethnic 
minorities in Mongolia live. Based on a consultative process, particularly the activities around 
the formalization of p asture herder groups and the development of p asture management plans, 
ethnic minorities will continue to be consulted  and included in the project. The AE notes that 
project interventions will ensure  that  all herder households (100 per cent ) in four target 
provinces benefit, irrespective of gender, social and economic status or ethnicity , and ensure 
balanced and equitable benefit s among the beneficiaries and provinces.  
27. Some of the risks and potential social impact s of the project include the risk that some 
herders may not abide by agreements reached , which could result in conflict over the use of 
resources. With this, the project intends to develop RUAs with the community -based RUGs to 
ensure that existing land -use agreements will be comprehensive enough to include all seasonal 
pastures and that herders’ rights and responsibilities will be clearly indicated and understood. 
There is also p otential for conflict over water resources. Nonetheless, the development of 
watershed management plans and watershed agreements that stipulate the responsibilit ies for 
the use, protection and maintenance of the new and renovated infrastructu re that are easily 
understood by potential beneficiaries mitigate this risk.  
28. Construction -related occupational safety risks in the installation of infrastructure ( such 
as the fencing of hayfields for winter pasture conservation and fodder preparatio n and t he 
construction of winter shelters for livestock and fodder storage structures)  will be 
implemented , taking into consideration  appropriate construction methods and avoiding 
culturally inappropriate actions. Other activities,  such as the fencing of springs,  small weirs and 
water harvesting structures ; establishment of windbreaks ; soil protection (from erosion) ; 
rehabilitation of water resource s; construction of deep wells ; and rehabilitation/establishment 
of shallow wells will be implemented in accordance wi th standard occupational and workers’ 
safety protocols. On all these activities, broad consultation with target users and relevant 
stakeholders to reach beneficial agreements is planned.  
29. The project has also listed activities as part of an exclusion list t hat the project will not 
support. This include s those that will involve significant conversion or degradation of natural 
habitats and/or may cause measurable adverse impacts to critical natural habitats; will involve 
physical or economic displacement of pe ople; could result in damage or loss to cultural heritage; 
do not meet minimum design standards with poor design or construction quality, particularly if 
located in vulnerable areas; and could  involve  forced labo ur/harmful child labo ur in production 
or activities . 
30. Institutional arrangements and capacity -building . On the ground, MET has the 
overall responsibility of ensuring that the project implements the ESMF provisions together with the project management unit (PMU). During construct ion, the contractor s’ activities will be 
supervised and managed by a site supervisor and a project manager, respectively , with MET 
having responsibility for  environment and social issues. Various components also include 
capacity -building activities aimed a t enhancing  the human resources capabilit ies of those who 
would be implementing activities under the project.  
31. Stakeholder engagement . The AE has conducted consultations throughout the 
proposal development stage with various government  officials  and aimag -level representatives 
and communities and other development partners. It also reported that consultations were 
carried out  with local government representatives from various sectors such as policy, 
agriculture, livestock and crop farming, environment and to urism, land and water resources 
management, hydrometeorology and emergency management. Representatives from non -
government al organizations, civil society, academ ia and  the private sector and beneficiaries 
from the target provinces have also been consulted through various form ats including 
roundtables, workshops and bilateral meetings. It has likewise prepared a stakeholder


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 84 
 
 
engagement plan , which provides an indicative list of stakeholders that need to be engaged 
during project inception and the course of pr oject implementation.  
32. Grievance redress mechanism . The AE will apply its two -tiered grievance redress 
mechanism consistent with  its stakeholder response mechanism s: Overview and Guidance 
(2014) and World Bank Group Safeguards Policies , which are designed to consider the local 
context. At the project level, those with grievances on social and environmental issues can raise 
them through various channels and formats  (e.g. verbal, by phone, complaints box, written) to 
the AE, MET, M OFALI, the constru ction contractor or  the field staff represented by the 
Safeguards and Gender Officer in the PMU , who is also the designated grievance redress 
mechanism officer.  
4.2 Gender policy  
33.  The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan , and  therefore 
complies with the requirements of the  GCF  Gender Policy .  
34. In the gender assessment, t he AE illustrated the commitment of Mongolia to achieving 
gender equality and women’s empowerment. Women have equal rights to inheritance, land use 
and ownership of livest ock and property under the constitution. Various policies and 
frameworks highlight the importance of the empowerment of women with the designation of 
gender focal points at various government levels. However , not all strategies, policies and 
frameworks ack nowledge and promote the empowerment of women , with some even being 
found to be gender -blind. Even when there are gender focal points , the capacity to mainstream 
gender across the various sectors and policies and strategies is limited. There is a paucity o f sex -
disaggregated data to inform policies and strategies to address  the needs and priorities in the 
various sectors.  However , available data indicates that girls are better educated , as it is thought  
that girls are not apt to herding  and it is assumed that herding can secure a regular income  for 
boys . Despite their achievement s in education, women’s representation in decision -making and 
lucrative jobs is much lower than men’s.  
35. The gender assessment, which was carried out  based on desk rev iews, indicates that 
gender inequality is also an issue in the localities where the project will operate. The overall gender inequality in the country means that women and men are affected differently by climate -
induced disasters . This  is further heightene d by the  prevailing gender -based division of labo ur 
and unequal workloads levied on women  as opposed to men,  particularly related to 
reproductive roles. However, t his situation sometimes provides unexpected changes in the role s 
men play . For example, when the women in the household have perished or become severely 
disabled due to disasters, men assume some of the reproductive roles . Young men seem to be 
more exposed to immediate disaster , and women are more susceptible to disaster s that have  
long -term effec ts. Disasters affecting  livestock i mpact women and men differently,  with the 
latter having to leave their home in search of jobs , leaving the aged and women behind. Men 
usually do most of the work outside and away from the home , such as selecting pastures,  
haymaking, herding animals, and participating in meetings and business- related activities. 
Women perform both animal husbandry and household work, which also includes activities 
such as rearing livestock, milking and processing , wool and cashmere she aring , and cleaning of 
animal shelters . They also engage and use natural resources  through their decision -making and 
implementation have been undervalued. T here are gender disparities  in the labour market , 
which are  seen in mostly unpaid jobs  performed by women , women’s limited engagement in 
entrepreneurial activities, women’s limited presence in higher level managerial positions and 
lower wages  for women . Despite their  constitutional rights, women’s land tenure and property 
rights  are weak ; ownership of property is in the  name of the head of household (usually men ), 
and men seem to be the dominant decision -makers with regard to  loans and expenditures. An 
estimated 90  per cent  of agricultural  land and livestock are re gistered under the name of the


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 85 
 
 
man as head of household. Men also seem to have better access to information related to 
technology and development. T he assessment also finds that there is a prevalence of violence 
against women despite specific data. The vio lence is rooted in the existence of patriarchal 
attitude s, alcohol dependence, men’s une mployment,  the wife’s economic dependenc e on her 
husband, and the attitude of tolerating violence to name a  few.  
36. In fulfilling the requirement of the GCF  Gender Policy , the AE has provided a gender 
action plan that includes activities to address the identified challenges to attain ing gender 
equality and contribute to women’s empowerment with corresponding indicators, targets, 
timelines, budget and a gender expert. The activities identified will ensure access to financing, 
ensure gender -balanced participation in developing  an integrated agricultural development 
business model, y. c) when supporting HPOs to  prepare business proposals, review the findings 
of opportunity and  risk analys es carried out under activity 3.1.1 to establish  a baseline to utilize 
and maximize the strengths of female -run business on business proposals;  d) facilitate access to 
the Government  of Mongolia ’s special purpose fund for supporting small and medium -sized 
enterprises , where small businesses can obtain loan s with low interest to expand their 
businesses. It also includes activities geared towards collecting sex/age -disaggregated data for 
any surveys or assessments,  including the needs assessm ent. The inception -phase studies will 
help identify the most effective and appropriate measures in addressing gender inequalities in 
the localities. The gender action plan also includes activities for reviewing  documents to ensure 
the mainstreaming of gend er issues in documents such as Opportunity and Risk Analysis on 
PPCP- CRAD; Value Chain Analysis; Climate Change Impact, Vulnerability, and Risk Assessment; 
Climate, Risk, and Adaptation Profiles. The project will also set quota s to ensure equitable 
represe ntation of women in decision -making position s in the RUGs, thereby  creating an 
enabling environment for women to express their views and promote their leadership. The 
project intends to conduct continuous dialogue with women and men on  the benefits of 
wome n’s empowerment to help bridge the gender gap and contribute to meaningful gender 
equality.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment (medium risk)  
37. The funding proposal requests a GCF grant of USD 23.1 million , accounting for 29  per 
cent  of the total financing. The total project cost is USD 79.3 million , with co -financing by way of 
grants from MET,  NEMA and  MoFALI. The AE provides no co -financing.  
38. The proposed project seeks to strengthen the resilience of resource -dependent herder 
communities in four aimags vuln erable to climate change. The objective of the project will be 
achieved through a combination of (i) enhanced climate -informed planning for land and water 
use localized to the aimag level;  (ii) ecosystem -based adaptation measures ; and (ii i) capacity -
building for herder s to pursue climate -resilient livelihoods. The project will be implemented 
over a period of 7 years with an expected lifespan of 20 years.  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity  capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk)  
39. UNDP, t he AE, has an extensive track record in  the implementation of projects. The AE 
has experience working with the executing entity  (EE)  and with projects in Mongolia on 
sustainable land m anagement practices.  
40. The EE, MET,  has experience in coordinating and implementing climate change -related 
projects with UNDP Mongolia (e.g.  “Sustainable Land Management for Combating 
Desertification in Mongolia” and “Ecosystem -based adaptation measures fo r maintaining water


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 86 
 
 
security in critical water catchments of Mongolia”) . MET is mandated to ensur e the fulfilment of 
the country’s obligations under the Convention on Biological Diversity, the  United Nations 
Convention to Combat Desertification and  the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change, and is one of the four mainstream policymaking ministries of the country.  
4.3.3.  Project -specific risks (medium risk)  
41. Execution of policies  and plans: A significant portion of funds is allocated to knowledge 
generation, policy review and development, the generation of plans and the provision of 
equipment to support decision -making. The lack of execution of such policies and/or decision -
making based on the new capabilities (e.g. as result of shifting priorities or  changing 
circumstances) would reduce on -the-ground impact for beneficiaries. A lack of availability of 
parallel financing, both public and private, could also reduce impact. Comfort is derived  from 
the commitment of the EE, the close collaboration of the AE with the implementing entities and 
the focus on the involvement of local communities.  
42. Sustainability  of outcomes : The lifespan of 20 years will depend on the quality of the 
equipment maintenance;  the continued application  of the knowledge and equipment 
transferred under output 1;  as well as  the continued O&M of work undertaken under output 2. 
Comfort is derived from  the alignment of co-financing with the EE, the focus on community 
participation and the inclusion of O&M provisions with contribution s from both the community 
and the local government. It is recommended that the duration of the O&M provisions be  
aligned with the expected lifespan of the project (20 years).  
43. Behaviour factors and increased livestock: The AE has id entified continued overgrazing 
as a result  of the lack of behavioural change among herders and the continued increase of 
livestock as risks for project success. Current programmes to reduce livestock growth have had limited results. To achieve behavioural change, training will be provided to herders that will 
help inform their choices related livestock management . In addition, activity 1.3  will support 
policy review and development for disincentivizing large herds. P arallel financing of the ADB 
ASDIP projec t would  provide incentives to herders to reduce livestock . 
4.3.4.  GCF portfolio concentration risk ( low risk)  
44. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.5.  Complia nce risk rating (medium)  
45. The proposed activities as described in the project do not suggest any unusual high risk 
for money laundering or terrorist financing .  Nevertheless, as in any project, appropriate 
monitoring and internal controls shall be applied t o identify, monitor and mitigate such risks. In 
this instance, the AE has described its internal policies, procedures and approach to assessing, 
monitoring and mitigating risks in the project and among its partners. Based on the additional 
information prov ided by the AE and taking into account the general circumstances and scope of 
the project, c ompliance risk is assessed as “medium” . 
4.3.6.  Recommendation  
46. It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment  
Overall programme  Medium  
Accredited entity/executing entity capability  Medium


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 87 
 
 
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary  
47. UNDP will be the AE for the “Improving Adaptive Capacity and Risk Management of 
Rural Communities in Mongolia” project. The GCF grant will be implemented following  the 
UNDP National Implementing Modality, according to the Standard Basis Assistance Agreement 
between UNDP and the Gover nment of Mongolia (s igned in 1976 ). The project will be 
administered by the UNDP and be passed  on to the Government of Mongolia through the 
Ministry of Finance as per the agreed  work plan with the EEs. In its role as an AE, UNDP will 
oversee project admini stration, monitor and overs ee project implementation and ensure project 
compliance with UNDP safeguards and relevant policies through its headquarter s, regional 
centr e and country office s. 
48. The national E E for this project is MET, which is accountable to UN DP for managing the 
project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achiev ement of  
project outcomes, and the effective use of project resources. MET will lead the implementation 
for outputs 1 and 2 and will name  MOFALI, the  Natio nal Agency for Meteorology and 
Environmental Monitoring (NAMEM)  and NEMA as key implementing entities. UNDP will 
provide support services in both technical and operations support for o utput 3 , whereby UNDP 
will assume the responsibility for mobilizing and effectively  applying  the required inputs and 
partnerships to reach its expected deliverables.  
49. A project management unit will be e stablished to implement the project as per the work 
plan approved by the p roject Board. MET and MO FALI  will each appoint a n ational project 
director  who will be tasked with over seeing the  implement ation of  output s 1 and 2 , 
respectively. They will ensure co ordination and mobilize project implementation support from 
their respective ministries and partner organizations and  manage  the intersectoral coordination 
required in project implementation. In addition, the project will have key staff tasked with the following: safeguards and gender, communications, monitoring and evaluation , training, 
finance, procurement and admin istrative  support. When fully staffed, the total number of key 
staff and support staff in the project management unit  will be approximately  20.  
50. An independent f inancial management assessment of MET was conducted  in 2018  by 
Moore Stephens LLP Chartered ( London) in accordance with the relevant UNDP guidelines. The 
financial management  risk rating for MET is “moderate”.  
51. The procurement risk asses sment rating is “moderate” for MET, as all procurements are 
governed by the Procurement Law of Mongolia. The project’s  financial management and 
procurement will be subject to UNDP financial rules and regulations. The project will provide the necessary trai ning on UNDP procurement procedures to enhance the procurement capacity 
of the agencies concerned.  
52. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits,  
informed by and together with any specific requirements agreed in the  accreditation master 
agreement . UNDP will select the auditors  according to the current audit policies . Scheduled 
audits are also performed  in UNDP  during the project cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, 
on the basis of UNDP guidelines.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add.01  
Page 88 
 
 
4.5.1.  Logical framework  
53. The logical framework has been designed with relevant details , including reporting on 
core indicators for adaptation and the respective impact, outcome and output indicators for the 
result area and the project targets as per the GCF results management framework /performance 
measurement framework .  
54. There are three clear result s outputs and they are  in turn  given appropriate monitoring 
indicators. The result s areas are: (1) i ntegrate climate information into land and  water use 
planning at the national and subnational levels ; (2) scale up climate -resilient water and soil 
management practices for enhanced small -scale herder resource management ; and (3) build 
herder capacity to access markets for sustainably sourced, cli mate -resilient livestock products.  
55. GCF -level outcomes and impacts are specified in  line with the GCF pre -set result area 
guidelines. They are given quantitative as well as qualitative indicators. As for the qualitative 
indicators, a change process is expl ained with anticipated, gradual levels of progress towards 
the final target .  
56. Anticipated outcomes are:   
(a) A 5.0 Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning 
and development. This outcome is indicated by A.5.1 Institutio nal and regulatory 
systems that improve incentives for low -emission planning and development and their 
effective implementation. It is foreseen that by  the end of year seven , documentation for 
policy transformations will be reviewed by the stakeholders and  comments integrated 
to the extent possible ; 
(b) A 6.0 Increased generation and use of climate information in decision -making. This 
outcome is indicated by A 6.1 Use of climate information products/services in decision -
making in climate -sensitive sectors. It i s foreseen that by the end of year seven , 
adaptation investments will be ongoing ;  
(c) A7.0 Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. This 
outcome is indicated by A 7.1 Use by vulnerable households, communities, businesses 
and publi c-sector services of GCF -supported tools /instruments, strategies and activities 
to respond to climate change and variability. A n improvement in the  score for 30  per 
cent  of rangeland covered by the project  is foreseen  by the end of year seven .  
57. Anticipated  impacts are:   
(a) A1.0 Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions.  This impact is indicated by A1.2 Number of women and men  
benefiting from the adoption of diversified, climate -resilient livelihood options 
(including fisheries, agriculture, tourism, etc. ). It is estimated that 130,000 people will 
benefit directly from this project by the end of year seven ; and 
(b) A4.0 Improved re silience of ecosystems and ecosystem services. This impact is indicated 
by A 4.1 Coverage/scale of ecosystems protected and strengthened in response to 
climate variability and change. It is estimated that by end of year seven , the project will 
have improve d 14 watersheds and restored 36.44 million hectares  of rangeland.  
58. Lastly, the core indicators are estimated on the basis of foreseen impacts and over the 
20-year project lifetime. Core indicators are:  
(a) E. 2.3. Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme as a result of GCF financing, disag gregated by public and private sources. Expected total 
leverage ratio is 2.433, all public  resources.   
(b) E. 2.4. Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries (disaggregated by sex). 
It is estimated that by the end of year seven  (end of project implementation), a total of


---
*Page 89*
---

G
CF/B.2 7/02/Add.01 
Page 89 
26,000 households (130,000 persons , of which 65,000 are women) will be direct 
beneficiaries. In terms of indirect beneficiaries, 160,000 households (800,000 people, of 
which 400,000 women) will benefit; and   
(c) E. 2.5. Number of beneficiaries relative to total population (disaggregated by sex). It isestimated that by the end of year seven  (end of project implementation), women
(accounting for 2.25 per cent of the total population)  and m en (accounting for 2.25  per
cent  of the total population ) will be direct beneficiaries of this project. As for indirect
beneficiaries, all herder households, including all women and men in these households
,
pl
us women  accounting for 13 per cent of the total population  and men accounting for
13 per cen t of the total population , will indirect ly benefit  from the GCF grant .
4.5.2.  Implementation timetable 
59. The funding proposal i mplementation timetable has been completed appropriately. It
shows all activities and key milestones associated with each phase of the p roject , and they ar e
c
onsistent with the ‘ logical framework’ .
4.5.3.  Monitoring, reporting and e valuation arrangements 
60. The arrangements for monitoring, evaluation and reporting (Section E.7) are adequate .
A
 detailed monitoring and evaluation  budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan has been
included.
4.6 Legal assessment  
61. The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 5 August
2016, and it became effective on 23 November 2016.
62. The Accredited Entity has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it ha s
o
btained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement th e project.
63. T he proposed programme will be implemented in Mongolia, a country in which the
GCF’s privileges and immunities are not yet in force. The agreement on privileges andimmunities was signed by GCF and Mongolia on 22 November 2019, and is currently  pending
ratification by the Parliament of Mongolia.
64. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redressactivities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by th
e
G
CF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and
expropriation in the country, or the agreement referred to above has been ratified.
65. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made
subject to the following conditions:
(a) Signat ure of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and
(b) Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 90 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP141 
Proposal name:  Improving Adaptive Capacity and Risk Management of Rural 
communities in Mongolia  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Country/(ies):  Mongolia  
Project/pro gramme size:  Medium  
I. Asse ssment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential        Scale:  Medium  
1. Mongolia is a landlocked country in East Asia with diverse topographical features and 
ecosystems. It possesses vast rangelands within its territory of 1.56 million km2, where about 3 
million people live. With a population density of 1.9 people/km2, it is one of the most sparsely 
populated countries in the world. Its vast landmass consists of grassy steppe, desert and mountain ranges stretching fr om the north to the west.  About 30 per cent of the population are 
nomadic or semi- nomadic, engaging in herding in the rangelands.  
2. Mongolia faces harsh winter conditions within its annual cycle. There is significant 
temporal and spatial climate variability, compounded by topographi cal diversity. The 
continental climate exhibits four distinct seasons. The mean annual temperature ranges 
between –8 °C and 8 °C . In summer, the average temperature ranges between 10 °C  and 26 °C, 
while that in winter ranges from –15 °C to –30 °C. The annu al average precipitation varies 
between 50 mm to 400 mm, of which about 85 per cent falls during the extended warm season 
between April and September. The Kharkhiraa Turgen mountain region receives an average of 
225 –250 mm of preci pitation per year, while low -lying lands receive an average of 125 –150 
mm.  
3. Available sources1 claim that the average surface air temperature has been increasing 
since the mid -1900s. However, a detailed  examination of a time series of average annual 
temperature data for  the period  1961 –1990 suggests that the actual rising trend for 
temperature began in a bout 1987 –1988 and has more or less continued ever since. The 
feasibility study report indicate s that the air temperature increased by 2.07  °C between 1940 
and 2013 . Moreover, the warmest 10 years out of the last 74 years have been experienced since 
1997, signifying the teleconnection with gradual atmospheric loading of greenhouse gases.  
4. The long -term prec ipitation trend shows a decadal- scale variability in  annual average 
total precip itation. The mo st recent declining cycle was from 1995 to 2010 , with two exception 
years. Total annual precipitation has started to increase again since the last decadal- scale 
reduction. By completely disregarding the cyclic variab ility of precipitation, a  regression 
analysis over the last 76 years exhibits a 7 per cent decrease in precipitation. T otal annual 
precipitation (average 219.8  mm) is heavily influenced by rainfall in the warm season  (average 
156.1  mm) . The regression analysis on time -series data for winter precipitation over Mongolia 
(average 6  mm) suggests that winter precipitation increased between 1941 and 2011 . As winter 
 
1 For example, Batima et al ., 2005. Obser ved climate change in Mongolia, AIACC Working Paper No. 12 , Assessments 
of Impacts and Adaptations of Climate Change (AIACC), Ulaanbaatatr, pp. 26.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 91 
 
 
precipitation is only 8 per cent of the total available precipitation in Mongolia, the overall  
incr ease in winter precipitat ion amount is low. Therefore, over the whole of Mongolia, one may 
infer that the re ha s been a reduction in precipitation in warmer months, while there ha s been a 
modest increase in  winter precipitation.  The total precipitation of J une, July and August 
cons titute s some 70 per cent of the total annual precipitation of the country. 
5. The proposal targets four aimags  (provinces) : Khovd and Zavkhan in the west of the 
country , and Dornod and S ükhbaatar in the east. A nalyses o f the microstru cture of the annual 
preci pitation cycle using long -term meteorological (observational) data sets reveal decreasing 
trends  in maximum 1 -day and maximum 5 -day precipitation episodes . However, such results 
are not statistically significant.  
6. Analyses involvin g consecutive wet days do  not result in a decisive inference . Both 
increasing and decreasing trends are observed in both the clusters of aimags in the western and 
eastern region s. Decreasing trend s in consecutive dry days are found for all four aimags .  
7. Efforts have been made to analys e the long -term observational data on precipitation in 
order  to reveal dryness in  the weather patterns. The standardized precipitatio n and 
evaporation index  has been analy sed for 3, 6 and 12 months. In all thr ee analytical 
considerations, the index  has been found to be declining , except in Dornod. The Thornthwaite 
equation has been employed to examine evapot ranspiration  for all four aimags using the same 
long -term data  sets. It f inds that evapotranspiration  has been increasing in the extended warm 
seas on in all four aimags.  
8. The feasibility study claim s that , with increasing evaporation over a landscape, there is 
increased loss of moisture , which leads to drought condition s. Increased drought leads to 
manifold changes in resource  availability in affected  aimags. Droughts put pressure on available 
water resources. Such event s also cause reduced  forage production in the rangeland s, which in 
turn affects the nutrition of grazing animals. The latter in turn affect s productivity from a nimal 
husbandry. Moreover , less forage production generally leads to considerably reduced 
opportunities  to store fodder for winter and/or much -constrained opportunit ies to produce 
high -value animal feed such as silage. Therefore, it is claimed that climate change has been 
adversel y affecting household -level economic outputs from animal husbandry in the rangelands.  
9. However, the secondary effect has been claimed to have serious consequences. While 
there is less forage in the rangeland s, the herders and pastor al communities find it di fficult to 
store excess fodder for use during the harsh winters, which are aggravated by stormy and 
windy sub -zero  winter conditions called d zuds2. During such events, animals cannot go out and 
continue to forage in the rangeland s, which is why they become  completely dependent on 
stored fodder  and processed animal feed such as silage. However, as climate change is claimed 
to be contri buting to an increasing number of d zuds, owing to a lack of fodder available in the 
four aimags, the re has been a significant  loss of livestock in recent years. It is claimed that, with 
the frequent  losses of livestock due to d zud events exacerbated by climate change, the herders 
have been coping by increasing the number of animal s in the ir herds. This  has resulted in 
overgrazin g of the rangelands. Moreover, with the changing precipitation patterns, there is  less 
water availab le for  the increasing number of animals. Therefore, it is claimed that climate 
change has been causing both overgrazing and loss of livestock production, le ading to poverty 
among the herders.  
10. A combination of trends of reduced warm -season precipitation and subsequent increase 
in potential evapotranspiration in all four target aimags has contributed to the net loss of 
 
2 “Dzud is the Mongolian term for a winter weather di saster in which deep snow, severe cold, or other conditions 
render forage unavailable or inaccessible and lead to high livestock mortality. Dzud occurs regularly in Mongolia, 
and plays an important role in regulating livestock populations. However, dzud, e specially when combined with 
other environmental or soc io-economic stresses and changes, can have a significant impact on household well -
being as well as local and national economies.”  Excerpts from Fernandez -Gimenez et al., 2012; Global 
Environmental Chan ge, 22(4): 836- 851, 2012.


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 92 
 
 
surface moisture . Analyses involving long -term observation data sets provide initial scientific 
reasoning for addressing the issue of ecosystem -scale drought under climate change.  
11. However, the deterioration in grazing condition s and water resources in the rangeland s 
of Mongolia ha s not been cause d by climate change alone. It is recognized that overgrazing due 
to a large livestock  population, perhaps beyond the carrying capacity of the rangelands , is 
another issue that  has also been causing degradation of the rangeland ecos ystem. W ith the 
deregulat ion of herding since the dissociation with the former Soviet cooperati ve regime in the 
early 1990s, herders started to gradually increase the size of their herd s. The Government of 
Mongolia formulated the National Mongolian Livesto ck Program 2010 –2021 (NML P) with some  
specific objectives: ( i) increase income from the livestock sector by increasing export volume s; 
(ii) increase employment in the livestock sector; ( iii) increase the number of large animals in 
order to boost productivi ty; and ( iv) decrease the number of smaller animals such as goat s, the 
latter being particularly destructive3 in terms of ecosystem health. The NMLP se t specific 
targets for redistributing the number s of animals by type so that the issue of overgrazing cou ld 
be managed. However, w hile the herders increased the herd size much beyond the target set by 
the NMLP by 2019, they did so without reducing the herd size o f goats and sheep  envisaged in 
the p rogramme . As a consequence, by 2019 , the estimated daily water  demand had  risen by 64 
per cent compared to that for the base year (2008 ), and rangeland productivity ha d declined .  
12. The trend analysis regarding the d zud index in the four aimags shows that the increase 
in dzud intensity started in 1999 –2000, irrespectiv e of the specific aimag.  It is claimed in the 
funding proposal that herders started to increase herd population s as a response to dzuds. In 
reality, the historical increase in herd size s and subsequent deterioration of rangeland 
ecosystem s due to overgrazi ng started in the early 1990s. The issue of dzuds has compounded 
the problem of overgrazing, while the implementation of the NMLP without any strong 
regulatory measure s has further encourag ed the herders to increase their herd size s, thereby 
putting more p ressure on rangeland reso urces.  
13. It is also claimed that lake volumes have been declining due to increased landscape- level 
drought conditions under climate change . Although the data presented are not con vincing , one 
may find a steady decline in water volum e in those lakes that are generally replenished by 
glacier melts under increasing temperature, which may be an indication of a net loss of water 
volume in glaci er-fed lakes. If the drought  scenario had  not worsened over time, one would have 
expected an inc rease in water volume in glacier -fed lakes. Th erefore, th is appears as a proxy to 
under stand effects of climate change -related hazards, which have adversely affected water 
resources in the target aimags.  
14. The consultations conducted during the design phase of the project indicate d anecdotal 
evidence that water availability has been declining and that dzuds have killed many animals. 
This simple anecdotal evidence vaguely establish es linkage s with a changing climate. However, 
it is the accumulation of increasi ng number s of animals in the herds that has contribut ed to both 
overgrazing and a simultaneous reduction in available water in the water infrastructures that 
usually store water for animal husbandry as well as for supporting modest agroforestry 
activities.  This has been compounded  by adverse impacts of climate change. Many of the 
existing water infrastructures are dilapidated, m ainly due to a lack of periodic operation and 
maintenance (O&M) . The latter is a product of the lack of public financ ing for O&M an d also the 
non- availabili ty of community participation in financing O&M costs. Many such water 
infrastructures are found to be non -functional .4    
15. The winter seasonal analysis suggests that there has been increased snowfall, but less 
cold due to a higher w inter temperature rise th an the average annual temperature rise across 
 
3 Goats uproot the plants on which they forage in open rangelands, thereby reducing the overall productivity of 
fodder.  
4 For which, finance is sought, including for O&M, under this project.


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 93 
 
 
the four target aimags. The anecdotal evidence suggest s that dzud events have become 
increasingly hostile for the animals , and also for the herders endeavouring to maintain animal 
husb andry in the rangelands of  Mong olia.    
16. The funding proposal presents model -driven climate projections5 involving the regional 
climate model (i.e. RegCM4 -HadGEM2) for Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 
scenario for the 2016 –2035 time frame. The t ime frame for the analysi s represents a timeline 
that matches with the project timeline. I ncreases  in both temperature and precipitation are  
projected. The projected increase in temperature is of  the order of 2.0 –2.1 °C, while the increase 
in precipitation is likely to  vary between  1.1 per cent in summer and  12.3 per cent in winter for 
the 2016 –2035 time  frame. This leads to some considerations. First, the increase in summer 
precipitation is nominal. Second, the large variation projected for winter precipitation is 
actually over a v ery low base of 6 –8 mm, which is not at all appreciable.  It is the distribution of 
summer precipitation and simultaneous occurrence of high evapotranspiration that can cause 
further damage to ecosystem health as well as a reduction  in availability of water  in the target 
aimags.   
17. The trend for mean evapo transpi ration for the timeframe of April –October presented in 
the funding proposal using the model results of RegCM4 -HadGEM2 for the period 2016- 2035 is 
justified  owing to a (climate change -related) declining  precipitation in three  aimag s (with 
Khovd  being the exception ). The dzud index is found to increase in all four target aimags.  
18. The outputs of the regional climate model are further used for projecting the impact of 
changes in terms of four parameters: ( i) soil organic carbon;  (ii) soil organic nitrogen; (iii) 
above -ground biomass (AGB) ; and (iv) below -ground biomass. These parameters have linkage s 
with rangeland health and forage/fodder production in the rangelands. Slight decline s in both 
soil organic car bon and nitrogen are likely in future (i.e. 2035 sc enario) for all four ecosystems.  
This indicate s that the overall tendency of biogeochemical balance is likely to be negative in the 
rangelands under climate change. A more importan t factor is the change in  AGB . This is because 
AGB  partially determines the availability of fodder6 in the rangelands. The model results show 
that,  under RCP  4.5, AGB will increase by 2035 . However, the funding proposal also claims that 
there has  been a si gnificant variance in the composition of available AGB throughout the 
rangelands, which explains why the apparent increase in AGB does not mean that fodder 
production has actually increased or will tend to increase in future. Rather, the availability of 
moisture will perhaps becom e a determining factor in the production of fodder as part of AGB in 
the target areas. I t is the fodder  that is important for the grazing livestock in the four target 
aimags.    
19. The project envisages three outputs: ( i) the i ntegrat ion of climate informatio n into land - 
and water -use planning at the national and subnational levels; ( ii) the s caling up of climate -
resilient water and soil management practices for enhanced small -scale herder resources  
management; and ( iii) the b uild ing o f herder s’ capacity to access markets for sustainably 
sourced, climate -resilient livestock products. This can be a development project at any given 
time, with or without the climate change -related considerations. However, the evidence base 
suggests that cl imate change will make th ings worse for animal husbandry, which is based on 
available rangeland resources. This warrants immediate action to address some of the 
constraints posed by climate change, especially in the target areas.    
20. According to the fundin g proposal, the project i s supposed to benefit 130,000 people 
directly, representing 26,000 herder households in the four target aimags. It is claimed that 50 
per cent of the total beneficiaries will be  women. The intended total direct beneficiaries 
constitute 4.5 per cent of the total national population. The corresponding indirect beneficiaries 
 
5 The modelling methodology and the app lication of different modeling parameters have followed  international best 
practices.  
6 Such relationships are only partially valid in the rangelands due to the presence of an overwhelming number of 
goats, which may have a far more significant impact on the productivity of rangeland AGB.


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 94 
 
 
will be 800,000, of which 50 per cent will be women , and the estimated number accounts for 26 
per cent of the national population.    
21. The proposal is claimed to be  a cross -cutting project,  with far greater emphasis on the 
GCF results area that is related to adaptation involving ecosystems and ecosystem services (62 
per cent).  If approved, t he project will be implemented in seven years from inception for a total 
budg et of USD 79.301 million. The funding proposal requests that GCF contribute USD 23.101 
million, all in grant financing.    
22. In view of the above analysis, the independent Technical Advisory Panel ( iTAP ) is of the 
opinion that the impact potential of the pro ject is medium .   
1.2 Paradig m shift potential      Scale:  Medium  
23. There are two key climate change- related issues that  significantly affect livestock 
productivity in the Mongolian rangeland s: (i) seasonal occurrence of droughts (or lack of 
water) ; and ( ii) a lack of fodder and shelter – the essential inputs for livestock to survive dzud 
events. However, sustainable rangeland productivity largely depends on other non -climatic 
factors such as herd size and structure.  
24. To address both key issues, th e project consid ers approaches to: (i ) provide for support 
towards increasing water availability , so that rangelan d drought may be ameliorated; (ii ) 
consider measures that would enable various water users to operate peacefully, share the 
resources, and utilize water in a planned manner; and ( iii) take early steps to grow fodder, store 
it, and make it available for the livestock so that they can be sustain ed through the dzud events, 
without being exposed to  sub-zero , harsh7 winter s in sea rch of forage. According to the fund ing 
proposal, two phenome na are simultaneously operating to cause degradation of the rangeland s: 
(i) climate change and its induced effects on droughts and dzud events ; and ( ii) overgrazing due 
to numbers of livestock animals beyond the carrying capacity o f the rangeland. T he prop osal 
claims  that the estimated contribution in caus ing the observed degradation of rangeland s in the 
target aimags is almost equal for both the phenomena.  
25. Water s torage is key to withstand ing a drought event. However, in the target areas, the 
water storag e infrastructures have deteriorated over the years despite the implementation of a 
number of projects. The predominant cause of the deterioration of water infrastructures  is the 
inability to generate funds either to bear the cost o f recurre nt O&M  or to r aise capital costs to 
replace di lapidated  infrastructure s. The inability to generate funds locally is compounded by the 
non- availability of credit support at the grass  roots  and a lack of mobilization of finance from 
the Government o f Mongolia following the dissociation from the former Soviet regime in the 
early 1990s.  
26. Therefore , the project places emphasis on the arrang ing of finance to reconstruct (and 
refurbish , where possible ) the water infrastructures8 so that the currently di lapidated 
structures are ma de functional, thereby making water available during the drought -affected 
months  leading up to the winter months . Apparently, external support (such as from GCF) is 
needed to arrange finance for the water infrastructures. For the s ustaining  of the structur es, 
emphasis is placed on organizing the rangeland producer s groups , called Rangeland  User 
Groups (R UGs). The RUGs are expected to engage in the management of the structures and 
other resources following a participatory planning phase, and to share the com mon resources , 
including the rangeland and water resources , under an institutionally supported governance 
 
7 Despite moderate in crease in winter temperature, the sub -zero temperatures in open rangeland and occasional 
blizzard create conditions that are not conducive for open foraging by the livestock.  
8 The NMLP has a clear man date to implement this agenda, ensuring sustained finan cial support for the agenda.


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 95 
 
 
system. It is anticipated that the R UGs will contribute to a fund9 that w ill ensure O&M costs  are 
covered . The local governme nt institutions are expec ted to  contribute to a locally operated O&M 
fund to address the issue.  
27. The solutions to the core issues are not innovative as such. The reconstruction and 
rehabilitation of inoperable water structures do not pose engineering challe nges and are subject 
to finance being arrange d. Therefore, replication of the agenda is dependent on arranging 
finance, something that the Government of Mongolia is said to be unable to commit  to. 
Therefore, the scalability is somewhat restricted due to a lack of finance unless 
external/international bodies  commit to further financing  to ensure countrywide replication of 
the solution.  The apparent lack of innovation in delivery of the project is to be addressed by 
considering the approach to nurture a local -level management structu re that involves the 
development of RUGs and their participation in managing local resources through a planned 
approach, in cooperation with the local- level government institutions. It is anticipated that, if 
these nascent arrangem ents become successful in  managing local water infrastructure s and 
implementing local (water allocation) plans to the extent that the adverse effect s of climate 
change are duly addressed, they will also contribute to the national call for restructuring the  
herd size and positively  contribute to the overall reduction in overgrazing by reducing the 
number of livestock in the target areas. It is also anticipated that the linkages that are likely to be established to gain from livestock product value chains wil l build confidence among the poor 
herders  and empower them financially , and that they will realize the value of reducing herd size 
in maintaining the productivity and environmental health of the rangeland ecosystem.   
28. The Government of Mongolia also intend s to address the issue of  overgrazing, which is 
one of the reasons for implementing the NML P.10 However, the performance of the 
implementation of the NMLP has been discouraging. Instead of decreasing the overall number of 
animals and decreas ing exploitation  of rangeland resources ( such as land itself and water), the 
updated state of implementation of the NMLP up to 2019 provides a dismal picture:  
 Larger -sized animals  (%)a Smaller -sized animals  
(%)  
Camels  Horses  Cattle  Sheep  Goat s 
Target in NMLP  +15.0  +35 .0 +100.0  –10.4  –41.5  
Change between 2008  and 2019  +82.0  +91.0  +89.0  +76.0  +47.0  
a Percentage  change with respect to 2008 levels:  a + sign indicates an increase, while a  – sign indicates a decrease.  
29. The results of the implementation of the NMLP up to 201 9 are self- explanatory. The plan 
failed to encourag e herders to reduce the number of smaller animals . Instead , the relative 
numbers of all types of animals significantly increased between 2008 and 2019, which led to an 
 
9 This approach appears too simplistic. No attempt has been made to assess the willingness to pay and the ability to 
pay against any hypothetical increase in family income involving the target households. The  verbal assurances 
provided by the participants are taken for granted, disregarding the fact that the voluntary contributions from the 
users were not able to match O&M cost requirements in the past, which contributed to a gradual degradation of the critically important water infrastructures.  
10 The NMLP has been implemented by the Government of Mongolia since 2010. The Government has pledged to 
allocate 3 per cent of the state budget annually to implement the programme, which indicates the seriousness of the 
Government to implement it. By  2021, the NMLP calls for increasing the number of large livestock according to the 
following targets: camels (by 0.3 per cent), horses (by 3.1 per cent), cattle (by 8 per cent) and sheep (by 2.7 per 
cent). Only for smaller -sized goats  is the target is a r eduction (by 14.1 per cent) with respect to the baseline in 2010. 
The NMLP also calls for an increase in annual meat export volume to 50,000 tonnes. The targets are better understood if one takes a look into planned increase of larger livestock types betwe en 2019 and 2021, as planned: 
number of camels to be increased from 472,000 to 595,000; number of horses to be increased from 4.215 million to 5.377 million and number of cattle to be increased from 4.753 million to 7.2 million.


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 96 
 
 
estimated 64 per cent increase in adv erse impact on land , with  a simultaneous 64 per cent 
increase in daily water demand with respect to 2008 (i.e. pre -NMLP) levels. It is claimed that the 
Government of Mongolia is conte mplating  devis ing a revised NMLP for its new phase, with 
another target f or the reduction in  herd size.11 It is expected that the project in question will 
provide support to organize policy dialogues towards f raming  the targets for each animal type. 
However, without a strong regulatory regime and demonstrated capacity of the ins titutions 
involved in enforcing such a regime, one cannot anticipate that the revised NMLP will force a 
reversal of the degradation of the ecosystem resources critical for the sustenance of the 
livestock. Even the potential gains likely to be achieved by t he project through the ap proach 
mentioned above may not be adequate to engender  a shift in the current paradigm of rangeland 
management.  
30. It is expected that the climate information system will inform the rangeland users 
regarding the seasonal implications of climate change with a lead time. However, the 
effectiveness of weather information  with a considerable lead time ha s been prove d for 
agricultural planning but not for the planning for rangeland use. Crop-related decisions can be 
made with a considerable lead time,  and varietal and/or cropping pattern changes are possible 
in anticipation of lesser rainfall.  However, upon issuance of the same forecast , herders cannot 
control the ir water demand by abruptly changing herd size. As  the technical efficacy of climate 
model -driven forec asts is generally limited in terms of “ forecast period ” and lead time, the 
reliance on the provisioning of such forecasts to  ensure a production paradigm shift may be 
overestimated.  
31. The paradigm -shift potential apparently lies in c ommunity mobilization and  ownership. 
The participatory planning p rocess under the aegis of local -level institutions (at the soum 
[district] and aimag level) will lead to an agreed regime for the sharing of local resources such 
as water (to be stored in the  reconstructed/refurbishe d water infrastructures) and rangeland, 
which might even reduce conflict on the use of such critical productive resources among 
neighbours. The participatory planning effort will cover a number of river basins.  
32. It is anticipated th at the herders’ interests  will be protected by facilitating herder 
producers o rganization s, which will engage with  the private sector. T hrough this engagement, it 
is expected that herders will move away from being price takers for products falling in value, 
and rather emerge as en trepreneurs with quality livestock pr oducts, the latter being sourced  in 
a manner consistent with the landscape and also with demand from  the private sector. If the 
instruments to achieve this are  to help the formation of s uch herd er producers organization s, 
and to link with the private sector, the proposed solution appears only to operat e at the outer 
layer of the problem .  
33. The project consist s of elements to enhance the knowledge of herders, development 
partners, technical agencies and their field offices . It is expected that the related training and 
other activities will generate knowledge on climate -informed land and water management , and 
on participatory multi -stakeholder management processes. The project is likely to develop a 
few knowledge products, i ncluding soum -level watershed plan s to contribute to resilience -
building. Such knowledge generation and sharing is likely to enhance replication potential, 
particularly if the knowledge generated is utilized to achieve resilient rangeland management.  
34. The a im of fostering public –private –community partnership s is novel, but unrealistic . In 
reality, such partnerships are hardly  ever sustained beyond  a project. Business relationships are 
nurtured on dynamically negotiated common -interes t grounds. The project ai ms to introduce 
disincentives regarding public transfer payments and accessing credit support by herders who tend to expand livestock ownership. By helping to introduce policies regarding such 
disincentives , the project will tend to contribute to a planned  rangeland regime. The project also 
 
11 In sheep -equivalent term, where the actual number of larger animal types will increase with a drastic reduction in 
the number of smaller animal types.


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 97 
 
 
aims at facilitating  policy development towards institutionaliz ing resource -use agreements by 
stakeholders so that planned rangeland management can be established. Such policies are 
expected to r estrain unlimited herding , with a likelihood of contribut ing to reduc ing 
degradation of the rangeland s. It is uncertain how the non -beneficiary herders will behave, 
especially when they will not receive any direct incentive from the project.   
35. The scaling u p of the scope and impact  of the intended project , without equally 
increasing the total costs of implementation , is low. The majority of the financing  is allocated for 
managing the watershed , including the water infrastructures, which cannot be replicated 
elsewhere without additio nal financing. The other elements may contribute to the weather 
information, training and policy aspects. Analysis shows that over 75 per cent of the budget 
involving GCF grant support is earmarked for consultancies and contractual  activities.  This 
indicat es that additional financing will be necessary for any future replication  and scaling up.  
Therefore, the replication potential appears  low.  
36. In theory, the project will cont ribute to a paradigm shift that will lead to resilience. On  
the basis of m any expect ations, the theory of change presents a rosy picture. The assumptions 
used for the design of responses are often oversimplified. In reality, the project will  not on its 
own lead to an alternate paradigm with much reduced risk, cons idering both climate chan ge-
related risks and those associated with any potential failure to reduce rampant exploitation of 
rangeland resources.  
37. In view of the above discussions, the independent TAP  is of the opinion that the 
paradigm -shift potential is b arely mediu m. 
1.3 Sustainable developmen t potential     Scale:  Medium  
38. The project aims t o contribut e directly to the following S ustainable Development Goals 
(SDG s): 
(a) SDG 1 ( End  poverty in all forms everywhere ) ‒ B y reducing losses of animals that are 
triggered b y decline s in seasonal water availab ility, enhancing fodder availability and 
promoting animal health through vaccination and other support, farm -level income is 
expected to increase, while the overall economic gains at the national level will help 
address the prevail ing poverty situation in Mongolia;  
(b) SDG 6 ( Ensure ava ilability and sustainable management of water  and sanitation for all) 
‒ By ensuring a planned approach to manage available water resources, enhancing 
availability at both landscape and community levels, keeping in mind environmental 
integrity and resource sustainability;  
(c) SDG 12 ( Ensure sustainable consumption and production  patterns ) ‒ By means of 
promoting sustainable production of animal products through the optimization of 
rangeland productivity. However, the potential contribution can also  be counteracted  if 
the Government implement s the said revised NMLP  without any st rong regulatory 
measure to limit herd size ; and 
(d) SDG 13 ( Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) ‒ B y means of 
addressing climate change -related concerns in soum -level sustainable rangeland 
planning and its implementation in the target region.  
39. The project also aims to contribute to the following SDGs:  
(a) SDG 2 ( End  hunger , achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote 
sustainable agriculture) ‒ By means of enhancing farm outputs, agropastoral 
households will have greater opportu nities to attain food security;  and


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 98 
 
 
(b) SDG 5 ( Achieve g ender equality  and empower all women and girls ) ‒ B y creating 
arrangements so that women in the project areas receive special attention, particularly 
in accessing gender -friendly services in rangeland man agement .  
40. Economic co -benefits : It is expected that, by enhancing livestock production, the 
project will enable herders to reduce livestock loss es caused by seasonal drought s and dzud 
events. In this process, not only will the herders of the target aimags gain financially, but the 
Government of Mongolia is also expected to generate increased revenues. The latter is already 
enshrined as a specific objective in the current NMLP  (2010 –2021) . By provisioning of adequate 
water for the animals  and by vaccination , it is expected that the health of these animals will be 
better managed even under harsh environmental conditions. The possibility of improved fodder 
production and storage will lead to greater availability of fodder throughout the year , including 
availabi lity in the sub-zero  winter s, which will further help livestock production. The linkage 
with value chain s of livestock products will enable herders to enhance their financial gains. All 
these will contribute to greater farm output and to the national econo my. However, if the 
Government is keen on implementing the NMLP  without introduction of effective regulatory 
measure s (as in the first phase of the NMLP) , then the effects are likely to result in much greater 
demand on the available water and fodder from t he rangeland s. The overall adverse effect might 
even lead to a reduc tion in the possibility of sustainable herding in the area. The sustainability 
of the project’s gain will largely depend on matching actions considered by the Government of Mongolia.  Such actions are beyond the activities envisaged for the project.  
41. Social co-benefits : If the planned herding on the basis of available resources at the 
soum level can be enforced with new policies and regulations, the social tension regarding 
competition for the water reservoirs will be ameliorated. However, i t is to be seen how the 
project brings in and accommodates the interests of the nomadic pastorals, because they are not stationary groups . Their access to critically important resources such as water from common 
reservoirs needs to be ensured and legally protected.  
42. Environmental co-benefits : The project places high hope s on sustainable management 
of land and water, at least at the soum level. Assuming that this will happen as expected, the 
environmental co -benefits will be shared among the stakeholders. However, having a national 
programme to increase numbers of larger animals , and with the presence of non -beneficiaries 
in the target areas , there is scope for potential leakage in achieving the said envi ronme ntal co -
benefits. The soum -level plan will not be able to contribute to sustainable management of the 
resources if the NMLP is implemented by the Government of Mongolia without considering 
strong regulatory measures that allow restructuring of the herd com position at the soum and 
aimag levels, but that also enforc e limits in terms of sheer number s of animals by type .  
43. By adding to available water infrastructures and/or by refurbishing the dilapidated 
ones , the overall reservoir capacity will increase, which  in turn will increase water availability. 
The planned water allocation regime is likely to emanate from river basin -wide planning. C lose 
community -level monitoring will enable people t o enjoy pollution/contamination -free water, 
and particularly for the ir animals. By promoting rangeland agroforestry, not only can a potential 
for sequestering 0.85 ton nes of carbon dioxide  per hectare of pasture -land be achieved, but the 
greater vegetation density will lead to enhanced biodiversity of the area. The mitigation  
potential through agroforestry needs to be brought under a monitoring, reporting and 
verification (MRV) regime, as promoted under the Paris Agreement. The same MRV process 
should ensure that, if the project is approved, the accredited entity (AE) should r eport the 
carbon sequestration through its annual progress reports.  
44. The project indicates a theoretical gain in terms of sustainable livestock management, 
which supposedly will contribute to reduced emissions from enteric fermentation. Improved 
forage, silage management, moderation of animal diet , and many other aspects of animal 
husbandry can potentially contribute to reduced enteric fermentation, thereby reducing 
methane emissions from livestock. However, managing enteric fermentation for rangeland (i.e.


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 99 
 
 
open-foraging) livestock is fun damentally different from that f or advanced , farm -based 
livestock management , and , therefore, it is difficult to tweak enteric fermentation in the former 
case. Implementation of such techniques regarding advanced animal husba ndry is even more 
challenging whe re it involves nomadic herders. In such a case, the environmental co -benefits 
will be erod ed from the expected levels , and the even tual overall emission s might even 
overwhelm the potential emission gains from agroforestry.  
45. Gender co -benefits : The project is said to be gender -sensitive. It promises that efforts 
will be made to integrate gender -sensitive plans and to implement such plans. The project will 
accommodat e women -headed households  in the planning process. The project  is likely to collect 
sex-disaggregated data, e nable gender -sensitive decision -making, promote access and control 
over resources by women, present gender analysis of the loan system to create access to such 
loans that currently  disfavour women , and also increase women’s participation in community 
activities.  
46. The independent TAP  is of the opinion that the sustainable development potential of the 
project is medium.   
1.4 Needs of the recipient            Scale:  Medium  to high  
47. Mongolia experiences poverty involving  28.4 per c ent of its  population. However, the 
poverty rate in rural Mongolia i s 10.1 per cent and expecte d to declin e further. It is reported 
that a major environmental hazard may have implications for  poverty rates by adversely 
affecting livelihoods of t he populati on group just above the poverty line. Livestock ac counts for 
about 90 per cent of the agriculture sector ; it represent s 85 per cent of the economies of a total 
of 332 soums across the 21 aimag s of the country. As  herders are the dominant populat ion 
group i n the rural areas, the need for interventions to enhance their livelihoods is important. 
Moreover, the Government of Mongolia relies on animal herding for earning foreign exchange 
and also for employment in processing products  of livestock origi ns. Mongoli a is a  developing 
economy , but it is n ot a least developed country , Small Island Developing State , or Africa n 
country . However, t here is a need for international financing to address issues that are related 
to rangeland -based production system s. 
48. On a natio nal scale , landscape- level drought is reported  as causing increased mortality 
of livestock and much reduced production from the livestock sector. The combination of 
drought and dzud event s can be quiet detrimental, especially if no adaptation measures  are 
considered.  While  the extent of adaptation  needs will be comparatively low  in the 2020s and 
2030s, this will increase  significantly in the 2060s  or later , as demonstrated by projections 
using climate models.  
49. Despite the fact that there are women -headed agr opastoral households in the target 
areas, there are no data to suggest that these households are engaged in the animal herding 
production process , or whether they face any disproportionate (or greater ) vulnerability 
compared to non -women -headed households.  However , one may imagine greater difficulties in 
arranging shelter for animals during dzud  events  and also in arranging fodder for the livestock 
so that they can su rvive the sub-zero  winter. The target areas, as per the project documents, 
inclu de nomadic pastoral groups, where herding is traditionally managed by m en. Despite such  
factors, the project  claims that about 50 per cent of the beneficiaries will be women, which 
might be  difficult to attain.  
50. It is claimed that , by 2030, the country wide investment requirement for the livestock, 
water and disaster management sectors is estimated at USD 46 million, USD 2.4 billion and USD 
65 million, respectively. The World Bank estimated a budget deficit of the Government of  the 
order of 18 per cent of gro ss domestic product in 2016 . The proposal attaches the highest 
priority to investments from the public financing window . There is hardly any private sector


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 100 
 
 
financing to address the prevailing issues, even including product -sourcing (i.e. traceability) and 
certificati on, despite the fact that the organized private sector is engaged in the existing value 
chain . Moreover, there is no investment plan for improving the value chain for the greater 
sust aining of the producers. In the absence of appreciable private  sector fin ancing, it falls to the 
public exchequer to invest in allied sectors, which is why GCF support is requested .  
51. An alternative source of financing could be from individual households in the 
production system. However, not only is their access to f inancing ra ther constrained due to 
interest rates and a lack of understanding for community -wide collective financing for the 
creation of common goods (such as water infrastructures), there are virtually no risk -transfer 
mechanism s to receive financial sup port in the  event of the occurrence of an environmental 
hazard. In order to increase farm -based income, herder households started increasing the 
number of livestock in the 1990s (which also marked the privatization of animal herding over 
government -owned r angelands),  without considering the carrying capacity of the rangeland s 
and also without understanding the potential changes in climate syste m.12 Now , they have 
limited financial means to  fight against the vagaries of nature, against the backdrop of 
constan tly deterio rating rangeland quality caused by overgrazing.  
52. In terms of GCF financ ing the project, t he project  is not among the most attractive  
proposal s that could be offer ed GCF financing, also in terms of maximum concessionality. The 
barriers of the pro duction system in the four target aimags have been  identified ; however , the 
allocation of finance through the GCF -specific budget has not been target ed at specific barriers.  
Rather , the bulk of it is to go to pay for consultancies and various consulting co ntracts. In 
contrast, budget allocations are made by mobilizing co -financing amounts to address various 
specific barriers. Therefore, one may question the actual needs of the recipient to receive fully 
concessional finance from GCF. 
53. The capital investments and subseq uent trai ning on climate information generation will 
help relevant institution(s) to enhance their capacities. The project wi ll facilitate the formation 
of resource users’ groups and resource users’ a ssociation s, which might attain organized 
bargaining  power if their capacities are well developed and if the prevailing regulatory regime 
allows such organizations to  exert influence in decision -making processes.  
54. Based on the above analyses, the independent TAP  is of the opinion that the needs of the  
recipient are medium  to high . 
1.5 Country ownership              Scale:  Medium  to high  
55. Mongolia has a pseudo climate change strategy in the form of the National Action 
Programme on  Climate Change (NAPCC), which w as updated in 2011 and approved by the 
Mongolian  Parliament. The goals  of the NAPCC are to ensure environmental susta inability, 
development of socio economic sectors adapted to climate change, reduction in vulnerabilities 
and risks, and mitigation of greenhouse gases. The promotion of economic effectiven ess and 
efficiency and  the implementation of green growth policies are also integrated in the NAPCC. 
Moreover, the nationally determined contribution (NDC) to the Paris Agreement is another 
important strategic document that sets priorities for adaptation. It also establish es synergies 
between adaptation and mitigation. The NDC hi ghlights issues such as animal husbandry, water 
resources management , and disaster management.  
56. An analysis of the objectives of the project finds alignment with the two strategic 
documents in relation to  climate change. The NDC stresses the need “to ensure proper use of 
water resources, and to strengthen integrated water resource management in river basins .” It 
 
12 The available data suggest that the actual climate -related decline in water resources started quite recent ly, perhaps 
after 1999 , when evapo -transpiration is found to be increasing significantly at the landscape level in the target 
aimags.


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 101 
 
 
emphasizes ensuring “proper use of water resources” within the integrated  water resources 
manag ement framework. In addition to the NAPCC and NDC, Mongolia has prepared its s econd 
national communication, which cover s issues regarding adaptation to hazards such as d zuds, 
integrated water resources management, building the capacit y of livestock manager s, sup port 
to household and community -based enterprises, regulation of animal numbers, development of 
pasture, imposing legislation on pasture leasing , and ensuring sustainable pasture utilization 
through improving pasture water avail ability. Many of these  issues are central to the delivery of 
the specific objectives of the project. This reflects the strong policy alignment of the project.  
57. However, one of the project’s specific objectives regarding reduction in  herd size is 
found to co nflict with the livest ock sector -specific policies that entail implementation of the 
NMLP , where emphasis is on increas ing the number of larger animals with a reduction  in the 
number of goat s, with the aim of increasing  animal productivity and employment i n the 
livestock sector . The NMLP states that the Government is looking for increased export volumes  
and earning s from the livestock and allied subsectors, and ensuring much increased 
employment generation in the sector. The national sub programme to support  the productivity 
of animal husbandry ( 2016 –2018 ) reiterates the goal of increasing livestock sector exports. 
Moreover, the results of the implementation of the NMLP up to 2019 indicate that the “ business 
as usual ” performance of the livestock sector under  the NMLP and existing  institutional capacity 
might result in a conflicting position with the specific objective set by the project . There exists 
an element of risk that  the issues of sustainable management of livestock in rangelands might 
become un tenable .  
58. The United Nati ons Development Programme is a development partner of the 
Government of Mongolia. It has a track record of financing adaptation -related projects in 
Mongolia. The funding proposal refers to another project submitted to GCF for approval, where 
the AE is the Asia n Development Bank , and overlapping with one of the aimags under 
consideration in this project (i.e. Khovd in western Mongolia). For the project, the Ministry of Environment and Touris m (MET) has been chosen as the e xecuting entit y. It is to be noted that 
the nat ional designated authority  for accessing GCF finance represents the Nature Conservation 
Fund of Mongolia, which works under the aegis of MET. A number of projects on climate change 
issues in Mongolia have been implemented in th e recent past under th e aegis of MET. Therefore, 
the institutional arrangement for the implementation of the project can be regarded as 
appropriate.  
59. It is reported that the design phase of the project has gone through an extensive 
consultation process sin ce 2016. Such consultation  session s have involved participat ion by 
communities at the aimag and soum levels, aimag officials, representatives of development 
partners of the Government of Mongolia, pasture herder groups, civil society organizations,  non-
government organizations, and academia. Such extensive consultations have been 
complemented by smaller group consultations involving government stakeholders,  including 
representatives of several ministries and local governments. A round -table was convened 
involving private sector representatives that included  meat processors, producers and 
exporters. In general, the project formulation process has gone through an extensive 
consultation process.  
60. It is reported that the national designated authority has been ad equately informed 
rega rding the development of the project. The project comes to GCF with a no -objection letter to 
meet the legal requirement.  
61. In view of the above analysis, the independent TAP  rates  the country ownership as 
medium to high . 
1.6 Efficiency and  effectiveness      Scale:  Medium


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 102 
 
 
62. The project will be implemented over  seven years at a total cost of USD 79.301 million . 
This makes it a medium- sized project. GCF support of USD 23.101 million is requested as a 
grant. There is a significant co -financing ar rangement for the project, where the co -financing 
ratio is 1:2.43. The co -financing amount is healthy with respect  to other GCF -financed projects.  
Although the recipient country is not a least developed country, Small Island Developing State, 
or African co untry, the AE requests GCF suppor t with full conc essionality.  
63. One of the positive  aspects of the financing plan lie s in the realization that the proposed 
GCF finance will not crowd out private financing in the sector and subsectors under the purview 
of the project. In Mongolia, the expor t of livestock products is a profitable venture , and some of 
the private sector operators  have been in the business for a long  time . However, the private 
sector has not yet started financ ing to stimulate the value chain. Mo st of the deliveries under the 
project are for the creation of public goods  (especially under component s 1 and 2) , which 
warrant public sector financing.   
64. There appears to be a disconnect between the explanations on identifying key 
investment barriers ( which justif y GCF financing) and spe cific mobilization of GCF support. The 
analysis of the budget spread involving the GCF financing is to be mobilized predominantly f or 
personnel, consultancy and consultancy sub contracting for various services.  This does not  seem 
the best use of GCF resourc es. It is found that over 75 per cent of the GCF financ ing is to be 
allocated for said services. Alternat ively, the majority of the GCF -financed  services could have 
been allocated specifically for activities revolving aroun d restoration of water infrastruc ture s, 
planning, capacity -building, etc. The AE mentioned in its communication that the co -financing 
from the Government counterparts would not go through the financial management of the 
project. All these appear to be weak nesses regarding the financial ad equacy and budgetary 
management  of the project .   
65. The project’ s cost -benefit analysis considers a discount rate of 10 per cent, which is 
broadly within the range for developing economies. A 20 -years time -horizon is set for the 
accrual of benefits. The cost  estimation invo lves total project costs including GCF support and 
the co -financing and O&M costs, the latter being a commit ment of the local government bodies. 
The economic analysis finds a positive net present value of US D 30 million , and an internal rat e 
of return (IRR) of 21 per cent. T he economic outcome of the project appears to be on a solid 
footing.  
66. The figures  used for the benefit analysis are overwhelmed by the costs saved in terms of 
animal lives lost during the worst hazards and diseases that h ave occurred in the recent past. 
The estimates are biased towards the benefits accruable from animal lives saved with the 
project. An annual expected loss of about 0.772 million livestock valued at USD 60 million (for 
2018)  is considered, which use s the lo ss figure for the worst adverse climatic effect observed t o 
date. This figure appears an overestimation due to an extrapolation of worst case observed as 
being an annual hazardous event. A more rational estimation would hav e found an IRR 
significantly lowe r than the es timated figure of 21 per cent. A sensitivity analysis ha s also been 
done, which considers an increase of some 20 per cent in project costs and a simultaneous 
decline in benefits of 20 per cent. The result, with  the above limitations in terms o f estimation, 
reveals  that the net present value is close to zero (i.e. USD 0.16 million), while the IRR comes 
down to 10 per cent.  
67. The proposed solutions h ave reportedly been piloted successfully in other projects. The 
project will build on these best pr actices. The core of the solution lies with improvement s in 
water -holding capacities that are located close to the communities. The project will attempt to 
invest in technologies that are already proven and where the commun ities are comfortable with 
those water sources. However, the total allocation for such technological aspects is relatively 
low compared to the mobilization of personnel , consultants and consulting services.  The latter 
reality remains a concern for the over all adequacy of the effectiveness  of resource mobilization.


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 103 
 
 
68. The o verall effectiveness and efficiency of the proj ect are found to be medium . 
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
69. The independent TAP  recommends that the Board approve the project.   
70. The independent TAP  also recommends that the AE establish results -based monitoring 
with a strong baseline, especially in relation to the dynamics of agroforestry , and bring this 
aspect (including the carbon sequestration potential ) under a n MRV regime.


---
*Page 104*
---

  
       GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 104 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment (FP 141) 
Proposal name:  Improving Adaptive Capacity and Risk Management of Rural 
Communities in Mongolia  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Country/(ies):  Mongolia  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
 
Impact potential  
The Medium  rating is noted.  
The climate rationale for the project is based on observed and projected increases in the 
frequency and severity of dzud events. These events are the result of the combination of 
summer drought, followed by harsh winters, which leads to increased livestock  losses (91% 
of non -natural livestock mortality) during winter. The climate changes that contribute to 
increasing dzud intensity and frequency, particularly increases in summer drought, also lead 
to other secondary effects:  
• Reductions in the number and a rea of lakes on the plateau as a whole which reduce 
access to water resources for livestock;  
• Reduced vegetation and fodder throughout the summer and winter.  
These increases in drought and consequent reductions in water and vegetation reduce the 
condition  (insufficient weight gain)  of livestock by the end of summer, which increases the 
risk of mortality during the following winter. If the winter is harsh (either low temperatures 
or high snowfalls , or low temperatures with ice sheets or almost no snow and no fodder ), 
then mortality is even higher. We are pleased that ITAP recogni zes that overgrazing is 
compounded by dzuds and that dzuds themselves are increasing in intensity due to climate 
change.  
Paradigm shift potential  
The Medium  rating is noted.  
Indeed, the National Mongolian Livestock Programme (ending 2021) has struggled to meet its 
targets.  However, the increase in livestock numbers underscores the urgency of the 
intervention s needed  - to bring livestock down to sustainable levels with the carrying 
capacity of the land and without stressing water sources.   The Government of Mongolia 
recognize s this and is seeking support, including towards the development of the new 
programme.   To that end, the project is well- timed to support a paradigm shift in a priority 
sector, impacted by climate change.  
As detailed in the MoFALI support letter dated 27 J uly 2020, “A national programme, a 
successor to the Mongolian Livestock Programme, is currently under deliberations and it is critical that the next phase’s targets are informed by the impacts of climate change to avoid 
further degrading land resources and  water stress, as well as activities to reduce the number 
of animals while maintaining herders’ incomes.  We expect to benefit from the studies 
commission and the policy advisory support of the Output 1 of Improving the Adaptive


---
*Page 105*
---

  
       GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 105 
 
 
 Capacity of Rural Communiti es in Mongoli a project.  We anticipate that the investments of the 
UNDP as well as the A DB supported project will thereby contribute positively to the 
necessary paradigm shift towards sustainable herding, adaptive natural resource 
management and climate -resilient development in Mongolia.”  
Regarding O&M of water infrastructure, it should be noted that local government authorities 
have provided letters of commitment to maintain the structures.  Please see Annex 13b.  
 
Sustainable development potential  
The Medium  rating is noted.  
It should also be noted that per the Government of Mongolia seeks to reduce livestock sector emissions by 23.4% against the current baseline.  This target was stressed in its NDC and is 
included in policy target discussions of the new programme, a successo r to the National 
Mongolian Livestock Programme.  MoFALI activities and the livestock programme are 
important co -financing for this project.    
 
Needs of the recipient  
The Medium to high  rating is noted.  
Indeed, h erder households  are particularly vulnerable to climate impacts g iven their reliance 
on natural resources .  Making up 30% of the population , but with a disproportionate poverty 
rate, support to herder households is an adaptation priority for Mongolia.  
 
Country ownership  
The Medium to high  rating is noted.   
Sustainable livestock management is indeed an adaptation priority for the Government of 
Mongolia , while also in line with the country’s economic development targets.  A new national 
programme, a successor to  the National Mongolian Livestock Programme, is currently under 
discussion.  Just as the National Mongolian Livestock Programme (ending in 2021) included 
an overall livestock reduction target, the new programme will also seek to r educ e the overall 
livestock number to 51.2 million by 2033  - to maintain optimal carrying capacity of grazing 
land .  In addition, the programme will seek to establish a land use payment system to limit the 
number of livestock and balance grazing pressure.  These ambitions were stressed in the 
letter of commitment from MoFALI , dated 27 July 2020 .  The GCF project will support 
development of the programme, including climate informed herd structure targets to ensure 
targets are in line with the impact of climate on land and water resources.   
Efficiency and effectiveness  
The Medium  rating is noted.  
The project will indeed sub -contract for some activities, these include investments.   Under 
Output 2, where the majority of “contractual services” are budgeted, this includes: USD 2.5M 
for the implementation of EBA measure such as i) rehabilitation of pasture reserves; ii) 
Catchment reforestation; and iii) provision of emergency fodder storage facilities across the 4 
aimags. USD 3.7M for establisment of haymaking/pasture reserves ; and USD 2M for


---
*Page 106*
---

  
       GCF/B.2 7/02/Add. 01 
Page 106 
 
 
 assessments  USD 200K and over USD 1.8M for t he implementation of resiliency -based 
watershed measures such as i) construction of new boring and hand wells; ii) rehabilitation 
of existing boring and hand wells; iii) Catchment protection for natural springs iii) provision 
of water harvesting structures  across the 4 aimags and (iv) restoration and rehabilitation of 3 
ancient schemes based on best practices and traditional knowledge.   Further information is 
provided in Annex 4 Budget.               
It is correct that co-financing from the Government counterparts would not go through the 
financial management of the project , and we feel this is consistent with country ownership.    
             
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
The iTAP recommend ation for the Board to approve the project  is noted .  
The recommendation to establish results based monitoring is also noted.  A baseline 
assessment will be conducted in Year 1 of the project, and the logframe includes an indicator 
and targets on improveme nts to rangeland.   This can be used as a basis to estimate carbon 
sequestration , potentially by analyzing soil organic carbon content, making use of NAMEM’s 
existing grazing land monitoring network .


---
*Page 107*
---

H  Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
Improving Adaptive Capacity and Risk Management of Rural Communities in Mongolia  
I. Introduction
This gender assessment aims to provide an overview of gender concerns in  Mongolia, with a specific 
focus on  thematic areas relevant to the “Improving Adaptive Capacity to Climate Change and Risk 
Management of Rural Communities in Mongolia”  proposal .  The assessment is based upon the review 
of available primary and secondary data and studies conducted by the Government of Mongolia, UNDP 
and other partners  and information collected during the project development phase  during 2016 -2017 .  
This data informed the Gender Action Plan (GAP) , which recommend s practical and feasible gender -
sensitive and specific interventions for incorporation into the project design and monitoring framework. 
During the project development, the consultations included equal participation of women representing 
different stakeho lders such as central and local Governments and local community. While undertaking 
gender analysis during the project formulation, Mongolia’s National Commission on Gender equality 
and other expert groups have been consulted.  
II. Climate Change Related Gende r Issues in Agriculture of Mongolia
Climate change impacts are not gender -neutral. Climate change impacts as well as coping 
opportunities, capacities and mechanisms for men and women are strongly dictated by the prevailing 
socio -cultural norms , gender ste reotypes  and poverty level , including control over productive assets 
and resources . Climate  change  puts enormous pressure on Mongolia’s  ecosystems causing 
desertification, water scarcity  and pasture degradation . It negatively affect s rural livelihoods  and 
exacerbat es environmental and social losses , including gender inequality . Climate change adaptation 
efforts present an opportunity to reverse existing patterns of gender -based socio -economic 
disadvantages , especially in agriculture s ector . 
The inseparable interrelations between climate change and gender equality are emphasized by 
international/national judicial/non -judicial frameworks. The United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC)1, the Sustainable Development go als (SDGs)2 and the Convention on the 
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against  Women (CEDAW)3 highlight gender equality as a 
1 In regard to UNFCCC, at COP 18 in Doha, Parties agreed Decision 23/CP.18. on concrete steps to promote gender balance 
and improve the participation of women in the climate negotiations and in the representation of Parties in the bodies of the 
Convention and the Kyoto Protocol, which marks an important step forward in advancing gender -sensitive climate policy by 
ensuring that women’s voices are represented in the global discussion on climate change.  
2 The Sustainable Development goals (SDGs) emphasize the importance of mainstreaming gender equality for the realization 
of human rights, and sustainable development. In particular, Goal 5 of the SDGs focuses specifically on gender equality, and 
Sustainable Development Goal 13 urges States to take immediate action to combat climate change and its impacts.  
3According to CEDAW/C/MNG/CO/8 -9, the impact of climate change and weather -related disasters, as well as negative 
environmental consequences of industries,  in particular the mining sector, which disproportionately affect rural women in 
the State party (32.c). Study the impact of the economic and social strategy of rural development on women’s human rights 
and collect specific disaggregated data on rural wome n (33.c). Include a gender perspective in national policies and action 
plans on climate change, disaster response and risk reduction, as well as on negative environmental and socio -economic 
consequences of industries…(33.d).  Gender documentation for FP141


---
*Page 108*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 necessary component for climate change response. Moreover, Mongolia experiences a gradual national 
movement towards gen der-sensitive climate change response guided by the Law of Mongolia on 
Promotion of Gender Equality (LPGE)4, the National Action Programme on Climate Change (NAPCC)5, 
the Environmental Sector Gender Strategy 2014 -20306, Green Development Policy  and Mong olia 
Sustainable Development Vision 20307.  
Endowed with rich natural resources, the country’s economy is mostly based on mineral commodities,  
which accounted for 20.5% of GDP and 73% of industrial value added  in 2016 . On the other hand, 
extractive industries employ only 3.3 % of the workforce, whereas agriculture employs 30.4%8  with the 
female  employment rate in agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting sector reaching  42.07%9 (2nd 
quarter of 2017) . At the same time, 1,129,365 sq. km ( 72.7%) 10 of land is used for  agricultural purpose . 
That is why, it is critical to recognize w omen as agents of change in climate change adaptation 
approaches to ecosystem’s management and agriculture sector  practices.  
 
III. Gender Issues in Response to Natural Disasters in Mongolia  
 
Natural disasters in Mongolia  
 
Due to the negative influence of climate change, the frequency and severity of disasters is increasing in 
Mongolia. The country is disproportionately impacted by natural disasters including harsh winter 
disasters, namely dzud , drought, snow, dust storms, flash floods and both cold and heat waves. Such 
natural disasters take a heavy toll on livestock and thereby rural livelihoods. The statistics show that on 
average 2,700 different hazardous events occur each year causing human  casualties, damage to the 
natural environment and built infrastructure and assets that negatively impact both economic and 
social sustainable development.11 Within the period of 2005 -2013, the number of annual natural hazard 
events reached 3,200 and human  induced  incidents reached 171 across 601 soums  and districts, 
causing loss of more than 200 human lives and damage of 95.6 billion Mongolian tug riks to environment 
and economy.12 
 
 
 
 
4 LPGE includes principle of ge nder mainstreaming that development policies shall be made gender -sensitive through 
incorporation of gender concepts in laws, government policies, programs and projects.  
5 NAPCC which was approved by the Government in 2000, highlights to “ensure justice, t ransparency, human rights and 
gender equality are upheld in the implementation of the program.”  
6 This strategy gives gender -sensitive strategic guidelines in regard to climate change through priority areas of objective 1.2, 
which is “to facilitate introdu cing new content into the Bachelor Degree program curriculum for students studying (on 
forestry and water) at colleges and universities on the subjects of social development, gender discourse, social impacts of 
climate change and natural resources utilizat ion, etc.” and objective 3.1., which is “to encourage participatory data -
collection and information packaging work carried out jointly with the local community people on the climate change, 
desertification and disaster prevention by emphasizing gender role s of women and men that based on their needs and 
jointly plan the dissemination schedule.”  
7 Mongolia Sustainable Development Vision 2030 states that one of the principles for achieving the sustainable social 
development is to ensure gender equality in soc ial development, and create a pleasant environment for equal participation 
in social welfare.  
8 Statistics Yearbook 2016, NSO  
9 Ibid.  
10 http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/AG.LND.AGRI.ZS?locations=MN , year 2014   
11 The National Programme on Strengthening Disaster Protection Capacity , 2011  
12 Appendix to the Resolution #303 of the Government  of Mongolia, 2015


---
*Page 109*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 Gendered impact of disasters  
 
Different disaster -related impacts on men a nd women are related to different roles they play in their 
households. According to the ‘Gender Analysis of Disaster Vulnerability in the Targeted Locations and 
Development of a Project Gender Mainstreaming Strategy (2009) ’ for the UNDP project, ‘Strengthe ning 
the Disaster Mitigation and Management System in Mongolia’ , young men are more exposed to 
immediate disaster and women are more susceptible to disaster with long -term effects. Men can be 
portrayed in the post -disaster situation being less affected in terms of labour division and work load. 
Women’s role and work loa d considerably increase in their households when their family members are 
affected by any forms of disaster.   
 
Climate change -induced disaster reinforces the gender roles, and at the same time, presents an 
opportunity to change the gender relationship. Fo r example, men happen to find themselves in the 
position of having to take lead in commonly identified “female tasks” when the women in the household 
have perished or become severely disabled due to disasters. Many women’s workloads in terms of 
caring for children, the infirm, the elderly and those with functional limitations or disabilities, rise at 
exactly the same time when the traditional support networks have been damaged. For instance, it is 
common that men are not provided with timely medical assista nce, while they are prone to frost, burn 
and injuries. This makes many of the wounded men temporarily and permanently lose their work 
abilities. Such a situation could jeopardize family wellbeing by increasing women’s work load as primary 
caregivers.  
 
Disaster -driven poverty such as loss of animals of rural nomads has impacted local men and women 
differently in terms of their capacities to migrate to better places in search of employment and 
livelihood improvement. A number of married men left the post -disaster region seeking for a new job 
and a better place to stay. As a result, the rural population became more “aged and feminized”. Women 
were left in town without their spouses and became breadwinners. Women tend to get jobs in service 
sector in aimag a nd soum centers, however the “age factor” seriously discriminates them from getting 
employed, thus marking middle aged women as the marginalized in labour market.   
 
Lack of gender sensitivity in aimag -level disaster risk management (DRM) plans  
 
The Nation al Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) is the main agent responsible for all natural 
disasters in Mongolia. The State Disaster Protection Services regulation was approved by the Vice Prime 
Minister, and its decree number is 52/May 06, 2013 Ulaanbaatar. The organizational chart of NEMA 
shows that there is no specialized gender focal point.  
 
The following DRM -related national programmes and aimag -level plans were reviewed with a gender 
lens: the Implementation Plan of the State Policy and Programme on Disaster  Protection; the National 
Programme on Strengthening Disaster Protection Capacity; the National Programme on Community 
Participatory Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR); the Implementation Plan of National Programme for 
Community Participatory DRR; DRM Plans of Zavhan, Khovd, Dornod, and Sukhbaatar Aimag.  
 
Neither of the aforementioned documents reinforce the significance of col lecting sex -disaggregated 
data n or include quotes that promote and ensure women's participation and leadership in decision -
making process . However, except the National Programme on Strengthening Disaster Protection


---
*Page 110*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 Capacity and DRM Plans of Sukhbaatar aimag, the rest of the documents address special interventions 
for vulnerable group s of people including people with disabilities, children, elderly peopl e, women  and 
people with low income.  DRM Plans of the Khovd and Sukhbaatar aimag demonstrate some availability 
of sex-disaggregated data.  
 
IV. Gender Indicators in  Mongolia   
 
The Gender Inequality Index (GII) reflects gender -based inequalities in three dimensions: repro ductive 
health, empowerment and  economic activity. Reproductive health is measured by maternal mortality 
and adolescent birth rates; empowerment is measured by the share of parliamentary positions held by 
women and at tainment in secondary and higher education by each gender, and economic activity is 
measured by the labour  market participation of women and men. The GII can be interpreted as the loss 
of human development due to inequality between women and men ’s achievem ents in the three 
dimensions.  Mongolia has a GII value of 0.278, ranking  53 out of 159 countries in the 2015 index.13  
The Gender Development Index (GDI) based on the sex -disaggregated Human Development Index (HDI) 
defines as a ratio of female to male HDI . The GDI measures gender inequalities in three basic dimensions 
of human development: health (measured by women and men’s life expectancy at birth); education 
(measured by expected years of schooling for children and mean years for men and women aged 25 
years and older); and command over economic resources (measured by estimated Gross National 
Income (GNI) per capita for women and men). The female HDI value for Mongolia is 0.744 in contrast 
with 0.725 for males, resulting in a GDI value of 1.026 among 160 countries in 2015.14  
The Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI) of the World Economic Forum examines the gap between men 
and women in four categories: economic participation and opportunity, educational attainment, health 
and survival  and political empowerment.15 Mongolia ranked 53 out of 14 4 countries in 2017 with the 
score of 0.71316: 
Description  Score  Rank  
Economic participation and opportunity  0.766  20 
Educational attainment  0.993  65 
Health and survival  0.980  1 
Political empowerment  0.102  107 
Gender Gap Index 2017  0.713  53 
* Inequality = 0.00; Equality = 1.00. Source: T he Global Gender Gap Report 2017  
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) developed the Social Institutions 
and Gender Index (SIGI), a composite index that scores countries (i.e., 0 to 1) on 14 indicators grouped 
into five sub -indices: discriminatory family code, restricted physical integrity, son bias, restricted 
resources and assets, and restricted civil liberties  to measure the discrimination against women in social 
institutions across 160 countries. The 2014 SIGI value for Mongolia is 0.0345 suggesting that SIGI 
category is very low.17 
 
13 http://hdr.undp.org/ sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country -notes/es/MNG.pdf   
14 Ibid.  
15 World Economic Forum. The Global Gender Gap Report 2014 Country Profiles. 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/GGGR14/GGGR_CountryProfiles.pdf  
16 http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2017.pdf   
17 OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index 2014. Country Profiles http://www.genderindex.org/country/mongolia


---
*Page 111*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 Health  
 
Maternal  mortality ratio  (MMR) , which was 38%18 in 2016, showed a sharp decline, from 121.5 
maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in 2001 to 30.0 in 2014.19  However, the MMR has doubled 
between 2015 and 2016, indicating Mongolia’s fragility in achieving better health outcomes.  At the 
same time , the increase in the adolescent birth rate is affecting the Gender Inequality Index (GII) 
negatively. From 21 bir ths per 1,000 adolescent women of 15 -19 years of age in 2002, the rate rose to 
29 births in 2013. Mongolia’s adolescent birth rate  (40%20 in 2013)  is higher than th e average among 
the countries of Asia and the Pacific region21. In addition, increasing number of abortions at national 
level from 18,168 (2015) to 18,316 (2016)22. Combined, these point to an un -met need for family 
planning and responsible sexual behavior .  
 
In terms of the disparity between male and female life expectancy  in 2016 , the differe nce was 9.52 
years, 75.1 years among women and 65.58  years among men .23 In addition, female life expectancy is 
rising more quickly than male life expectancy, thus, the female -male gap is widening.24 
 
Education  
 
Gender gap in education is still evident among 16 -19 year old  boys in rural areas.25 There is a tendency 
to place more importance on educating girls, sending them to universities or supporting them in pursuit 
of a higher education in urban areas, which is based on a conventional belief that girls are more 
vulnerable and are not apt to herding. Analy zing the reasons for boys’ dropout , the most prevalent  one 
is the need of herder famili es for more workers  and the assumption that herding life secures a regular 
income.26  
 
In 2015, at national level, the female graduates, at the beginning of ac ademic year, accounted for 
52.86 % showing 7.79 % increase from 45.07% in 2014. In  2015, the female  graduates ) accounted for 
51.95 % in general education schools, 41.03 % in technica l and vocational schools, and 60.72 % in 
universities, insti tutes, and colleges  ((Table -1, Figure -1).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
19 Mongolia Human Development Report, UNDP, 2014  
20 National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
21 Mongolia Human  Development Report, UNDP, 2014  
22 National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
23 Ibid. 
24 Mongolia Human  Development Report, U NDP, 2014  
25 Ibid.  
26 Gender Analysis in Pastoral Livestock Herding in Mongolia , Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) 2015,  
p64


---
*Page 112*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 Figure -127  
 
 
Labour force  
 
In the context of labour  market, gender disparities are especially prominent in the types of work women 
do - mostly unpaid with limited engagement in self -employment/entrepreneurial activities and with 
high level of occupational segregation , having a limit ed presence in higher level managerial positions – 
and the wages that they are paid. 28 In addition, according to the Government ’s General Office of Labour  
and Welfare Service , among the registered 34,400 unemployed people in 2016, 17 ,800 people (51.74%) 
were women. While women have higher rate of university graduation  (61%, 2015) , more than half of 
the registered unemployment is represented by them  (53.7%, 2017)29. In addition, the overall gender 
wage gap in log wages is 0.18, which i mplies that male wages are 1.2 times higher than female wages .30 
At national level, there has been ₮31 107,740 (12.65 %32) increase of average monthly wage from ₮ 
851,400 ( as of the first quarter of 2015 ) to ₮ 959,140  (the first quarter of 2017 ). The average monthly 
wage as of the first quarter of 2017 has shown an increase by 12.93 %33 for men and by 12.43 %34 for 
women compared to that of 2015 . Specifically, while  there has been 49,490 ₮ (7.64%35) increase of 
national average monthly wage from ₮ 647,800 ( as of the first quarter of 2016) to ₮ 697,290 ( as of the 
first quarter of 2017 ) in the sector of agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting, men showed 8.03% of 
increase and women showed 6.91% of increase  (Table -2).36  
 
Retirement policy can negatively affect gender equality situation in Mongolia. According to the general 
requirement s established  in the Law on Social Insurance (entered into force on  1 January 1995)  and the 
Law on Pensions (amended in 1990) , the retirement age in Mongolia for women is 55 years, 5 years 
earlier than for men and rising to 10 years earlier if they have four or more children . Despite the fact 
 
27 Ibid.  
28 Mongolia - Gender disparities in labour markets and policy suggestions, World Bank, 2013  
29 National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
30 Mongolia: Gender Disparities in Labour Markets and Policy Suggestions  
31 1 US Dollar equals to 2413.50 Mongolian Tugrik on July 19, 2017  
32 {(959,140 -851,400)/851,400 } *100 =12.65%  
33 {(1,042,430 -923,100)/923,100 } *100 =12.93%  
34 {(879,280 -782,100)/782,100 } *100 =12.43%  
35 {(697,290 -647,800)/647,800} *100=7.64%  
36 National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  6139Female Graduates of Universities, Institutes, and colleges 
in 2015 
% of Female
% of Male


---
*Page 113*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 that such laws provide  for retirement at “one’s own request”,  in reality this clause has become an 
excuse for  dismissing women under the pretext of staff reduction.37 
 
Political participation/Decision making  
 
According to the Election Law of Mongolia not less than 20% of nominations must be women and 
women must comprise at least 20 -40% of those at a decision -making level.  Although 50.8 3%38 of 
Mongolia’s population is female and 60.72 % (2015)39 are female gradua tes from universities, ins titutes, 
and colleges , women do not have equal participation in decision -making.  In 2016, before the 
parliamentary election in June, the proportion of fe male parliamentarians was 14.5%, which was below 
the world average of 22.9% and Asia -Pacific average of 18.8%. However, the current proportion has 
increased and stands at 17.1% , with  13 female parliamentarians out of 76 Members of Parliament.40 
 
In Mongolia, civil workers are divided into  four major categories, namely: i)  political  arena , ii) 
administrative  arena , iii) special service and iv) civil service. In 2016, among 186,458 civil workers in 
total, only 23.64% in political arena and 25.95% in special service arena were women while mor e than 
half the proportion was represented by women in administrative and civil service arena (Figure -2).41 In 
addition, l ack of women’s participation in decision -makin g positions is demonstrated in Figure -3 42. In 
2016, female officials/staffs accounted for 17.11% of the parliament, 12.5% of ministry -level positions, 
25% of deputy ministry positions, 4.55% of governor position, and 0% of head of citizens’ khural43 
positions.   
 
Figure -244
 
 
37 Reports in Response to Request for Information, CEDAW Watch, January 24 –February 15, 2000. 
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/cedaw24/cedawcmng34.pdf   
38 National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
39 Ibid.  
40 Statistics of the “Civil “Service Council” of Mongolia 2016  
41 Ibid.  
42 Ibid.  
43 Local self -government of Mongolia  
44 Statistics of the “Civil “Service Council” of Mongolia 2016  77
4274
30
2458
2670
0102030405060708090
Political arena Administrative arena Special service Civil serviceSex-Disaggregated Data of Civil Workers in 2016 
% of Male % of Female


---
*Page 114*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 Figure -345 
 
 
 
Access to resources  
 
Unequal distribution of state assets in the shift towards privatization in the 1990s when land and 
livestock were registered in th e names of heads of households, predominantly men ( 90% ), left women 
without legal title or control.  Women  require the conse nt of heads of households to use assets as 
collateral for loan or credit46. Although the participation of husbands and wives in obtaining official 
bank loans is equal as herder families use their livestock as collateral and both husband and wife have 
to sign loan contracts, husbands’ decisions were more predominant than women’s in the other kinds 
of loan arrangements.47 While a  survey (1998) conducted by  Women’s Information and Research 
Centre  reports that  45.2% of those whose pr incipal occupation was herding were women , single 
women  herders received less than their entitlement in the distribution of assets resulting from  
privatisation48.  
 
Under the 1992 Constitution of Mongolia, women have equal rights to inheritance, land use, and 
ownership of livestock and other property. However, the land tenure and property rights of women are 
generally weakened by the absence of clear legislation around  property rights in the contexts of divorce 
and inheritance. For women, property ownership remained elusive  in rural areas as they exhibited 
lower rates of property ownership than males49. 
 
As per 2011 National Law on Gender equality, Ministries have gende r focal points. MET was the first 
Government Ministry to have a sectoral gender analysis undertaken and gender strategy developed 
and approved in 2014. For the implementation of the strategy, the sector itself is committed to ensure 
gender equality in all environmental projects, programs and policies. The strategy acknowledges the 
 
45 Ibid.  
46 B. Robinson and A. Solongo, 2000, The gender dimension of economic transition in Mongolia , p.10  
47 Gender Analysis in Pastoral Livestock Herding in Mongolia , Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) 2015  
48 B. Robinson and A. Solongo, 2000, The gender dimension of economic transition in Mongolia, p.10  
49 Registry Systems Process Study Baseline Report, 2014, Millennium Challenge Account of Mongolia (MCA -M) Property 
Rights Project (PRP), p.5  7616162222
132410
0 20 40 60 80Member of parliamentMinisterDeputy ministerThe governor of aimags and UBThe head of citizens’ khural in 
aimags and UBWomen’s Participation in Decision Making in 2016
Number of women
Total  number


---
*Page 115*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 importance of different needs of women and men, social groups and local development, and ensuring 
their equal opportunities for participation and equal access to resources and ben efits: “reflect gender -
specific and social groups such as different local communities, various population, demographic and 
social groups with varying participatory scope and levels in the policy planning as they are critical 
players of development.  
 
Howev er, a UNDP report on “Analysis of social inclusion and gender dynamic for REDD+ in Mongolia“ 
indicates that the policy and decision makers do not adequately recognize the main principles to 
mainstream gender into sector policy planning. The same report sug gested that gender sensitization of 
decision makers, policy implementers are critical along with capacity building in social inclusion and 
gender mainstreaming to eliminate existing gender gaps rooted by imbalanced roles and 
responsibilities and opportunit ies, existing stereotypes and male preferences/dominance in natural 
resources management and forestry.    
 
Gender -based violence  
 
Violence against women and girls is a serious concern. While there has yet to be a nation -wide survey, 
it is reported that close to 90 % of victims of domestic violence are women – 40% are young women 
aged 15 -34 – who are less likely to report incidents. In 2015, experts  estimated that one out of 5 women 
suffered physical violence within the family, and one out of 2 children we re subjected to domestic 
violence.  
 
According to 2017 UNFPA report, around 75,000 women in urban areas and 37,000 in rural areas have 
experienced physical violence within the year preceding the survey. The same study findings indicate 
that triggering facto rs include patriarchal attitude, alcohol dependence, poor socio -economic situation 
in Mongolia; the unemployment of men, vulnerability of households, debt burden, wife’s economic 
dependency on her husband, the attitude of tolerating violence because of the  children or child from 
previous marriage, lack of emotional skills of the couples such as basic family education, communication 
skills, respecting other people, managing anger and stress, the influence of family members or friends, 
lack of professional su pport services that protect and assist victims of domestic violence, lack of 
counselling and legal support services, to assist both victims and abusers.  
 
The Law on Combating Domestic Violence (LCDV) was first passed in 2004, its revised version was 
appro ved in December 2016 and the law entered into force on 1 February 2017.  This law, in 
conjunction with the Criminal Code, Law on Witness Protection, Criminal Proceedings Code, Family Law 
and the Law on Child Rights, represents cohesive legislation to addre ss violence against women. Since 
the adoption of the Law on Combatting Domestic Violence, the National Programme on the Control 
and Prevention of Domestic Violence4 was approved in 2007 and implemented. There has also been a 
Supreme Court Ruling on Uniform  Interpretation and Implementation of Some Clauses of LCDV5, as 
well as related rules and procedures issued by the Ministry of Justice and Home Affairs (MoJHA), 
Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry of Labour and Social Protection (MoLSP). The government, apart 
from taking measures to establish shelter homes, has set up a victim help hotline and three one -stop 
service centres (OSSC) in Ulaanbaatar in 2009, which provide health, psychosocial, protection and legal 
aid services. Three further one -stop services  centres were established in Zavkhan, Gobi -Altai, and 
Bayankhongor aimag s in 2013 -14.    
 
The new Law to Combat Domestic Violence came into effect on February 1, 2017. The newly approved 
law criminalizes domestic violence, and has expanded its scope of cov erage from immediate to 
extended family members to co -habitants, former spouses or co -habitants  and unmarried couples with


---
*Page 116*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 children.  The m ulti-sectoral coordination mechanisms for violence against women and girls have been 
established at the national level  and three provinces, but their effectiveness needs to be improved and 
they need to be expanded to other provinces.  
 
V. Gender Analysis  
 
The gender analysis undertaken at the onset and design of this project acts as an entry point for gender 
mainstreaming throughout its implementation.   
Limited institutionalization of gender mainstreaming: lack of sex -disaggregated data and gender -blind 
policy making  
 
Relevant sex -disaggregated data and gender qualitative and ethnographic analysis across sectors and 
geographical regions is very limited. Even though in some instances the sex -disaggregated data is 
collected and available, it is not being syst ematically analysed and used in formulation of national and 
sector -specific programs and policies. For the purpose of this analysis, t he following selected national 
law, policies and development strategies have been reviewed with a gender lens : Mongolian 
Sustainable Development Vision 2030 (2016); The State Policy on Disaster Protection (2011); National 
Food and Agriculture Policy (2015); Government Policy for Herders (2009); Green Development Policy 
(2014); SME Law (2007). While most of the reviewed documents are gender -blind, the Mongolian 
Sustainable Development Vision 2030 ( target 2.2), the National Food and Agriculture Policy (target 
7.1.4) , and the Green Development Policy ( strategic objective 4 ) highlight the importance of 
empowering women and promoting gender equality. Thus, continued monitoring/collection  of  sex-
disaggregated data  in relevant sectors in each aimag is necessary:  division of labour based on time use; 
asset ownership including access and control over information, land, loan, etc.; income generation; 
participation and leadership in decision -making including activities within cooperatives such as 
Land/Water/Forest User Groups, parliament, local government; school dropouts; unemplo yment.  
Although gender focal points are designated at government level, they have limited capacity to guide 
the gender sub-councils  at ministries and subcommittees in aimags  in establishing gender 
mainstreaming strategies, policies  and programmes. In other words, regardless of gradually improving 
gender legislative framework, its implementation is inadequate and inconsistent in Mongolia due to 
lack of sectoral sex-disaggregated  data  collection/monitoring , gender -blind policy making, and limited 
accountability and capacity of governance institutions to mainstream gender.  
 
Women’s l ack of control over resources , participation and leadership in decision -making, a ccess and  
 
Although there are no specific and fact -based gender -related pro blem in water and soil management 
reported in any gender related studies, there are common observations. Both women and men play 
important, but different roles in the management of natural resources and forestry sector in Mongolia’s 
nomadic pastoralism.  W omen perform both animal husbandry and household works, i.e. taking care 
of food, clothes, and health of their children and members of the family but also women undertake 
repetitive housework such as processing milk, taking care of housekeeping.  They also  work on wool 
and cashmere sheering, milking and rearing of livestock, feeding and taking care of animal offspring, 
and cleaning of animal shelters. Men usually do most of the work outside and away from the home 
such as selecting pastures, haymaking, herdi ng animals, participating in meetings and business -related 
activities.  
 
At the same time, women’s roles and participation in natural resource use, decision -making and 
implementation have been undervalued. A FAO project report indicates relatively equal level of


---
*Page 117*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 participation of men and women in the Forest User Groups (FUGs), o f which 54.6% of all members were 
men and 45.6% were women. However, only 26% of FUGs are led by women revealing a considerable 
gap between men and women in decision making positions.  
 
There is a deeply engraved social belief that men are to make major decision s and lead livestock 
production as they are  generally more knowledge able  about the land, pastures, water, vegetation, 
winter disasters,  and droughts, women being  less interested in these areas. In order to ensure gender 
balance in decision -making, access and control over resources, capacity building and awareness raising 
training  should be tailored to the needs of target groups including women, men, local government 
staffs, etc. In terms of leadership, it is important to conduct  a gender -sensitive sur vey on: the 
respondents’ confidence and motivation to participate and lead the community group; community 
group  leader’s gender preference; training  that women and men need.  
 
It appears that men are dominant at the decision -making level about loans expendi tures. In relation to 
the control of household assets, properties are mostly registered under the husband’s name. A report 
by the Asian Development Bank (ADB, 2005) showed government regulations had not proactively 
supported gender equality in  terms of  access to or control over newly allocated land. 50 For instance, 
the regulations did not question traditional de finitions of “family  and household”, and in consequence, 
only those officially registered as a married couple or as a household unit prior to 2003 were initially 
entitled to land. Some land s also ended up being registered in the names of male household heads only, 
as other adult household members were allowed to waive their right to be named on titles of newly 
allocated land. The ADB study found that  just 30% of registered land titles were registered jointly to 
husbands and wives and only 16% were registered to wives.51  
 
Women’s limited access to information and participation in community activities  
 
Information is critical to the development and use of technical innovations and improvements, yet 
women frequently cannot obtain such information  due to inappropriate information disseminating 
methods and distant training locations and unavailable timing . Providing more relevant informa tion by 
specifically addressing gender aspects related to agriculture should enable female farmers to increase 
the accessibility of new agricultural technologies and innovations. According to Swiss Agency for 
Development and Cooperation (SDC)’s Gender Anal ysis in Pastoral Livestock Herding in Mongolia 2015,  
a significant number of the herders surveyed said that they did not participate in community activities 
because they had not received information in advance. In order to better inform of community 
activi ties, appropriate information dissemination measures should be surveyed and applied by gender. 
There should be a survey before disseminating information whether receivers are literate, technology -
literate , physically or mentally available to receive inform ation, etc.  in order to select appropriate 
information dissemination strategies.  
 
Once engaged however, results show strong participation by women.  T he UNREDD project 2017 
“Analysis of Social Inclusion and Gender Dynamics for REDD+ in Mongolia” reports r elatively equal level 
of participation of men and women in 98 surveyed Forest User Groups (FUGs) of which 54.6% of all 
members were men (1,424) and 45.6% were women (1,196). Groups led by women made up 25.6% of 
the total .  Results show that male and female  members are relatively balanced within the groups, which 
shows the benefits will be shared accordingly. Within the RUGs, most strategic decisions for the RUGs 
 
50 Mongolia Country Gender Assessment , ADB and World Bank, 2005  
51 First Reflection on Researching Women’s Tenure Security in Mongolia, Zoe Driscoll , 2016


---
*Page 118*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 are made through a voting system and therefore, balanced membership of men and women guarantee 
the participation of women in decision making and benefit sharing.  
 
Women’s double burden and transforming gender relations  
 
Data from recent Participatory Living Standards Assessment of the NSO  of Mongolia have identified 
that a disproportionate number of  female -headed h ouseholds are living in poverty  and its proportion 
is growing. This phenomenon is closely related to the fact that women are often limited to engage in 
livelihood or employment opportunities due to the tasks at home. Specifically, women who  are 
employed or engaged in small enterprises need to work longer hours than men do, just to manage tasks 
at home and at work.  
 
Specifically, while women who are involved in livestock sector carry double burden to work in 
productive as well as reproductiv e arena all year long, the main characteristic mentioned in relation to 
Mongolian men’s work is seasonality with busy periods of work as well as of rest. Women’s workload 
resulted to be higher than men’s for all the months of the year, with the exception o f March and 
December. The average daily workload of women during the year is 11.1 hours while the workload of 
men is 9.2 hours.52 Despite this  fact, women’s contributions and roles are not sufficiently  recognized in 
other aspects of household herding life, such as decision -making on major spending and purchases, 
household business management, participation in community activities and leadership.  
 
Women’s limited access to running small and medium enter prises (SMEs)  
 
According to the SME Law (2007), SMEs are defined as legally registered business entities with 199 or 
fewer employees and with an annual turnover of up to ₮ 1.5 billion (USD 833,000). The law also 
differentiates between sectors in  terms of number of employees and annual turnover for a company 
to be considered as a SME (Table -3)53. In addition, the law was amended on  February 04, 2016 adjusting 
the minimum annual turnover to ₮ 50-250million. While wives face higher barriers to loan access 
com pared to husbands, yet they  are fully responsible for financial risk in case of business failure.  Further 
gender analysis on loan system in Mongolia is required to establish whether there is  indirect 
discrimination against certain groups of populations  such as women who are leading households,  bread 
winners , women with disability, senior women etc.  
 
Sex-disaggregated data on SME owners who are clients  at commercial banks is currently not disclosed. 
However, according to the consultation with managers of several commercial banks and non -bank 
financial institutions, the share of female -owned  businesses in the sector is significant, approaching 
nearly 60% of micro -scale, family, and sole -entrepreneur -owned businesses. This observation of 
industry stakeholders differs significantly from the findings of the World Bank’s Mongolia Enterprise 
Survey 2013, which shows the percentage of firms with female ownership  at 38.9%.54 
 
The earlier described discrepancy of women spending longer time for unpaid work than men, according 
to 2013 JICA report on Mongolia’s Gender Profile, influences women’s access to markets negatively.  
Also, tendencies reported on limited acces s to finance by women -heads of households and other 
disadvantaged (elderly and disabled) groups, partially due to lack of collateral as livestock and land is 
registered to men as head of households.  
 
52 Gender Analysis in Pastoral Livestock Herding in Mongolia , Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) 2015, p9 
53 http://www.mongolianlaws.com#    
54World Bank’s Mongolia Enterprise Survey 2013


---
*Page 119*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
  
Vulnerable groups in four target Aimags  
 
Following parag raphs present a more granular information on the status of identified vulnerable groups 
in four target Aimags of this project.  
 
Female -headed households:  14.45% of the total female -headed households reside in the four aimags . 
The number of female -headed households decreased by 1.13% from 78,606 (2015) to 77,717 (2016) at 
national level. However, during the respective period, the number of female -headed households 
increased by 3.7% from 2,893 to 3,000 in Zavkhan, by 3.69% from 2,871 to 2,977 in Dornod, and by 
3.98% from 2,310 to 2,402 in Sukhbaatar, while that decreased by 1.55% from 2,899 to 2,854 in Khovd 
aimag  (Figure -4)55. 
 
Figure -456 
 
 
 
Female registered unemployment:  At national level,  the female  registered  unemployment  rate 
oscillated between 52.85% -54.29%, in the period between Q1 2016 – Q3 201757.  
 
According to Table -4, the national female registered unemployment decreased by 12.16% from 
September 2016 to September 2017. The female registered unemployment increased by 94.23% in 
Zavkhan aimag and by 26.72% in Khovd aimag, while that decreased by 4.05% in Dornod aimag and by 
4.49% in Sukhbaatar aimag. 58 
 
 
55 National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
56 Ibid.  
57 Ibid.  
58 Ibid.


---
*Page 120*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 Figure -559
 
 
Children out of school:  Sex-disaggregated data on out -of-school children is missing. At national level, 
the number of pupils dropped -out of schools  aged 6 -14 has gradually decreased  – 2,332 in 2012, 1,755 
in 2013 and 1,169 in 2014. In 2014, the number of pupils dropped -out of schools aged 6 -14 was 13 in 
Zavkhan  aimag , 39 in Khovd  aimag , 15 in Dornod  aimag  and 47  in Sukhbaatar  aimag .60  
 
People with disabilities:  The rate of females w ith disabilities was 44.79% at national level in 2016. 
Compared to that, Zavkhan demonstrated a higher rate (46.57%), while Khovd (43.71%), Dornod 
(42.66%) and Sukhbaatar (41.15%) showed a lower rate in 2016. (Table -5).61 
 
Single women with the children aged below 16 years old:  The n ational statisti cs do  not show the latest 
number  of single women with the children aged below 16 years old. The most recently  updated data 
from 2012 indicate that the number of single women with the children aged below 16 years old was 
38,55 9 at national level , 839 in Zavkhan  aimag , 575 in Khovd  aimag , 1,369 in Dornod aimag and 652 in 
Sukhbaatar  aimag62. 
 
Senior single -headed households over 65 years old:  At national  level, there has been 4.77% increase in 
the number of  female -headed households over 65 years old in 2016 compared to that of the previous 
 
59 Ibid.  
60 Ibid.  
61 Ibid.  
62 Ibid.  25,3501,0631,1821,093807
29,1925749251,024865
13,920606664497404
15,847312524518423
0 5,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000NationalZavkhanKhovdDornodSukhbaatarRegistered Unemployed in Target Aimags
2016 Sept. Female 2017 Sept. Female 2016 Sept. Total 2017 Sept. Total


---
*Page 121*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 year. Compared to that, only Khovd demonstrated 4.57% decrease, while Zavkhan (13.58%), Dornod 
(23.49%) and Sukhbaatar (21.76%) showed higher rate of increase in 2016  (Table -6).63 
 
 
VI. Legal and Administrative Framework Protecting Women and Protecting Gender 
Equality  
 
Mongolia promotes a national movement towards gender -sensitive climate change response guided by 
the Law of Mongolia on Enforcement of the Law on Promot ion of Gender Equality (LPGE), the National 
Action Programme on Climate Change (NAPCC), the Environmental Sector Gender Strategy 2014 -2030, 
Green Development Policy and Mongolia Sustainable Development Vision 2030.   
 
The adoption of the LPGE  and the revision of the Criminal Co de led to the cr iminalization domestic 
violence. T he revision of the Law on Election  ensured that  at least 20 percent of candidates nominate d 
by a party or coalition shall  be represented by one ge nder (Article 126.2.) and the LPGE  stated that 
representation of any one sex among politically appointed civil servants shall not be less than 15 
percent on national, aimag and the capital city levels, 20 percent on district, 25 percent on soum and 
30 perc ent on khoroo levels (Article 10.1.1.) and representation of any one sex in decision -making 
positions in public administration shall not be less than 15 percent among state secretaries and heads 
of agencies, 20 percent among managers in other central agenc ies, 30 percent among heads of 
department in ministries and agencies, 40 percent among heads of secretariats, departments and 
divisions on aimag, city, soum, duureg and khoroo levels (Article 10.1.2.) . The LPGE  introduces concept 
of gender mainstreaming an d stipulates for development of gender -sensitive policies through 
incorporation of gender equality concepts in laws, government policies, programs and projects.  
  
The NAPCC , which was approved by the Government in 2000, highlights to “ensure justice, 
transparency, human rights and gender equality are upheld in the implementation of the program.”  
The Environmental Sector Gender Strategy 2014 -2030  gives gender -sensitive strategic guidelines  for 
activities and interventions in the environmental s ector in general,  and with regards to climate change 
in particular through  the objective 1.2, which aims  “to facilitate introducing new content into the 
Bachelor Degree program curriculum for students studying (forestry and water) at colleges and 
universi ties on the subjects of social development, gender discourse, social impacts of climate change 
and natural resources utilization, etc.” and the objective 3.1., which “encourage s participatory data -
collection and information packaging work to be carried out  jointly with the local community people on 
the climate change, desertification and disaster prevention by emphasizing gender roles of women and 
men that  are based on their needs and  by jointly planning  the dissemination schedule.”  
Even though the Green De velopment Policy  does not make  direct, explicit references to gender equality, 
the preamble of this policy emphasizes  inclusiveness, social justice and better human well -being. These 
notions imply  that equal  and inclusive participation of men and women of all groups  are to be ensured.  
The Mongolia Sustainable Development Vision 2030  states that one of the principles for achieving the 
sustainable social development is to ensure gender  equality in social development  and create a 
pleasant environment for equal  participation in social welfare.  
 
 
63 Ibid.


---
*Page 122*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 VII. Recommendations  
 
In response to the  need for continued efforts to mainstream gender in climate change adaptation,  this 
particular gender assessment  provides steppingstone to reveal gender inequalities related to 
aggravating cl imate change in Mongolia and guide s the project team in addressing them throughout 
various stages of its implementations.  
Based on the gender analysis, recommendations are made to address gender dimensions  within the 
whole project cycle incl uding design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation  and reporting. 
Emphasizing the fact that women are the key players in supporting climate resilience and 
transformational change in the agriculture sector , this  proposal works to identify and integrate  
interventions to provide gender responsive  and transformative results.  
 
Best Practices and Lessons Learned  
The gender action plan for the proposed project was also built on the lessons generated through the 
previous interventions in the field of Community -based Natural Resources Management, Climate 
change adaptation and Disaster risk reduction.  A key strategy is to present equal opportunities 
available to men and women, support to overcoming gender -based barriers, increase women 
participation and ensure t hat the enhanced mechanisms for women’s empowerment should not have 
a negative impact on the social functioning of the communities.  
 
A good practice of undertaking comprehensive analysis and developing recommendations, policies and 
measures on social incl usion and gender mainstreaming in forest and climate change through UNREDD 
programme has been applied for the proposed project , as has a s ocial and environmental safeguards 
framework .  Through UNDP’s “Sustainable Land Management for Combating Desertificati on” project , 
it has been found that the poorest and most vulnerable, including elderly, disabled and women headed 
households are at the risk of becoming left behind, as the most active and better -off herders benefit 
more by getting informed of opportunitie s presented through development partner initiatives. 
Therefore, the SLM project instituted principle of including certain percentage of vulnerable 
households (elderly, disabled, single -parent or women headed) while establishing Resource User 
Groups in orde r to receive project support. It has also been found that enrolling higher percentage of 
women in capacity building interventions increase effectiveness of interventions, as they tend to 
further disseminate the obtained information and knowledge much more openly and efficiently than 
men would. This also includes application of block chain technology in traceability of sustainable 
livestock commodities (i.e. cashmere and wool), the certification of which requires joining efforts as a 
group, not as individual  households, to improve quality of their practices in animal husbandry and 
rangeland stewardship.    
 
The herder group model has been applied throughout the last 20 years in all development partner 
projects and there are proven advantages of joining the ef forts to improve their livelihoods and 
overcoming economic and disaster shocks. According to the 2018 SDC report “Socio -economic study of 
herder households” indicates that group herders’ annual earnings are almost 30% higher than those 
living individually.  Much earlier UNDP report of 2012 on development results indicated that the group 
herders suffered 30% lower loss of animals during the dzud of 2010 -2011 winter. The herder groups 
are formed of 10 -20 households within the same geographic locations (Bahg an d Khoroo) as neighbours  
and relatives. The groups are established mainly of herder households with different purposes 
however, mainly for enhanced management of natural resources management, i.e. pastureland and 
water and forest resources, local protected area management/visitor  management or biodiversity


---
*Page 123*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 protection. As herders do not have regular income, many of these groups are engaged in additional 
income generation or alternative livelihood initiatives. Once those activities are successful, they turn 
into cooperatives or Herd er Producer Organizations. Participation in groups are household -based, not 
on individuals and therefore both husband and wife and other adults in the household can be enrolled 
as members. The groups are established on voluntary basis and elect their own l eaders.  The groups 
mostly establish their co -management funds (risk management fund) with everyone’s contributions 
and strategic and investment decisions and labor division (resource management plans, hay and fodder 
preparation for winter, establishment o f hay making areas, rotational use of pasture, well 
establishment) are made on democratic principles or voting at resource user group meeting. The same 
principles applied when revenue is generated and needs distribution.    
 
Project design and implementati on 
• Promote the growing role of women in agriculture by ensuring participation of women in 
community consultations to adequately respond to their needs and challenges;  
• Collaborate with the existing initiatives within UNDP Mongolia, and those of other 
devel opment partners and relevant government interventions - and seek for gender 
mainstreaming entry points for existing policies - water/land management policies, Soum Level 
Development Plans, Resource Use Agreements, etc;  
• Conduct a  needs assessment and collect sex -disaggregated data to identify the gaps in gender 
equality, enabling development of targ eted implementation strategies. Continued 
monitoring/collection  of  sex -disaggregated data in relevant sectors in each aimag is necess ary:  
division of labour based on time use; asset ownership including access and control over 
information, land, loan, etc.; income generation; participation and leadership in decision -
making including activities within cooperatives such as Land/Water/Fore st User Groups, 
parliament, local government; school dropouts; unemployment.  This needs assessment will be 
a useful basis to mainstream gender into the development of PPCP -CRAD Agreement, 
Integrated Agricultural Development Model, HPO’s Business Proposals,  Value -Chain Analysis, 
etc.;  
• Promote  national/aimag/soum -level policy making process to raise  its gender -sensitivity by 
ensuring gender parity in terms  of participation and ensuring  that sex -disaggregated data and 
a gender -sensitive screening checklist for policy development  is incorporated into the decision 
making process of  aimag/soum khurals ; 
• Tailor capacity building needs by gender and facilitate trainings that are based on men and 
women’s nee ds. Training on introduction to and culturally acceptable sensitization about 
gender equality and women’s empowerment should be planned for partner organizations’ staff 
involved in the project implementation, as well as direct beneficiaries. Possible train ees are 
HPOs, PMUs, Resource User Group, NANEM and gender focal points of local governments;   
• Prepare a short questionnaire to monitor the impacts of trainings and other capacity 
development interventions on women and men and document the results;  
• Ensure that both men and women have  equal access to information on markets, pricing policy, 
and climate through innovative information communication mechanisms. Before holding 
decision -making meetings or trainings, i dentify and tailor appropriate information 
dissemination method, timing, and location for women and men. For example, e nabling an 
environment where women can bring their kids to community activities or holding events 
during w inter and autumn which are thought to be the best seasons for training64, would be a 
 
64 Gender Analysis in Pastoral Livestock Herding in Mongolia , Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) 2015,  
p77


---
*Page 124*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 solution for  women’s low level of participation in community activities  due to double work 
burden.  
• Ensure that project interventions are directed to women and men’s practical and strategic 
needs and priorities that would bring transf ormational change in the gender relations. Through 
trainings, invite both men and women to freely question what they want to do before being 
asked to do something, which will lead them to see flexibility in gender roles. If needed, focus 
group discussions can be held in order to enable a freer environment for women to raise their 
voices.  
• Create a financing mechanism that can promote and ensure women’s involvement in public 
private partnership, SMEs, etc. by adding value to existing women’s capacity building  activities 
such as felt product making of EbA project and giving women sales opportunities in the market;  
• All interventions should be monitored, collecting sex -disaggregated data before and after 
interventions, so that the gender -specific benefits and outcomes from the project interventions 
can be discerned in the mid -term report, and terminal evaluation;  
• Ensure that good practices and lessons learnt from gender mainstreaming activities related to 
climate change adaptation evidenced through the project are shared effectively amongst 
stakeholders and inform policy/decisions at national and sub -national levels;  
• Secure a Gender Specialist position for provision of advice within the project to implement 
gender related activities and identify budget for gender mainstreaming in the designing stage 
of the project. In addition, an effective communication system with re gular meeting schedules 
should be institutionalized within the project team to provide a platform for the Gender 
Specialist to actively interact with other team members of the project;  
• In order to ensure that the project is sustainable and inclusive, disag gregate data about the 
project’s main target beneficiaries, herder  households,  who are vulnerable to climate change, 
by various attributes that can cover the needs of vulnerable people such as single - and female -
headed households, men, women or youth with disability, etc.  
 
Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting  
 
Above -mentioned recommendations will  be incorporated in the Gender Action Plan (GAP), annual 
Project Implementation Report, Mid -Term Report, and Terminal Evaluation. GAP will function as a 
monitoring and evaluation platform, demonstrating entry points for gender -responsive actions and 
indicators to track the progress of these gender actions . This can be incorpor ated into the detailed M&E 
plan, which can be updated through the project implementation and provide  additional concrete 
recommend ations on how to ensure gender equality throughout implementation.   
 
Stakeholder engagement  
 
The first c onsultation for stakeholders from four aimags targeted by the project  took place on 
November 10, 2017 at UN House, Ulaanbaatar. Over 70 people participated comprising of 
representatives from the Ministry of Environment and To urism (MET), Ministry of Food a nd Agriculture 
(MoFA), governors from 4 target aimags  such as Dornod , Sukhbaatar, Zavkhan and Khovd , national 
agencies, international organizations, research instituti ons, private companies and NGOs. Group 
discussion on the following themes were conducted:  Enhanced early warning system to strengthen 
preparedness and plan ning in the agriculture sector; Up-scaled ecosystems based adaptation measures 
to preserve land and water res ources; Application of climate -smart technologies to increase agriculture 
product ion and protect agriculture livelihoo ds.


---
*Page 125*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 The second c onsultation for stakeholders from Dornod aimag  was organized at Choibalsan soum of 
Dornod aimag on February 20, 2017 with a support from governors from Dornod aimag. A main purpose 
of organizing the wor kshop at the local level was to incorporate closer to the local administration, 
agricultural organization, herders and natural resource users and obtain their views and contributions 
into development of project documents for adaptation agricultural sector in climate change. Over 50 
participants including from local government, civil society organization s, private sectors herders and 
natural resource users attended the consultation.  Group discussion on the following themes were 
conducted: D isaster risk asses sment and e arly warning information system; A ctual measures  to provide 
ecosystem services; C limate change adapted agriculture.  
 
This gender assessment was mainly based on a desk review. In order to implement gender 
mainstreaming effectively, gender dimension of the project should be discussed and related 
experiences shared with the Ministry of Environment and Tourist, National Committee of Gender 
Equality, Mongolian Women’s Caucus,  Nation al Committee on Gender Equality,  women’s 
organizations, international development partners such as SDC, cooperatives, aimag/soum level 
governments and their gender focal points . In addition, g ood practices and lessons learnt from the 
project promoting gend er equality in climate change adaptation should be shared amongst 
stakeholders and inform policy/decisions at national and sub -national levels.  
 
Stakeholder engagement and consultation should focus on identifying  the following areas as 
particularly important dimensions to be reflected in the implementation strategy of the project:  
• Identification of project activities that promote gender equality and  women’s empowerment;  
• Eliciting distinct needs of people of diffe rent gender in terms of climate change adaptation ; 
• Identifying specific roles to be played by women during the project implementation;  
• Establishment of recommendations to incorporate into the Gender Action Plan;  
• Adjusting advocacy and awareness raising app roach to different population groups - for 
sensitive topics, focus group  meetings can be organized.  
 
 
Gender actions proposed for the project  (Detail description in GAP)  
 
• Appoint a gender specialist;  
• Allocate gender budget for potential needs - other than the activities described in GAP - in the 
future;  
• Conduct gender -responsive M&E and reporting;  
• Collect sex/age -disaggregated data  for any surveys;  
• Ensur e balanced inclusion of both men and women members of households to the RUGs and 
HPOs and other governance mechanisms from gender equality perspective will be put in place, 
such as PPCP agreement templates including gender sensitive clauses  
• Ensure gender -balanced participation in trainings  (i.e. technical trainings on agriculture, 
business, value cha in, etc. as well as gender trainings targeting HPOs, N ANEM and aimag level 
government  or community activities ) and community activities (i.e. HPO activities, livestock 
investment fairs and Agricultural Development Business M odel  building activities);  
• Revie w the core documents with gender perspective , i.e., Opportunity and Risk Analysis on 
PPCP -CRAD; Value Chain Analysis; Climate Change Impact, Vulnerability, and Risk A ssessment; 
Climate, Risk, and Adaptation P rofiles;


---
*Page 126*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 • Mainstream gender into  local level policies, i.e., PPCP a greements; S oum Level Development 
Plans; Resource Use Agreements (RUA) ; Watershed Plans;  
• Break gender stereotypes promoting non gender stereotypical roles by implementing 2 
activities a year to include more men or women in non -typical roles of men – i.e. felt handicrafts 
and women – i.e. firefighting training.   Time constraint for women and the reproductive work 
burden  will be considered.  
 
The project will commission a baseline study with number of sex disaggregated  surveys during the 
inception period to further validate the targets set and to identify some of the hidden or underlying 
issues between women and men that can very well be locally specific. This includes looking into gender 
issues in detail as well and co llecting baseline data that can be used to update the Gender Action Plan 
of the project and be reviewed regularly. The Safeguards and Gender Officer at the central Project 
Management Unit in Ulaanbaatar will be responsible for ensuring availability of sex -disaggregated data 
to address issues of  gender -equality within the project interventions.  The grievance redress 
mechanism established for the project will be a means to identify and address gender related 
challenges that can be addressed through the proj ect. 
 
The project should  aim to put in place mechanisms to enhance women power and participation in 
decision making in RUGs and to create enabling environment for women to participate and express 
their views and promote women leadership programmes. The project should  work to ensure that 
women have the same level of access to information as with men , including  information on markets, 
pricing policy, and climate through innovative information communication mechanisms, creating 
special mechanisms for women if needed . If found necessary, focus group discussions could be held 
separately with women and vulnerable groups which would enable a freer environment for women and 
other vulnerable groups (elderly, disabled and minorities) to raise their issues and voices a nd project 
interventions can be planned and implemented to facilitate the specific needs of those groups.   
 
Before holding decision -making meetings or trainings, the project should identify and tailor appropriate 
information dissemination method(s), timing, and location for women and men. These include for 
example, enabling an environment where women can bring their children  to community activities, 
providing child and elderly care s upport while women participate in project activities, promoting 
technologies to help reduce women’s unpaid work burden, engaging men in conversation about their 
involvement in unpaid housework, or holding events during winter and autumn which are thought t o 
be the best seasons for training, as a potential solution for women’s low level of participation in 
community activities due to double work burden.    
 
 
The project plans to take the following actions: a)  Ensure facilitating access to financing, includin g ADB 
project financing mechanism  (see FP for further details on ADB project) , that can promote and ensure 
women’s involvement in public private partnership, SMEs, etc. by adding value to existing women’s 
capacity building activities such as felt product m aking of Ecosystem -based adaptation project and 
giving women sales opportunities in the market and project supported trade fairs; b)  ensure gender -
balanced participation in developing integrated agricultural development business model in order to 
address d ifferent needs and ben efits from the project by gender and use information dissemination 
methods and choose locations and timing that can involve both men and women effectively ; c) when 
supporting HPOs to prepare business proposals, review the findings of opportunity and risk analysis, 
done under Activity 3.1.1, as a baseline to utilize and maximize the strengths of female -run business


---
*Page 127*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 on business proposals ; d) facilitate access to the Government’s special purpose fund on SME support, 
where small businesse s can obtain loan with low interest to expand their businesses.   
 
This active mainstreaming of gender equality aspects and approaches throughout the project will 
contribute to have the issue of women and men’s inequality in regular focus.  Dialogues with men on 
women’s rights, the benefits of their empowerment for the household and more broadly 
society/community, throughout the course of the project implementation, will contribute to bringing 
in balance the power relations between men and women which ultim ately brings meaningful gender 
equality.  The project will ensure within the three project outcomes maximize the gender equality 
benefits. As recommended in project gender analysis, through project supported trainings, both men 
and women will be encouraged  to freely question before being asked to do something, , and take up 
leadership roles in community -based activities, which will lead them to see flexibility in gender roles. If 
needed, focus group discussions can be held with women separately in order to enable a freer 
environment for women to raise their voices.  
 
UNDP ensures gender equality results through its four point -scale gender marker mechanism, whereby 
all projects are expected to generate such results. Also a Gender analysis is undertaken for all  projects, 
to identify specific gender issues, based on which Gender Action Plans are developed. All project 
workplans are required to incorporate specific and properly budgeted activities to contribute to 
implementation of the  Gender Action Plan with spe cial focus on involving more women in capacity 
building interventions in both local and central levels. UNDP projects encourage participation of female 
government officers and rural women in planning workshops and meetings throughout the 
implementation. Lo cal community -led activities of the projects prioritize benefits to women headed 
households.    
 
The Gender Action Plan can help ensure that the project interventions across the three Outputs will 
contribute to SDG Target 5.4. Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the 
provision of public services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared 
responsi bility within the household and the family  and  5.5: Ensure women's full and effective 
participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision -making in political, 
economic and public life.


---
*Page 128*
---

H                                                                                        Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                       GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
 
   
 VIII. Gender Action Plan (GAP)  
Project Title  Improving Adaptive Capacity to Climate Change and Risk Management of Rural Communities in Mongolia  
GCF Project Outputs  Output 1. Integrate climate information into land and water use planning at the national and sub -national levels    
• Enhanced technical capacity for long -term climate resilient development planning, and medium -term response planning capacity  
• Integration of climate change and climate -informed carrying capacity into aimag and soum level development plan (incl. Integrated River Basi n 
Management Plans (IRBMP))  
• Analytical products to support policy and regulatory reform promoting sustainable land and water management a nd resilient herder livelihoods  
Output 2. Scaling up climate -resilient water and soil management practices for enhanced  smallholder productivity resources management  
• 2.1. Enhanced cooperation among herders on sustainable use and stewardship of shared land and water resources (formalized thr ough Resource 
User Agreements)  
• 2.2. Ecosystems -based adaptation measures to protect land and water resources from the impacts of climate change  
Output 3. Build herder capacity to access markets for sustainably sourced, climate -resilient livestock products   
• 3.1. Identify public -private -community partnerships for sustainably sourced, clima te resilient livestock products   
• 3.2. Establishment and training of Herder Producer Organizations (or cooperatives)   
• 3.3 Improve traceability for sustainably sourced, climate -resilient livestock products  
• 3.4. Generation and dissemination of knowledge prod ucts to support private -sector engagement and herder enfranchisement in climate -resilient 
and sustainable production in Mongolia  
Gender Mainstreaming Output(s ) • Appoint a gender specialist;  
• Allocate gender budget for potential needs - other than the activities described in GAP - in the future;  
• Conduct gender -responsive M&E and reporting;  
• Collect sex/age -disaggregated data for any surveys;  
• Review the core documents with gender perspective, i.e., Opportunity and Risk Analysis on PPCP; Value Chain Analys is; Climate Change Impact, 
Vulnerability, and Risk Assessment; Climate, Risk, and Adaptation Profiles;  
• Ensure balanced inclusion of both men and women members of households to the RUGs and HPOs and other governance mechanisms fr om 
gender equality perspecti ve will be put in place, such as PPCP agreement templates including gender sensitive clauses  
• Ensure gender -balanced participation in trainings (i.e. technical trainings on agriculture, business, value chain, etc. as well as gender t rainings 
targeting HPOs,  NAMEM and aimag level government or community activities) and community activities (i.e. HPO activities, livestock investment 
fairs and Agricultural Development Business Model building activities);  
• Mainstream gender into local level policies, i.e., PPCP a greements; Soum Level Development Plans; Resource Use Agreements (RUA); Watershed 
Plans;


---
*Page 129*
---

H                                                                                        Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                       GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
 
   
 • Break gender stereotypes promoting non gender stereotypical roles by implementing 2 activities a year to include more men or women in non -
typical roles of men . Time constraint for women and the reproductive work burden will be considered.  
Gender Actions  Related Project Outputs and Activities & Detail 
Gender Actions  Indicators/Evidence  Responsible 
Institutions  Timeline  Budget (USD)  – 
costs are 
integrated in to 
budget activities  
1. Appoint a gender expert   
  All Outputs and Activities  Indicator: No. of gender experts  
Baseline: 0 gender expert (2018)  
Target: 1 gender expert (2019 onwards)  
Evidence: ToR for gender expert  UNDP  Y1 - End 100,000  
2. Allocate budget for gender activities to 
remove barriers for gender balanced 
participation  All Outputs and Activities  Indicator: Budget allocation for gender activities 
ensured to remove barriers for gender balanced 
participation  
  UNDP  Y1 - End See below  
3. Conduct gender -responsive M&E and 
reporting  All Outputs and Activities  
By using the GAP, monitor and report gender -
related activities and budget utilization on a 
quarterly basis;  
Ensure that  bi-annual monitoring report captures  
gender -specific project results ; 
Project evaluation report should examine and 
assess  gender -specific results achieved during the 
project . Indicator: GAP  
Baseline: GAP (2018)  
Target: Implement GAP (during the project)  
Evidence: GAP implementation progress documented 
on a quarterly basis  
 
Indicator: Existence of bi -annual monitoring report 
capturing gender -specific project results  
Baseline: 0 (2018)  
Target: 2 Midterm report (End of year)  
Evidence: 2 Midterm report  
 PMU, gender 
expert , UNDP  Y1 - End 50,000


---
*Page 130*
---

H                                                                                        Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                       GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
 
   
 Indicator: Project evaluation report examines and 
assesses gender -specific results achieved during the 
project  
Baseline: 0 (2018)  
Target: Project gender -specific results mentioned in 
project evaluation report  
Evidence: Annual project implementation report; 
Mid-term report; terminal evaluation TORs and 
reports  
4. Collect sex/age -disaggregated data for 
any surveys or assessments including the 
needs assessment  Output 3, Activity 3.2: 
Identify the support needed by women and men 
by analyzing their opportunities and risks in terms 
of participating in PPCP -CRAD, i.e., access to and 
control over information; community discussions; 
business ownership;  
Identify the challenges that men and women 
experience by participating  in HPOs and 
developing joint business strategies with the 
private sector.  Indicator: Assessment  conducted including the sex -
disaggregated data collection  (RCTs)  
Baseline: 0 (2018)  
Target:  Sex -disaggregated data collection checklist 
prepared prior to the needs assessment and needs 
assessment conducted (2019)  
Evidence:  
Needs assessment with sex/age -disaggregated data 
from target areas; consolidation of gender -related 
best practices of  existing initiatives or development 
partners  PMU, gender 
expert, HPOs, 
existing initiatives  Y1 100,000  
5. Review the core documents with 
gender perspective, i.e., Opportunity and 
Risk Analysis on PPCP -CRAD; Value Chain 
Analysis; Climate Change Impact, 
Vulnerability, and Risk Assessment; 
Climate , Risk, and Adaptation Profiles  Output 3, Activity 3.1: 
Include the gender -sensitive screening checklist as 
one of the screening tools for validation of PPCP 
agreements;  
Review the legal template for PPCP agreements 
with a gender perspective by ensuring gender 
balanced particip ation and including gender -
sensitive contents in the agreements - address the 
identified needs of male and female herders and 
elaborate the benefits that private sector can gain 
by engaging with HPOs.  Indicator: Existence of the g ender -sensitive screening 
checklist  for validation of PPCP agreements, for 
implementation of the Climate Change Impact, 
Vulnerability, and Risk Assessments (CCIVRA) and for 
preparation of business proposals  
Baseline: No (2018)  
Target: Yes (2019)  
Evidence:   gender -sensitive screening checklist  for 
the aforementioned core documents  
 PMU, gender 
expert, HPOs  Y1 5,000


---
*Page 131*
---

H                                                                                        Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                       GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
 
   
  
Output 3, Activity 3.2: 
When supporting HPOs to prepare business 
proposals, review the findings of opportunity and 
risk analysis, done under Activity 3.1.1, as a 
baseline to utilize and maximize the strengths of 
female business runners on business proposals.  
 
Output 2, Activity 2.1: 
When conducting the Climate Change Impact, 
Vulnerability, and Risk Assessments (CCIVRA), 
identify  how people of different gender have 
dissimilar advantages and disadvantages against 
climate change adaptation.  Indicator: Gender equality mainstreamed into the 
PPCP agreements and actions  
Baseline: No (2018)  
Target: Yes (2019)  
Evidence: Gender mainstreamed into PPCP 
agreements/actions, the Climate Change Impact, 
Vulnerability, and Risk Assessments (CCIVRA) and 
business proposals   
10,000  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20,000  
6. Ensure gender -balanced participation 
in trainings (i.e. technical trainings on 
agriculture, business, value chain, etc. as 
well as gender trainings targeting HPOs, 
NANEM and aimag level government or 
community activities) and community 
activities (i.e. HPO activities, livestock 
investment fairs and Agricultural 
Development Business M odel building 
activities)  
 Output 3, Activity 3.2: 
As PMU will act as the manager to oversee PPCP -
CRAD, provide trainings that can guide PMU to 
raise their gender sensitivity and enhance gender 
mainstreaming strategies;  
Ensure women herders’ active partici pation in 
livestock investment fairs to identify PPCP 
opportunities by using appropriate information 
dissemination methods and holding the events 
where women are more accessible and when they 
are less involved with house chores, caretaking 
responsibilities  and seasonal livestock -related 
tasks;  
Ensure gender -balanced participation in 
developing integrated agricultural development 
business model in order to address different 
needs and befits from the project by gender. Use Indicator:  Technical as well as gender trainings 
targeting project beneficiaries provided  
Baseline: 0 (F:M=0:0), 2017  
Target: (F:M=50%:50%),  2018  
Evidence: List of participants for training; gender -
sensitive/technical advisory training materials; 
gender -sensitive questionnaires to monitor the 
impact of training  
 
Indicator: No. of case studies documenting project 
results from the perspective of both men and women  
Baseline: 0 (2018)  
Target: 6 (2024)  
Evidence: published case studies in media, on 
project/UNDP websites and presented in the 
knowledge -sharing workshops  
 PMU, gender 
expert, HPOs, 
NANEM, NEMA, 
local government 
officials of target 
areas  
  Y2 or 3  50,000


---
*Page 132*
---

H                                                                                        Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                       GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
 
   
 information dissemination methods and choose 
locations and timing that can involve both men 
and women effectively;  
 
Output 3, Activity 3.2: 
Set up HPOs and provide trainings for them by 
ensuring gender -balanced participation – for 
instance, general management and financial 
training to HPO leaders;  
Develop questionnaires to monito r sex -
disaggregated impact of trainings for HPOs;  
Ensure gender -balanced participation when 
providing market specific trainings in production, 
post -harvest processing, post -harvest value 
addition and on -sight storage.  
 
Output 1, Activity 1.3:  
Based on the  business proposal developed by 
HPOs, provide targeted technical assistance to 
build capacity related to climate resilient  value 
chains ensuring gender -balanced participation;  
Provide technical assistance for women to build 
niche high -end value chains – for instance organic 
certification, traceability, humane processing and 
ISO standardization – through trainings.  
 
Output 2, Activity 2.1: 
When establishing community -based Resource 
User Groups (RUGs), ensure gender -balanced 
participation by using appropriate information 
dissemination methods and choosing convenient Indicator:  No. of participants in the livestock fairs 
disaggregated by sex  
Baseline: 0 (2018)  
Target:  
Evidence: Participation list of l ivestock investment 
fairs (F:M=50%:50%); gender -sensitive invitations for 
community activities  
 
Indicator: No. of RUGs led by women  
Baseline:  
Target:  
Evidence:  
 
Indicator: Gender equality committee is represented 
in decision making body  over climate cha nge and risk 
management issues  
Baseline:  
Target:  
Evidence: A minutes of the report or decision decree   
 
 
 
50,000  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100,000  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50,000


---
*Page 133*
---

H                                                                                        Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                       GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
 
   
  meeting time for women and men Ensure that 
gender -balanced participation in R UGs leads to 
better incorporation of women’s voice when 
developing Rangeland Use Agreements.  
7. Mainstream gender into local level 
policies, i.e., PPCP agreements; Soum 
Level Development Plans; Resource Use 
Agreements (RUA); Watershed Plans  Output 1, Activity 1.3: 
Incorporate the gender -related findings of CCIVRA 
into development planning to guide adaptation 
measures in four target aimags.  
 
Output  1, Activity 1.3: 
Review the national and sub -national policies and 
strategies on land water management, climate 
change -related forecasts with a gender 
perspective, and identify the gaps and entry 
points in regard to gender mainstreaming;  
Ensure gender -balanced participation in 
developing Soum Level Development Plans and 
Resource Use Agreements (RUAs), and make sure 
gender -sensitive recommendations are included 
in these d ocuments;  Indicator: No. of gender mainstreamed planning 
documents and agreements  
Baseline: 0 (2018)  
Target:  
Evidence: Gender mainstreamed lo cal level policies 
such as PPCP agreements; Soum Level Development 
Plans; Resource Use Agreements (RUA); Watershe d 
Plans  
 PMU, gender 
expert, Local 
government  Y1 - End 20,000  
 
 
 
 
10,000  
8. Break gender stereotypes promoting 
non gender stereotypical roles by 
implementing 2 activities a year to 
include more men or women in non -
typical roles of men.  - Indicator: No. of events held that promote non 
gender stereotypical roles  
Baseline 0 (2018)  
Target:  2 activities implemented per  year (during the 
project)  Gender expert, 
PMU, local 
government  Y1-End 20,000


---
*Page 134*
---

H                                                                   Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
                                                                                GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
   
  
 
   
 IX. Tables  
 
Table -1: GRADUATES OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS OF ALL LEVELS  at the beginning of an academic year, by 
sex, year  
Unit: thousand persons  
Classification  2015  2014  2013  
 National t otal number  111.8  127.7  162.2  
 Of which: female  59.1  67.5  73.1  
 General education 
schools  56.4  
73.5  85.1  
 Of which: female  29.3  37.5  43.4  
 Technical and vocational 
schools  19.5  
19 18.4  
 Of which: female  8.0 8.1 8.0 
 Universities, Institutes 
and colleges  35.9  
35.2  33.9  
 Of which: female  21.8  21.9  21.7  
Source: National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
 
Table -2: MONTHLY AVERAGE WAGES AND SALARIES, by divisions, sex, quarter  
Unit: thousand  MNT (₮) 
By divisions  Sex The first 
quarter of 
2017  The first 
quarter of 
2016  The first 
quarter of 
2015  
National average  
  
  Total  959.14  871.4  851.4  
 Male  1,042.43  936.4  923.1  
Female  879.28  809.6  782.1  
Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting  Total  697.29  647.8  697.7  
 Male  714.48  661.4  735.5  
Female  676.85  633.1  657.4  
Source: National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
 
Table -3: SMALL AND MEDIUM  ENTERPRISES  in Mongolia  
Enterprise category  Sector  Number of Employees  Annual turnover in MNT (₮)  
Small  All sectors  ≤19 employees  ≤MNT (₮) 250 mln  
 Services  ≤49 employees  ≤MNT (₮) 1.0 bln  
Medium  Wholesale  ≤149 employees  ≤MNT(₮) 1.5 bln  
 Retail/Manufacturing  ≤199 employees  ≤MNT(₮) 1.5 bln  
Source: http://www.mongolianlaws.com/#   
 
Table -4: REGISTRED UNEMPLOYED, by sex, by region, by month  
 Sex 2017 Sept.  2016 Sept.  
National  Total  25,350  29,192  
  Female  13,920  15,847  
Zavkhan  Total  1,063  574 
  Female  606 312 
Khovd  Total  1,182  925 
  Female  664 524


---
*Page 135*
---

H  Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
Dornod  Total  1,093  1,024  
Female  497 518 
Sukhbaatar  Total  807 865 
 Female  404 423 
Source: National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
Table -5: DISABILITY PERSON S, by sex, aimag, year  
Aimag  Sex 2016  2015  2014  
National  Total  100,993  101,730  99,573  
 Female  45,235  45,296  44,709  
Zavkhan  Total  3,618  3,723  3,921  
 Female  1,685  1,714  1,727  
Khovd  Total  2,832  2,958  3,025  
 Female  1,238  1,268  1,280  
Dornod  Total  4,137  4,258  4,025  
 Female  1,765  1,847  1,715  
Sukhbaatar  Total  2,649  2,696  2,665  
 Female  1,090  1,124  1,107  
Source: National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
Table -6: NUMBER OF SENIOR SINGLE -HEADED HOUSEHOLDS OVER65 YEARS OLD, by sex, aimag, year  
Indicators  Sex 2016  2015  
National  Total  34,060  33,007  
 Male  9,294  9,369  
 Female  24,766  23,638  
Zavkhan  Total  1,797  1,675  
 Male  417 460 
 Female  1,380  1,215  
Khovd  Total  1,256  1,315  
 Male  317 331 
 Female  939 984 
Dornod  Total  637 519 
 Male  227 187 
 Female  410 332 
Sukhbaatar   Total  952 852 
 Male  163 204 
Female  789 648 
Source: National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
Table -7: GENDER INEQUALTIY INDEX, by region, aimags and the capital  
Aimag  2016  2015  2014  2013  2012  
National  0.335  0.289  0.294  0.323  0.345  
Zavkhan  0.289  0.264  0.261  0.241  0.348  
Khovd  0.806  0.815  0.789  0.815  0.803  
Dornod  0.841  0.841  0.842  0.841  0.819  
Sukhbaatar  0.836  0.816  0.821  0.819  0.822  
Source: National Statistics Office (NSO) www.1212.mn  
______________________