=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20200721154307+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20074
/ModDate: D:20200723141256+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20074
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
18 – 21 August 2020  
Virtual meeting  
Provisional agenda item 11  GCF/B. 26/02/Add.0 5 
28 July 2020 
Consideration of funding proposals -  
Addendum V 
Funding proposal package f or FP 133 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Resilience to hurricanes in the building sector in Antigua 
and Barbuda "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.26/02 /Add.05 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 91 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  92 
Secretariat’s assessment  94 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   110  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  119  
Gender documentation  120


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  Resilience to hurricanes in the building sector in Antigua and 
Barbuda 
Country(ies):  Antigua and Barbuda  
Accredited Entity:  Department of Environment, Antigua and Barbuda  
Date of first submission:  2019/11/09  
Date of current submission  2019/11/09   
Version number  V.001


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 0 OF 86  
Contents 
S
ection A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
Section H ANNEXES   
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
•Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
•Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes  must be
r
eflected in all relevant documents.
•The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual
service standard time.
•The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.
•Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4
.
P
lease submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name]- [Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 1 OF 86 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP ) Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)  Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment:    
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
 
 
34% 
Enter number % 
66% 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  Indicate t CO2eq over 
lifespan  A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  Direct beneficiaries: 
~73,216 people (52% of 
which are women and 48% 
of which are men)  
Indirect beneficiaries: the 
entire population of Antigua 
and Barbuda (equivalent to 
~96,000 people) . 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  46.1 million  USD  
A.9. Project size  Small (Upto USD 50 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  32.7 million  USD  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding   
☒ Grant  32.7 million USD   
☐ Loan   Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  6 years  A.12. Total lifespan  50 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  11/8/2019  A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☐    No ☒ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Antigua and Barbuda Ministry of Finance  
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 2 OF 86 
 Historically, Antigua and Barbuda had only been directly hit by relatively low -intensity tropical storms, with those 
reaching hurricane status seldom strengthening above Category 3  and with one c onfirmed  Category 4. Consequently, 
building codes in Antigua and Barbuda did not prescribe the construction methods/technologies required to withstand 
above a Category 3 hurricane. While designing buildings to withstand up to a Category 3 hurricane was suf ficient in the 
past, the increasing intensity and frequency of hurricanes hitting the country is having severe impacts on the built 
environment and population. Climate change projections under both the RCP4.5 and 8.5 scenarios indicate that, 
although the t otal number of storms is not expected to change significantly, there will be an increase in the frequency 
of high- intensity storms (Category 4 and 5 hurricanes) experienced by Antigua and Barbuda. The increasing intensity 
of hurricanes is already evident i n the country. The return rate of Category 4 hurricanes in the first half of the 20th 
century was 1 in 50 years  compared with the latter half of the century , when the return period for Category  4 hurricanes 
shortened to 1 in 10 years . The only Category 5 hurricanes in recorded history  to affect the country have occurred very 
recently, namely  Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017.  The first of these, Hurricane Irma, was a direct hit on Barbuda 
and resulted in the destruction of ~95% of all infrastructure on the island. The combined impact of the 2017 hurricanes 
amounted to ~US$136 million in damages and ~US$19 million in post hurricane economic losses, with total recovery 
costs estimated at US$222 million.  The cost related to loss of revenue to the economy up to 12 months after the 
hurricane is not included here.  
Following a Category 5 hurricane, power and water supply in Antigua and Barbuda can be disrupted for 3 - 24 months, 
while damage to communication and transport infrastructure disrupts associated services for up to 6 months, with 
considerable impacts on the country’s economy. In addition to the general disruption of economic acti vities, food and 
medical imports, which are mostly brought in by ship, are disrupted for several weeks after an extreme event, impacting 
the health and wellness of local communities. These impacts are exacerbated by the significant damage caused by 
hurricanes to critical public service infrastructure, which limits the capacity of emergency services as well as the National 
Office of Disaster Services (NODS) to prepare for and respond to extreme climate events. The capacity of the country 
to prepare for a hur ricane is further constrained by inadequate early warning systems and the absence of formalised 
communication and early action protocols. Given the projected increase in the frequency of Category 4 and 5 
hurricanes, the combined impacts on the economy and wellness of local communities will become increasingly severe 
in the absence of urgent adaptation interventions.  
 
At present, the country has limited technical and financial capacity to fully address the impacts of Category 4 and 5 
hurricanes on critical public service and community buildings through domestic sources of financing – including both 
private and public sector finance.  This is because, although Antigua and Barbuda is considered a middle income country 
on a per -capita basis, its size and small population means that it lacks the scale required to invest adequately in 
adaptation. The country also has a high public debt burden which, in 2018 , reached ~US$1. 4 billion — more than 88% 
of the country’s GDP. This burden is increased by extreme climate events, with recovery needs reducing economic growth and the ability of the country to repay public debt. Although this debt was expected to decline by 2019, long 
standing problems in the fiscal and banking sectors remain unresolved, including this public debt as well as persistent 
large financing gaps, high rates of non-performing loans caused by repeated extreme weather related disasters and 
the delay in bank resolution. Consequently, the Government of Antigua and Barbuda (GoAB) is requesting GCF grant 
finance,  which will be combined with government co- financing to initiate a paradigm shift within the country’s building 
sector towards climate- resilient sustainable development. Specifically , the proposed project will create an enabling 
environment for existing infrastructure to be upgraded to withstand the impacts of Category 4 and 5 hurri canes – which 
have sustained wind speeds of over 200km/h –  as well as for all future development to be equipped to withstand these 
impacts. This transformative change in the country’s approach to climate- resilience will be achieved by: i) enhancing 
the cli mate resilience of critical public service and community buildings through increasing the structural integrity of 
these buildings to withstand Category 4 and 5 hurricanes; ii) ensuring the uninterrupted supply of power and water to 
critical buildings durin g extreme climate events; iii) mainstreaming climate change adaptation into the building sector 
as well as public and private financial, insurance and banking sectors; and iv) strengthening climate information services 
in Antigua and Barbuda to facilitate early action  to secure non- category 4 and  5 buildings as early as possible after a 
hurricane warning has been issued. By focusing initially on critical public service and community buildings, the project 
will ensure the uninterrupted provision of critical services – including health, fire, rescue and police. This will facilitate 
rapid recovery after an extreme climate event, reducing economic downtime and improving the lives and welfare of 
local communities. Furthermore, mainstreaming climate resilience int o national building regulations, combined with 
strengthening the capacity of local authorities, building inspectors, engineers, architects and draughtsmen to adhere to these regulations, will promote the upscaling of adaptation interventions across the country’s entire building sector.


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 3 OF 86 
 Overall, the project will confer direct adaptation benefits to ~73,216 vulnerable people in Antigua and Barbuda , and 
indirect benefits to the entire population of the country,  by reducing the adverse impacts of extreme climate events on 
human life and enabling the country’s major economic sectors to resume business as usual more quickly following 
these events. Direct health benefits are also expected to incur through the improve d provision  of clean water,  increased 
operability of clinics during a storm,  integration of storm shelters into existing clinics and improved storage for vital 
medication that are usually damaged by an intense storm.  Further benefits are expected across the Caribbean, with 
Antigua and Barbuda serving as an example of climate- adaptive building practices for Small Island Developing States 
(SIDS).


---
*Page 8*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 86 
   
  
1 United Nations. World Population Prospects. Available at: https://population.un.org/wpp/DataQuery/. Accessed on 8 July 2019.  
2 Government of Antigua and Barbuda. 2011. Population and Housing census.  
3 The following explanation clarifies the use of the ter ms ‘hurricanes’, ‘tropical storms’ and ‘high- intensity storms’ in this Funding Proposal: The 
Saffir -Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale defines a hurricane as having sustained wind speeds of more than 74 mph (119 kmh), while a tropi cal 
storm has sustained wind speeds of less than 38 mph (61 kmh). Hurricanes are therefore likely to result in more damage to infrastructure and 
loss of life than tropical storms. Additionally, Category 4 and 5 hurricanes are considered to be high- intensity storms because of the associated 
sustained wind speeds of these hurricanes. According to the Saffir -Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale, Category 4 hurricanes have sustained wind 
speeds of 130– 156 mph (209– 251 kmh) while Category 5 hurricanes have sustained wind speeds upwards of 157 mph (252 kmh).     
4 Further details on Antigua and Barbuda’s vulnerability to climate threats are presented in Section 3 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
5 Further information on the country’s financial challenges are presented in Section B.5 of the Funding Propos al, and specific details on these 
challenges can be found at the following reference: International Monetary Fund. 2015. Antigua and Barbuda. IMF Country Repor t number 
15/189.  
6 Further information about the geographic, climatic and socio- economic context in Antigua and Barbuda is presented in Annex 2: Feasibility 
Study (Section 2).  
7 Government of Antigua and Barbuda. Antigua and Barbuda Recovery Needs Assessment.  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate rationale and con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Context  
Antigua and Barbuda forms part of the Leeward Islands in the eastern Caribbean. Most of the population, ~94 ,400 
people, live on the island of Antigua, with a further ~1,600 residing in Barbuda1,2. As a small island developing state 
(SIDS), Antigua and Barbuda is among the most vulnerable countries to extreme climate events such as hurricanes 
and tropical storms3,4. This vulnerability is exacerbated by the country’s long- standing macroeconomic and financial 
problems5, with extreme climate events having significant impacts on the lives and livelihoods of local communities, as 
well as the local economy. In particular, damage to critical public infrastructure — including centralised power and water 
supplies, roads, hospitals, clinics, emergency services, telecommunications and schools — leads not only to disruptions 
to economic activity, but also to considerable recovery cost s after an event. Moreover, it often takes several months for 
the country to recover from such disruptions, which leads to considerable declines in economic productivity and quality 
of life.6  
 
Climate Rationale  
Historically, Antigua and Barbuda has only been hit by relatively low -intensity tropical storms, with those reaching 
hurricane status seldom strengthening above Category 3. The return rate of Category 4 hurricanes in the first half of 
the 20th century was only 1 in 50 years, and until 2017, the country had never experienced a Category 5 hurricane  
(Figure 1a ). Consequently, building codes in Antigua and Barbuda did not prescribe the construction 
methods/technologies required to withstand above a Category 3 hurricane. While designing buildings to withstand up 
to a Category 3 hurricane was sufficient in the past, the increasing intensity of hurricanes hitting the country (Figure 1b)  
is having severe impacts on the country’s built environment and population. For  example, Hurricane Irma in 2017 
resulted in the destruction of ~95% of all infrastructure on Barbuda, with total recovery costs estimated at US$222 million
7. The recent occurrence of several Category 5 hurricanes  in the region have also driven up insurance prices in 
Antigua and Barbuda, this is true even if the event does not make landfall in the country. This trend of increasing 
intensity  of storms within the Caribbean region  is projected to continue in the coming century (see analysis below) . 
Urgent adaptation measures for the building sector are therefore needed to address the impacts of climate change on the country. Further details on the climate change risks and impacts for Antigua and Barbuda are described b elow.


---
*Page 9*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 86 
   
  
8 Details on the return periods of hurricanes and tropical storms within a range of 15 to 105 nautical miles are presented in Section 2 of Annex 2: 
Feasibility Study.  
  
 
Figure 1. A: Historical data showing the frequency of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes in Antigua and Barbuda between 1900 and 2019. 
While the data is too sparse to conduct a statistical trend analysis, there is a noticeable increase in the frequency of Category 4 
hurricanes in the latter half of the century, with the first ever Category 5 hurricanes observed in 2017.  B: Historical data showing the 
average wind speeds of tropical storms and hurricanes in the Eastern Caribbean. Although not statistically significant, an increasing 
trend has been observed in the average wind speed of storms in the region.  
Climate change risks  
Hurricanes and tropical storms are the main climatic hazards affecting Antigua and Barbuda. Since 1995, the country 
has experienced 15 hurricanes and 14 tropical storms. Most of these storms ranged from Category 1 to 3 in magnitude,  
with the notable exceptions of Hurricanes  Luis in 2005 (Category 4) , and Irma and Maria in 2017, which were the only 
Category 5 hurricanes that have affected the country and region in recorded history .8 The frequency and intensity of 
these storms is strongly correlated to: i) high sea surface temperature (SST) in the major development region (MDR); 
ii) decreasing vertical wind shear (VWS) in the mid- troposphere during depression development; and iii) cha nges in the 
La Niña phase of the El Niño  Southern Oscillation (ENSO). In the lead up to Hurricane Irma in 2017, the SST anomaly 
from baseline climatic conditions was shown to be in the order of 1°C in the region to the south- east of Antigua and 
Barbuda. Hurricane Irma was fluctuating between Category 2 and 3 strength before being deflected west south- west 
by a high- pressure system back over the area of warmer ocean9. This increased SST gave energy to the depression, 
contributing to its development into a C ategory 5 hurricane. The analyses below use these parameters to demonstrate 
the expected increase in the intensity of hurricanes over the next century.  00.511.522.5Number of storms
Cat. 4 Cat. 5A
5060708090100110Wind Speed (knots)B


---
*Page 10*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 86 
   
  
 
11 These representative concentration pathways (RCPs) are based on the main forcing agents of climate change, including GHG emis sions, GHG 
concentrations and land- use change. RCP4. 5 represents the likely best -case scenario with a peak radiative forcing of 4.5 W/m2 (~650 ppm CO2 
eq) at stabilisation after 2100. RCP8.5 represents a very high GHG emission scenario with a peak radiative forcing of 8.5 W/m 2 (~1,370 ppm CO2 
eq) and no expected stabilisation in emissions. RCP8.5 indicates a business as usual scenario where the rate of GHG emissions continues to 
increase with no mitigation measures.  
12 Kossin J. 2018. A global slowdown of tropical -cyclone translation speed. Nature.  558: 104– 107.    
To determine how climate change is likely to result in more favourable conditions for hurricane development, two factors 
were assessed, namely: i) SST over the oceans in the lead up pathway for most hurricanes affecting Antigua and 
Barbuda; and ii) VWS in three 4° x 4° locations in the MDRs ( Figure 2). An analysis of the projected ENSO cycle under 
future climate scenarios was not undertaken because of the uncertainty in the relevant literature10. 
 
 
Figure 2. Vertical wind shear (VWS) and sea surface temperature (SST) domains used for the analysis of  major development 
region s (MDR s) for hurricanes that affect Antigua and Barbuda.  Lines show the historical trajectories of hurricanes.  
 
Climate change projections under both the RCP4.5 and 8.5 scenarios11 indicate that , although the total number of 
storms is not expected to change significantly, there will be an increase in the frequency of high- intensity storms 
(Category 4 and 5 hurricanes) experienced by Antigua and Barbuda. Furthermore, a 20% slow -down in storm 
translation speed over land for Atlantic storms  has been observed. These speeds are likely to continue decreasing 
under future conditions of climate change, resulting in heavier rainfall events  and increased flood risk.12 The changes 
in hurricane patterns are as a result of the projected changes in SST and VWS, which were assessed in the MDRs 
where most extreme climate events affecting the country develop ( Figure 2 above). The results from this assessment 
show that under RCP8.5, SST in the 50th percentile is likely to increase from the baseline conditions by 2°C in 2050 
and nearly 4°C by 2100 ( Figure 3) in the SST MDR.


---
*Page 11*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 86 
   
  
13 The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Fifth assessment report. Available at: https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment- report/ar5/ . 
Accessed on: 19 September 2019.   
Figure 3. Sea surface temperature (SST) anomaly yearly for RCP4.5 (left) and RCP8.5 (right).  
 
In addition to the increasing SST, a general decreasing trend in VWS is expected under both RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 climate scenarios ( Figure 4) and across all MDRs. Such decreases, combined with increasing SST, will create more 
favourable conditions for the development of high- intensity storms in the MDRs assessed. These key findings are 
supported by the most recent IPCC AR5 report, which emphasises an expected 50% increase in the frequency of high-
intensity storms, along with increases in the magnitude of these events and their associated maximum wind speeds
13.  
 
 
 -2.0-1.0 - 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
1900 1919 1939 1959 1979 1999 2019 2039 2059 2079 2099Change in Sea Surface Temperature ( °C)
CanESM2 CSIRO-Mk3-6-0 GFDL-CM3
GFDL-ESM2G GFDL-ESM2M GISS-E2-H
GISS-E2-H-CC GISS-E2-R-CC HadGEM2-AO
HadGEM2-ES MIROC-ESM MIROC-ESM-CHEM
Average - RCP4.5-2.0-1.0 - 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
1900 1919 1939 1959 1979 1999 2019 2039 2059 2079 2099Change in Sea Surface Temperature ( °C)
CanESM2 CSIRO-Mk3-6-0 GFDL-CM3
GFDL-ESM2G GFDL-ESM2M GISS-E2-H
GISS-E2-H-CC GISS-E2-R-CC HadGEM2-AO
HadGEM2-ES MIROC-ESM MIROC-ESM-CHEM
Average - RCP8.5
-25%-20%-15%-10%-5%0%5%10%
MDR1
August
RCP4.5MDR1
August
RCP8.5MDR2
August
RCP4.5MDR2
August
RCP8.5MDR3
August
RCP4.5MDR3
August
RCP8.51950 - 1980
1980 - 2010
2010 - 2040
2040 - 2070
2070 - 2100
-25%-20%-15%-10%-5%0%5%10%
MDR1
September
RCP4.5MDR1
September
RCP8.5MDR2
September
RCP4.5MDR2
September
RCP8.5MDR3
September
RCP4.5MDR3
September
RCP8.51950 - 1980
1980 - 2010
2010 - 2040
2040 - 2070
2070 - 2100


---
*Page 12*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 86 
   
  
14 A detailed cost -benefit analysis is presented in Annex 3 and summarised in Section D.6 of the Funding Proposal. This analysis describes what 
the projected costs of extreme climate events will be in Antigua and Barbuda with and without project interventions  under baseline and projected 
climate change scenarios.  
15 Alternative methodologies that seek to address deficiencies in the SSHWS as a granular measure of a hurricane’s potential impact are 
investigated and presented in Section 3.3.3 of Annex 2: Feasibil ity Study.   
Figure 4. Change in VWS from August (top) to October (bottom) for MDR1- 3 and under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios . Climate 
change impacts and vulnerability   
Given that Category 4 and 5 hurricanes are expected to occur more frequently under future climate conditions, the 
combined impacts of intense rainfall and strong winds will become increasingly severe in the absence of urgent adaptation interventions.  This will have severe impacts on the lives and livelihoods of local communities as well as the 
economy as a whole
14. Following a Category 5 hurricane, power and water supply can be disrupted for up to 24 months, 
while damage to communication and transport infrastructure disrupts associated services for up to 6 months. 
Furthermore, rough seas and inflated insurance premiums after a storm disrupts the import of vital food, medical and building supplies for several weeks after an extreme climate event. The ability of the country to respond to such events 
is constrained by the vulnerability of critical public services, including healthcare, police, fire and rescue services as 
well as government coordination and response agencies. Disruption to these services caused by damages to critical infrastructure reduces the efficiency and effectiveness of emergency response and delays recovery. This vulnerability 
is further exacerbated by limited capacity within Antigua and Barbuda’s Meteorological Services (ABMS ) for early 
warning and preparatory action in response to an extreme climate event.  To determine the most appropriate sites to 
receive project interventions  and ensure that maximum benefits are realised as a result of these interventions , a climate 
vulnerability analysis was conducted.  This analy sis included a hydraulic flood analysis as well as a walk -time analysis 
to determine the total coverage of project interventions and support justification for the project to primarily address the 
impacts of C ategory 4 and 5 hurricanes . The findings from this analysis are presented in Section B. 3 of this Funding 
Proposal , as well as in Section 10 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
 Rationale for the use of the Saffir -Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale (SSHWS)  as the operational meteorology 
measure for the proposed project  
The current assessment for the project utilises the Saffir -Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale (SSHWS) as the currently 
accepted, applied and projected academic and operational meteorology measure. There are,  however , potential 
limitations with the SSHWS as a robust and granular measure of a tropical cyclone ’s potential impact both in observed 
records and for projecting future tropical cyclone activity. This deficiency is based on the wide v ariety of noted , on-the-
ground impacts within a given hurricane category as a result of being classified primarily by maximum sustained 
windspeed. However, given the data input  requirements (ocean– atmosphere –energy interaction, wind  intensity 
duration, wind speed threshold radii) of alternative hurricane impact indices, the weakness of climate models to 
accurately simulate these extreme dynamics, and the limited uptake of these scales in academics as well as  by the 
IPCC, the use of the SSHWS remains more feasible.
15 
 
Baseline projects, programmes and initiatives  
Considerable baseline investments are being made through public expenditure and donor -funded initiatives to increase 
the resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector to extreme climate events. Lessons learned and best practices 
from these investments have been incorporated into the design of the proposed project to replicate successful 
adaptation techniques and ensure that there is complementarity between the project and existing actions. During project 
development, the most relevant baseline investments that will be complemented by the proposed project interventions  
were identified. Following this  identification, an analysis of each of these projects was conducted to ensure that the 
proposed project will not duplicate or adversely affect these ongoing initiatives. Instead, GCF resources will be used to -25%-20%-15%-10%-5%0%5%10%
MDR1
October
RCP4.5MDR1
October
RCP8.5MDR2
October
RCP4.5MDR2
October
RCP8.5MDR3
October
RCP4.5MDR3
October
RCP8.51950 - 1980
1980 - 2010
2010 - 2040
2040 - 2070
2070 - 2100


---
*Page 13*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 86 
   
  
16 A comprehensive list of baseline projects, programmes and initiatives as well as details of their focus and alignment with the proposed project 
is presented in Section 6 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  enable project interventions to build on and c omplement existing initiatives to achieve maximum adaptation impact in 
the target sector.  The most relevant baseline investments, including a description of how the proposed project will 
complement these investments, are presented below16.   
 
The Government of Antigua and Barbuda (GoAB) is currently implementing a project entitled Building climate resilience 
through innovative financing mechanisms for climate change adaptation  (2016– 2020; SCCF; US$11,390,000) , funded 
by a grant of US$5 million  from the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF)  and co- financing  from the GoAB . Among its 
four primary focus areas  are: i) developing innovative financing mechanisms to fund adaptation interventions through 
the Sustainable Island Resource Framework Fund (SIRF Fund) , including for the building sector ; and ii) s trengthening 
national policies and plans to promote adaptation to climate change through inter alia  updating the national building 
code, which includes considerations for Category 4 and 5 hurricanes.   In its current form, the SIRF Fund is optimised 
for small grants and a revolving loan program.  Small grants are provided to vulnerable Community Buildings in 
vulnerable areas  of the country such as churches, schools and community centres . The revolving fund program is 
highly concessional non- collateralize loans to individual homeowners.  The loan portfolio for  individual applications is 
capped at 5% of the  total funds available at a given time.   The loans are to be used for the incremental cost of the 
climate interventions only and cannot be used for normal construction cost. The Incremental cost is calculated by identifying the agreed adaptation interventi ons and what is normal construction cost. The SIRF Fund is the only finding 
mechanism of this type in Antigua and Barbuda. It is designed to not compete with the local private financial sector . At 
this time and based on the capital in the fund , no individual loan can exceed $400,000 USD. This acts as a barrier to 
small - to medium- sized businesses, which often require larger investments  to implement the incremental costs related 
to adaptation interventions.  The proposed GCF project  will complement  the SCCF -funded project  as well as to set the 
stage for the scaling up to the private sector by the following (a)  the demonstration of the DCA building codes on 
government buildings (b) provide a new source of trained construction workers in the public and private sectors who 
can deliver work to meet the new code (c) the project for the first time will mainstream and increase demand for 
renewable energy installers and will generate  interest in this field for young students  and finally (d) provi de additional 
evidence based incremental cost calculation to the SIRF Fund for buildings used for a business .  With information and 
lessons learnt from this GCF project , the SIRF Fund can now establish a window for small businesses.  During the 
implementation of Activity 2.2, options for increasing financial inflows into the SIRF Fund will be investigated (through 
consultations with relevant public and private sector actors) to increase the available financial resources to address the anticipated cost and other barriers to the implementation of the new code and the scaling up of the number of resilient 
buildings in the country. This will increase the amount of financing av ailable for access by the public and private sector, 
which will in turn enable these entities to implement more / larger -scale adaptation interventions on their buildings more 
rapidly. GCF resources from this project will not be used to capitalise this fun d, fill funding gaps or retroactively finance 
activities already under development or implementation other programmes / initiatives.  
 
The Global Climate Change Alliance (GCCA)  climate change adaptation and sustainable land management in the 
Eastern Caribbean (2013– 2018; US$14,575,000)  project  is closely aligned with the SCCF -funded project in that it 
supported mainstreaming climate change adaptation into policymaking. Although t here is alignment, the building code 
— which is being updated to meet the design requirements for future climate scenarios — is not included in the country’s 
as part of the national regulatory framework.  The building code however enjoys wide range of comp liance since the 
banks and the physical planning department (i.e. Development Control Authority [DCA] ) require that the plans for 
construction are designed to the code. If the plans are not approved by the DCA the banks will not fund the project.   
This approach actually demonstrates  the value of Article  2(1)(c) of the Paris Agreement  2015 (i.e. making fina nce flows 
consistent with a low emission and climate resilient development pathway) and is a valuable mechanism to effect 
change. The  fact that the code is just a standard therefore does not necessarily limit the ability of the government to 
enforce the climate- proofing technologies proposed under the revised building code. The proposed project however 
will seek to move the building codes from a standard to a legal requirement  which allow s for the Government to include 
clear financial incentives to reduce the barriers hindering full implementation of the code. To this end the project will : i) 
draft amendments to the Physical Planning Act (PPA)  to make provision for the inclusion of the n ational building code 
in the country’s regulatory framework ; and ii) raising awareness of and providing training for relevant technical staff 
from inter alia Ministry of Works ( MoW ) and Development Control Authority ( DCA ), as well as building inspectors, 
engineers, architects and draughtsmen on the application of the updated PPA and national building code  and iii) along


---
*Page 14*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 86 
   
  
17 Abu Dhabi Fund for Development  with the ADFD17 project (parallel financi ng of RE in the private and public sectors) will demonstrate the bulk purchasing 
of RE equipment for the private sector .  In so doing, project interventions may be able to create a stronger enabling 
environment for the upscaling and replication of climate -resilient solutions across Antigua and Barbuda’s building 
sector.  This approach,  however , has risk s since there is a greater than 50% increase in the cost between a Category 
3 and a C ategory 5 code.  This will in turn limit the ability of most citizens as well as the Government to meet this code.  
 
A further two projects are currently being implemented in Antigua and Barbuda to increase the climate resilience of the country’s built environment, namely: i) An integrated approach to physical adapt ation and community resilience in 
Antigua and Barbuda’s northwest McKinnon’s watershed (2017– 2020; AF; US$9,970,000) ; and ii) Integrated physical 
adaptation and community resilience through an enhanced direct access pilot in the public, private, and civil society 
sectors of three Eastern Caribbean small island developing states  (2018– 2023 ; GCF; US$20,000,000) . Both of these 
projects  address resilience through a multi -stakeholder approach and include private sector and NGO owned buildings 
and promotes flood reduction using an ecosystems -based approach. The focus of these projects is  on drainage 
infrastructure to prevent flooding and vector management combined with the establishment of community shelters  using 
NGO and community buildings  rather than schools . As described above, building the climate resilience of critical public 
services to the impacts of climate change is essential for reduc ing economic downtime and faster recover after an 
extreme climate  event. These projects focus on private sector and community buildings, and will involve the 
implement ation of  climate- proofing measures on publicly owned and maintained critical public service and community 
buildings . Resilience interventions will also include decentralised renewable energy and climate- resilient water -
harvesting solutions.  
 
Complementarity within Antigua and Barbuda’s GCF Country Programme    
The proposed project forms an integral part of Antigua and Barbuda’s GCF Country Programme. The current portfolio 
under the Country Programme has been specifically designed to take a holistic approach to climate change adaptation 
and mitigation in Antigua and Barbuda. Each project addresses a specific element of climate risk in the country, with 
the concept of complementarity underpinning the entire portfolio. These projects are focused on inter alia climate -
proofing the country’s -built environment, mainstr eaming climate resilience into the financial sector in Antigua and 
Barbuda and initiating a paradigm shift within the transport and electricity sectors towards low -emission s development.  
 Although hurricanes are considered the most urgent climate hazard in Antigua and Barbuda, the impacts of hurricanes 
are multi -faceted, and all impacts cannot be addressed in a single project. Interventions under the ‘Build’ project are 
directed toward immediate adaptation needs for critical public service and community buildings, particularly with regard 
to the impacts of strong winds associated with Category 4 and 5 hurricanes on critical services. This project will be 
complemented by other projects under the Country Programme which will address the additional cli mate hazards 
associated with hurricanes, including flooding and storm surges. In particular, two other GCF projects are under 
development that will: i) increase the climate resilience of road infrastructure, including adaptation measures for 
reducing flooding and improving drainage; and ii) build the resilience of the fisheries sector to the impacts of hurricanes, 
with specific focus on storm surges. Of particular relevance within the context of the proposed project is the GCF project 
currently under development by the GoAB focused on increasing the resilience of key road infrastructure and adjacent 
utilities in Antigua and Barbuda to withstand the impacts of floods and droughts. Proposed adaptation interventions 
under this project include a combination of grey and green infrastructure through: i) increasing the thickness of key 
roads and burying adjacent utilities to withstand the impacts of hurricanes and droughts; ii) constructing detention ponds 
in key areas upstream of the target road infrastructure to attenuate water flow from heavy rainfall events, therefore, 
reducing the flood- risk of these roads; and iii) implementing protection measures on specific sections of these roads 
that are situated along the coastal and consequently vulnerable to sea level ri se.  
 
The proposed project, combined with the GCF project focused on climate- proofing key road and utilities infrastructure, 
will cumulatively reduce the impacts of multiple climate hazards on Antigua and Barbuda’s built environment. 
Furthermore, these projects, combined with the additional projects in Antigua and Barbuda’s GCF Country Programme, 
will contribute significantly towards achieving the adaptation and mitigation goals put forward in the country’s NDC 
(2015).  
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 word s, approximately  2 pages  plus diagram ) 
Problem statement


---
*Page 15*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 86 
   
  
18 Antig ua and Barbuda Meteorological Services. Antigua Tropical Cyclones 1851– 2018. Available at: 
http://www.antiguamet.com/Climate/HURRICANE_SEASONS/AntiguanStorms.txt  
19 This figure is coming from the initial costings on resilience cost from applications to the SIRF Fund.  
20 World Bank Data. 2018. Antigua and Barbuda. Available at:  https://data.worldbank.org/country/antigua- and-barbuda .  Climate change is causing an increase in the frequency of high intensity hurricanes making landfall on the small island 
developing state (SIDS) of Antigua and Barbuda. Historically, the majority of tropical depressions impacting the islands 
were of relatively low intensity, remaining as tropical storms or Category 1– 3 hurricanes. Only nine   Category 4 and 
two Category 5 hurricanes have been recorded since 185018, with eight  of these more intense storms o ccurring in the 
last 15 years  alone . Given the previous return rate of major hurricanes, the country’s current infrastructure is only 
designed to withstand the impacts of hurricanes up to Category 3.  However, warming conditi ons over the Atlantic 
Ocean are resulting in an increased intensity of hurricanes in the Caribbean, with Antigua and Barbuda experiencing 
their first recorded Category 5 hurricanes (Irma and Maria  in 2017.  Because existing building codes in Antigua and 
Barbuda have not accounted for Category 4 and 5 hurricanes, the impacts of such events have been severe, causing 
significant damages to housing and infrastructure, as well as disrupting basic services such as health, education, 
telecommunication, electricit y, water, sewage and waste systems. Moreover , the disruption of critical service 
infrastructure — including hospitals/clinics, police and fire stations as well as buildings that serve as storm shelters —  
limits the capacity of the National Office of Disaster Services (NODS) to respond during and after an extreme event. 
This problem is exacerbated by limited capacity for and coordination of early warning systems in the country which reduced the ability of c ommunities and government agencies to prepare for an extreme climate event.  
 The challenge of upgrading existing buildings to Cat egory  4 and 5 is estimated to cost over US$6.4 billion
19. While  
Category  4 and 5 standards can be incorporated into new buildi ngs much easier than existing structures. The economy 
of Antigua and Barbuda is US$1.6 billion20 and to transition the building sector alone to the climate change impacts will 
take time to generate the funds needed.  Taking into consideration that climate change is now  considered an emergency 
situation, the Government via its NDA and nationally Accredite d Entity  (DoE) is requesting a grant to expedite the 
building of resilience in 54 of the 254 buildings in the Government sector.  This will allow for the Government to provide critical services while providing time for the resilience of the  rest of the bui ldings within the country to  be enhanced over 
time.  
 Preferred adaptation solution  
For Antigua and Barbuda to adapt to the impacts of extreme climatic events, it is necessary to strengthen the climate resilience of the building sector.  Existing infrastructure needs to be upgraded to withstand the impacts of Category 4 
and 5 hurricanes – which have sustained wind speeds of over 200km/h. This can be achieved by strengthening the 
structural integrity of buildings to withstand the wind shear forces, as well as by decentralising power and water supplies to reduce communities’ reliance on vulnerable centralised systems. Initial climate -proofing interventions should focus 
on critical services such as police, fire, and health, as well as community buildings that act as shelters during a storm. 
Increasing the resilience of these priority buildings  will lead to: i) critical services remaining operational during and after 
an extreme event; and ii) more rapid recovery, including restoring water supply, power and communication services, 
along with healthcare and education. In addition to climate- proofi ng critical infrastructure, an enabling environment that 
includes both the public and private sectors needs to be created to facilitate the upscaling of climate- proofing 
interventions to all buildings. Finally, climate information services should be streng thened to improve the dissemination 
of early warnings and facilitate early action for disaster preparedness.  
 
Barriers to the adaptation solution  
Several barriers to the preferred adaptation solution have been identified for Antigua and Barbuda. These are  
summarised below and explained in detail in Section 8  of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
 
• Barrier 1:  The government of Antigua and Barbuda has limited financial capacity to invest in climate proofing critical 
public service and community buildings to withstand Category 4 and 5 hurricanes. This includes not being able to 
install decentralised Renewable Energy backup energy and water systems to maintain supply when centralised 
distribution lines are disrupted by a storm.  
• Barrier 2:  The remote location of Antigua and Barbuda makes it difficult to access replacement solar PV panels to 
restore power after a storm to critical service buildings that are equipped with decentralised renewable energy systems. There is currently limited stoc k of renewable energy equipment available in the country and no secure 
location to store additional back -up equipment.


---
*Page 16*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 86 
   
 • Barrier 3:  During a major storm, critical information servers/computers at public institutions – including hospitals, 
police stations and other government institutions – are likely to be damaged resulting in the loss of vital information 
for public health and security. However, there is currently limited technical capacity to preserve this information, 
either through the safeguarding of physical infrastructure or the provision of reliable coordinated backup systems.  
• Barrier 4:  The high cost of adaptation in the building sector to Cat 4 and 5 limits the ability to  sufficiently 
mainstreamed into Antigua and Barbuda’s regulatory frameworks.  Based on initial costings from the  initial 
operation of the S IRF Fund, this amount is approximately US$ 130/sq ft . At an average of 1000 sq ft per building, 
and 50 thousand buildings , a conservative cost  estimate is US$6.5 billion.  In particular, the Phy sical Planning Act 
(2003) does not yet make provision for the newly revised national building code  — which includes appropriate  
actions for reducing the risk of buildings to the impacts of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes.  As a result, the guidelines 
established in the building code are not formalised into legislation.  There is also limited technical and institutional 
capacity within the Public Works Department (PWD) and Development Control Authority (DCA) to adequately apply the regulations stipulated in the building code.   
 
• Barrier 5:  While there is a firm understanding of the need to climate proof buildings in Antigua and Barbuda, local 
communities and private sector property owners, as well as public sector decision makers and design 
engineers/architects, have limited knowledge of the adaptation options available for the building sector.  This 
increases  the risk of over -engineering of interventions  and consequently also higher  incremental cost and risks to 
low income persons that they cannot meet the code.  
• Barrier 6:  There are currently limited evidence based entry level into the national financial systems and mechanisms 
available to support ongoing investment into climate- resilient development in both the public and private sectors , 
i.e. the implementation of Article 2.1c of the Paris agreement . This includes limited provision for adaptation finance 
through existing national  private financial entities and local development funds .  With  limited replenishment of 
development funds as well as  limited consideration of climate change adaptation by the banking and insurance 
sector s This  project will allow for the evidence and information needed to attract  replenishments from local and 
international sources as well as the mainstreaming of adaptati on into the private banks.    
• Barrier 7:  The long- term sustainability and upscaling potential of climate change adaptation interventions is 
constrained by limited technical capacity within NODS, DCA and PWD for long- term monitoring, maintenance and 
planning for adaptation measures in the building sector. These capacity limitations extend to the local workforce 
who are ultimately responsible for the installation and maintenance of equipment.  
• Barrier 8:  To effectively prepare for a storm – including the temporary removal of solar panels – requires adequate 
lead time on early warnings. However, there is currently limited technical capacity in the ABMS and NODS to 
adequately disseminate early warnings  to support early action, particularly with regards to preparing shelters and 
securing renewable energy equipment ahead of a storm.  
 Project approach to overcoming the barriers to adaptation  
The proposed project will overcome the abovementioned barriers to bui ld the climate resilience of Antigua and 
Barbuda’s building sector. This will be achieved through three interconnected outputs, described in detail in Section 
B.3. below. The Theory of Change is presented in Figure 5.  
 
Barrier 1 will be addressed by investing directly into strengthening the climate resilience of existing critical service infrastructure, including clinics, fire stations, police stations,  and community buildings that serve as shelters during 
hurricanes  (Activity 1 .1). This investment will improve the structural integrity of the buildings, as well as decentralising 
water and energy supplies to ensure that services continue to be provided during and directly after a storm  – thereby 
contributing to GC F Impact Area A.3 and Output A.7.  Furthermore, by ensuring the operability of first responders during 
and immediately after an extreme event, the project will build the overall resilience of vulnerable communities to the 
impact of such events, thereby contributing to GCF Impact Area A.1.  To further support the rapid recovery of critical 
services, a climate- resilient warehouse will be established to store replacement renewable energy equipment –  solar 
panels and batteries in particular –  which can be used to restore power in the event of equipment being damaged by a 
storm (Activity 1.3) . This will overcome Barrier 2. The preservation of data which underpins the operation of these 
critical service buildings will also be ensured by installing physical safeguards to protect servers from damage during a 
storm, as well as establishing cloud- based backup servers, thereby overcoming Barrier 3 (Activity 1.4) .  
 
In addition to on- the-ground interventions for climate proofing critical infrastructure, a policy -based approach will be 
adapted to create an enabling environment for future investment into climate- resilient buildings  (GCF Outcome A.5) . 
This includes revising building codes and standards to further guide future design and construction accounts for climate


---
*Page 17*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 86 
   
 change and the impacts of high intensity storms  (Activity 2. 1). Awareness campaigns will also be conducted to inform 
the public and private sectors of the revised building codes and associated adaptation options available on Antigua and 
Barbuda (Activity 2.3) . These interventions will only partially overcome Barriers 4 and 5. The paradigm shift potential 
of the project will be enhanced by overcoming Barrier 5 through the evidence based analysis of the financial and other 
barriers to allow the government along with the banking and insurance sectors, as w ell as in the existing SIRF fund  
(Activity 2.2)  to collaborate to overcome other barriers .  These actions are expected to reduce the incremental cost of 
meeting the standards of the code. Some of these actions may include bulk purchasing, l owering the cost of training 
new persons, access to concessional financing and others.  There are regulatory barriers to access financ ing, collateral 
requirements and limits to individual borrowing that are appropriate for the traditional banking sector but limits the 
urgent need for financing for public and private sector to adopt climate- adaptive technologies.  
 
Barrier 7 will be overcome by establishing training programmes at existing educational institutions that focus on various 
aspects of climate change adaptation – including planning, implementation, operation and maintenance. The training 
will target staff at relevant government institutions (NODS, DCA and PWD) to promote effective adaptation planning and adaptive management of adaptation interventions  (Activity 2.3)
. Furthermore, public and private sector 
stakeholders – including engineers, architects and tradespeople –  will be targeted to increase the national capacity for 
the installation, operation and maintenance of adaptation technologies  (Activ ity 2.4) . Training of private sector  
engineers, architects and tradespeople will contribute to GCF Impact Area A.1 by enhancing their livelihoods  through 
adapting to future needs of the building sector.  This will ensure that the adaptation technologies promoted and 
implemented through the project are sustainable and can be upscaled in the long term (GCF Outcome A.5) .  
 
Finally, the project will address Barrier 8 by  strengthening the technical capacity of ABMS  for the real-time processing 
of climate data (GCF Outcome A.6) . This will be achieved by establishing a centralised online server, housed within 
ABMS, to ensure that climate threats are detected in advance and facilitate impact -based forecasting  (Activity 3.1) . In 
addition, a formalised  communication protocol will be established between ABMS and relevant decision- makers to 
facilitate rapid information sharing and early action preceding a hurricane (Activity 3.2) . This will lead to better 
preparedness, including affording maintenance teams sufficient time to secure vulnerable infrastructure to reduce damages.  
 Together, the abovementioned interventions will overcome the barriers to climate change adaptation in Ant igua and 
Barbuda, thereby contributing to a paradigm shift within the building sector towards climate- resilient sustainable 
development. This shift will ultimately reduce the impact of hurricanes on the country, ensuring that critical services remain operational during an event, and that normalcy is restored quickly after the event.


---
*Page 18*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 86 
   
  
Figure 5. Theory of Change diagram.


---
*Page 19*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 86 
   
 B.3. Project/programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages ) 
At present, global  development efforts to address the impacts of climate change  predominant ly focus on the deployment 
of mitigation measures  — primarily  clean energy solutions and energy -efficiency measures. Adaptation measures for  
climate -proofing of structures against climate hazards are still at the preliminary stages of advancement, with limited 
experience on the ground and practically no calibrated engineering solutions for integrated building codes  which 
embrac e both climate change streams. This situation is  visible in the broad adoption of ‘green’ building codes , which 
relate to energy -efficiency  measures and the preservation of natural resources but  do not incorporate customi sed 
climate -proofing solutions.  
               
With existing worldwide examples of climate- proofing against wind and water loads, it can be preliminarily assessed 
that climate- proofing solutions are much more disruptive for the structure of buildings th an mitigation measures. 
Consequently, in the case s where mitigation measur es are not yet introduced, it is advisable to refurbish structures  to 
achieve climate- proof characteristics prior to the incorporation of renewable energy (RE) or  energy efficiency (EE)  
measures. This is because EE solutions are related to the building structure directly  and therefore depend strongly on 
the building ’s features and use.  
               
The proposed project is one of first projects in the Caribbean region to introduc e building codes that account for the 
impacts of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes. The  successful accomplishment of this task , as well as lessons learned from 
the refurbishment of a 52  targeted critical public  service and community  buildings , will allow EE measures  to be 
assessed t o determine which solutions are the most efficient and compatible with the improved structur al integrity of 
these targeted buildings. It will also enable the adjust ment of existing EE building codes to  integrate climate -proofing 
measures. This exercise can become an important market test to benchmark the scope of integrated building codes 
for future use. As presented further in this  Funding Proposal, RE installations, water harvesting solutions as well as EE 
measures will be part of the design of the critical buildings , along with the climate -proofing elements. The combined 
information generated from the implementation of these interventions will create the best combination of both mitigation 
and adaptation measures to be introduced into building codes. A comprehensive  report on this matter will be developed 
upon the project completion.  
 
Project objective  
The proposed project will contribute t o GCF’s paradigm shift objective of increased climate- resilient sustainable 
development through enhancing the resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector to extreme climate events such 
as hurricanes and tropical storms. The proposed transformative approach will shift the country’s building sector away 
from reactive development — involving costly recovery actions after an extreme climate event — towards a proactive 
approach in which buildings are adapted to withstand the increased frequency of high- intensity hurricanes. This 
proactive approach will include direct investments into critical public service and community buildings to climate- proof 
them against Category 4 and 5 hurricanes, as well as mainstreaming climate resilience into the building sector and 
relevant financial sector and mechanisms to facilitate the upscaling of such interventions across all buildings in the 
country. The effectiveness of climate- proofing interventions will be enhanced by formalising communication protocols 
between the AB MS and relevant government agencies to facilitate early action within the building sector to respond to 
extreme climate events. This will include strengthening the capacity of ABMS to collect, process and manage climate 
data, thereby improving the accuracy  and reliability of early warnings. The combined effect of project interventions will 
result in a standard of climate resilience for Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector being established that can be readily scaled up and replicated nationally and regiona
lly. Proposed project outputs are described below with detailed 
descriptions of all project activities described in Section E.6 of this Funding Proposal.  
 Output 1.  Climate -proofing interventions implemented in critical public service and community buildings to 
improve resilience to, and recovery from, extreme climate events  
Output 1 will contribute to GCF Outcome A7.0 — Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate 
risks — by climate- proofing critical public service and community buildings (hereafter referred to as ‘priority buildings’) 
to withstand the adverse impacts of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes and safeguarding critical basic supplies.  These priority 
buildings include hospitals/clinics, police and fire stations as well  as buildings that serve as storm shelters. Each  of the 
54 priority buildings that will be targeted under the project  is briefly described in Annex 2: Feasibility Study , with 
preliminary assumptions regarding their design and adaptation needs also presented in this annex. The technical 
assumptions were derived from the most advanced protocols developed by the State of Florida. This is possibly the 
only existing system that encompasses resilience against wind sp eed above 270 km/s. These provisions , combined


---
*Page 20*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 86 
   
 with the findings from Annex 22: Building assessment , enabled the costing of material s and workload  to be determined 
and assigned in the detailed project budget  (Annex 4) . A full design of each priority building targeted under the project 
will be a pre- requisite for disbursement of GCF resources. These designs will also embrace a thorough assessment of 
the drainage needs, RE, EE and water harvesting measures for all critical b uildings selected for interventions under 
the project. Such designs will further support the preliminary selection of these 14 buildings to receive additional 
drainage engineering solutions in the face of climate change.  
 
To reduce the exposure of priority  buildings hurricanes, the structural integrity of these buildings will be strengthened 
through several adaptation interventions, including the installation of hurricane shutters and using hurricane straps to 
secure roofs. These interventions will physical ly protect buildings, thereby reducing damages and maintaining 
operability of critical services during and directly after an extreme event. The climate- resilience of critical services will 
be further enhanced through the decentralisation of power and water  supplies to priority buildings. Decentralising power 
and water supplies will reduce the dependence of critical services on vulnerable central systems which are often 
disrupted for prolonged period both during and after an extreme climate event. This will ensure that priority buildings 
and the critical services they support maintain an uninterrupted power and water supply when centralised systems are 
disrupted. To decentralise power supply, renewable energy (RE) systems will be installed on priority buildings, 
comprising solar PV panels and battery packs.  These systems will be grid-interactive and the necessary regulatory 
process will be followed with the utility authority  (APUA) . The installation of solar panels account for site -specific 
requirements, including exposure to climate hazards and the energy requirements of the building. Specifically, solar panels will be installed using hurricane- proof clamps, that will secure panels during periods of extreme winds, while 
allowing for easy removal prior to extreme winds to prevent damage from flying debris. Maintenance staff at priority 
buildings, along with teams from the PWD will be trained to safely remove and store panels prior to a Category 4 or 5 
hurricane making landfall (See Activity 2.4). To ensure continued power supply during the period that the panels are 
removed, the storage capacity of battery packs will be sufficient to meet basic electricity demands of priority buildings 
for 24– 48 hours. The effectiveness of battery packs will be enhanced through the installation and use of energy -efficient 
equipment in priority buildings to reduce demand. To ensure uninterrupted supply of water to priority buildings, climate -
resilient rai nwater harvesting solutions will be installed. These solutions will be site- specific and secured to withstand 
the maximum sustained windspeeds associated with Category 4 and 5 hurricanes. Coupled with these water harvesting 
systems will be the installation of stormwater drainage solutions on 14 buildings situated less than 30 m from inundation 
zones in Antigua and Barbuda. While flooding is not recognised as a primary hazard at these 14 project sites, these solutions will mitigate the risk of potential floo ding that may result from heavy rainfall associated with Category 4 and 5 
hurricanes. This flood risk mitigation will be achieved through installing drainage gutters at the 14 target sites to ensure 
that water from these heavy rainfall events is distribute d into the existing drainage systems to avoid localised flooding. 
Further details on the technical design of climate- proofing interventions and a list of the specific priority buildings that 
will be targeted by the project are provided in Annex 2: Feasibil ity Study.  
  
In addition to adaptation investments in existing priority buildings, the project will construct two types of climate- proof 
structure to protect human life, preserve vital information within public institutions and secure basic supplies — including 
RE equi pment, building materials, food and medicine. First, five climate- resilient storm shelters will be built on to public 
clinics to provide places of safety for vulnerable community members who may be ill and whose own homes are not 
equipped to withstand Cate gory 4 and 5 hurricanes. Targeted clinics  will take ownership of these extension shelters, 
which will be sufficiently equipped to protect community members and provide the necessary services during an 
extreme climate event. Attaching shelters to selected c linics will improve health and safety, not only because nurses 
will be present on site to treat the sick and injured, but also because the greater distribution of small shelters will reduc e 
health risks associated with crowding in public schools which are currently used as shelters. Furthermore, by limiting 
the need for schools to function as shelter, the project will reduce the downtime for schools resulting from prolonged occupation after an event. All five shelters will be equipped with RE and climate- resilient water harvesting equipment 
to reduce their reliance on centralised supply systems. Second, a climate- resilient bunker will be constructed at a 
central location to store supplies  required by critical services during and immediately after an extreme event. The bunker 
will be operated by a sub-
committee for disaster preparedness, comprising representatives from the health, 
environment, public works and welfare sectors, who will be responsible for maintaining supplies of medicine, RE equipment, building materials and food, respectively. This bunker will also serve as a battery recharge site, allowing for battery packs to be  recharged and swapped out at priority buildings if RE systems cannot be made operational again 
before battery systems run out. In addition to these physical interventions, back -up protocols will be developed and 
operationalised to secure vital information within critical public institutions, including hospitals, clinics, schools, police 
and fire stations. In so doing, critical service providers will have increased access to emergency supplies, and vital


---
*Page 21*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 86 
   
 information will be preserved. Detailed site -specific assessments will be conducted for Activities 1.1 –1.3, precedin g the 
implementation of climate- proofing interventions and construction of the climate- resilient bunker and extension 
hurricane shelters. The AE will oversee these site-specific assessments and the public sector entities who own the 
targeted critical build ings that will receive climate- proofing interventions will take ownership of these interventions .  
 
Justification for the selection of target critical infrastructure  
The vulnerability -driven selection process was followed for  targeted critical public service and community buildings to 
ensure that climate- proofed critical services provide maximum coverage to vulnerable areas with high population 
density , the poorest communities  and those individuals living in areas outside of the main drainage channels . The 
distribution of project interventions therefore cover s the majority of built -up areas in Antigua and Barbuda, with 
increased coverage in the more densely  populated and exposed com munities  (Table 1). 
 
Table 1. Population coverage of critical public service and community buildings that will receive climate- proofing interventions under 
the proposed project.  
Parish  Populations  Intervention buildings  
Saint John  51,737 28 
Saint Mary  7,341 5 
Saint George  8,055 3 
Saint Peter  5,325 1 
Saint Paul  8,128 5 
Saint Philip  3,347 2 
Barbuda  1,634 2 
 
Project intervention sites were also selected by  accounting for  the location of lower income communities in Antigua and 
Barbuda, where infrastructure is generally less resilient to the extreme winds and heavy downpours associated with  
Category 4 and 5 hurr icanes . To ensure maximum coverage of these vulnerable groups by project interventions, a 
walk-time analysis was conducted at 5- , 15- and 30- minute  intervals from these vulnerable communities to critical public 
service and community buildings targeted under the project  (Table 2). This analysis  demonstrated that the selection of 
target intervention sites would  ensure that maximum coverage of critical services to the most vulnerable people as a 
result of project interventions.   
Table 2. Walk -time analysis conducted to determine the coverage of project interventions.  
Walk time  Population served  Population served (%)  Low income Population 
served (%)  
5 minutes     10,512  11% 17% 
15 minutes     45,923  47% 62% 
30 minutes     73,216  76% 89% 
 The majority of the selected project intervention sites are located in areas of higher elevation, outside of the potential inundation areas from extreme downpours associated with hurricanes, such as those noted during Hurricane Irma. 
Specifically, 9 sites are located within 10 m of the flood inundation zones, 5 are within 30 m, 5 within 50 m, 12 within 
100 m and 16 sites are located further than 100 m away from these inundation zones. 60% of the project intervention 
sites are therefore located 50 m or more away from potential flood inundation zones . For this reason, climate change 
adaptation measures to be implemented on target critical infrastructure will be focus on reducing  the impacts of extreme 
winds and heavy downpours associated with  Category 4 and 5 hurricanes, which are considered the main  climate 
threat to these critical buildings.   
 
Based on the vulnerability -driven selection process, site assessment and the f indings from the building assessment  
(Annex 22), 54 critical public service and community buildings were selected to receive adaptation interventions under 
the proposed project. These buildings are listed below and maps showing their locations are presented in Section D.1 
of this Funding Proposal as well as in Section 10.3.2 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study. Where a need is identified during 
the implementation phase for originally targeted crit ical building(s) to be replaced with other buildings, these potential 
replacement buildings will be subject to same selection criteria used in the selection of the 54 targeted buildings. 
Additionally, the upgrade cost will be considered during the selection of replacement building(s) to ensure that the cost 
of upgrading these replacement building(s) does no t exceed the original budget allocated to implementing adaptation


---
*Page 22*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 86 
   
 interventions on critical public service and community buildings. The AE will notify the GCF if such changes are required 
and these changes will be subject to GCF approval.   
 
The 54 targeted critical public service and community buildings are listed below. Those buildings that are listed more 
than once  are building complexes with multiple buildings  within each complex (corresponding to the number of times 
the building is listed) targeted for receiving adaptation interventions.  
 
• All Saints Clinic  
• All Saints Fire Station  
• All Saint’s Police Station  
• Analytical services 1  
• Analytical services 2  
• Antigua State College 1  
• Antigua State College 2  
• Bendals health clinic  
• Bolans health clinic  
• Clareview Psychiatric Hospital 1  
• Clareview Psychiatric Hospital 2  
• Clareview Psychiatric Hospital 3  
• Clareview Psychiatric Hospital 4  
• High Court of Justice  
• Defence Force Building 1  
• Defence F orce Building 2  
• Department of Environment 1  
• Department of Environment 2  
• Fiennes Building 1  
• Fiennes Building 2  
• Good Shepherd Children’s Home   
• Met office  
• Ministry of Finance  
• Ministry of Tourism  
• National Archives  
• National Office of Disaster Services  
• Parham health clinic  
• Police Headquarters  
• Potters health clinic  
• Her Majesty’s Prison  
• St John’s Fire Station  
• Swetes health clinic  
• Liberta Police Station  
• Liberta Primary School  
• Urlings Primary School  
• Jennings Primary School  
• Bolans Primary School  
• Bend als Primary School  
• Pigotts Clinic  
• Princess Margaret Secondary School  
• Cedar Grove Clinic  
• Old Road Clinic  
• Freetown Primary School  
• Emergency Medical Service 
• Gray's Farm Clinic  
• Grays Farm Police Station


---
*Page 23*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 86 
   
 • Willikies Primary School  
• Red Cross  
• Cedar Grove Primary  
• Clare Hall Secondary School  
• Bethesda Clinic  
• Cobbs Cross Primary School  
• Barbuda Fire Station  
• Barbuda Council & Treasury  
 
Operation and maintenance of climate -proofing interventions  
All operations , maintenance and Insurance activities required under the project will be financed by the Government of 
Antigua and Barbuda. The MoF will create an internal budget line for the maintenance of climate- proofing interventions, 
highlighting their commitment to ensuring the adequate imple mentation, operations and maintenance of these 
interventions. Furthermore, t he sustainable operation and management of construction- related project interventions 
has been secured by identifying key government institutions to oversee specific project activi ties. MoW will oversee the 
implementation of climate- proofing measures on critical infrastructure (Activit y 1.1), while the Ministry of Health, 
Wellness and the Environment (MoHWE) will be responsible for managing the shelters that will be built on to five clinics 
in the country (Activity 1.2). In addition to the operations and maintenance plan for climate- proofing interventions 
described above, multiple project partners have been engaged to ensure the management and restocking of critical 
supplies that wil l be housed within the climate- resilient bunker (Activity 1.3). Responsibilities for the stocking of these 
supplies will be as follows: i) RE stock and medical supplies will be maintained by the MoHWE; ii) food supplies will be 
maintained by the Ministry of Social Transformation; and iii) building supplies will be maintained by MoW. To ensure that climate change adaptation measures to be constructed under the project provide maximum benefits, relevant 
project partners have committed to maintaining all climate proofing measures implemented under the project (including 
physical upgrades as well as decentralised RE and climate- resilient water harvesting solutions) for at least 20 years 
after implementation of the project. A framework for effective operations and maintenance of these measures , including 
the associated costing,  is presented in Annex 21.  Project activities that will be implemented under Output 1 are 
summarised below . Further details on these activities, including on the associated sub- activities and deliverables, are 
presented in Section E.6 of this Funding Proposal and Section 9 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.      
 
Activity 1.1. Implement climate- proofing measures on critical infrastructure.  
To ensure that critical public services remain functional during and directly after a hurricane, the proposed project will invest in improving the structural integrity of critical infrastructure to enable buildings to withstand Category 5 hurricanes. 
Preliminary assessments have identified appropriate climate- proofing interventions, as presented in Annex 22: Building 
assessment. During project implementation, detailed site- specific building assessments will be conducted to determine 
the precise extent of th e adaptation upgrades  to be conducted as well as the cost associated with upgrading each 
targeted building. Co-finance will also be provided to invest in baseline repair work required to upgrade priority buildings 
in accordance with the building code. Targeted infrastructure will include hospitals/clinics, police and fire stations, storm 
shelters, relevant government buildings and schools. Furthermore, to ensure continuous supply of power and water 
during and after an extreme event, when centralised systems  are down, this activity will install decentralised systems 
at critical public service buildings. For energy supply, RE systems will be installed, comprising solar PV panels and battery packs. The solar panels will be removable, allowing maintenance teams to take down the panels ahead of a 
large storm to prevent damages. During these periods, the buildings will run on battery reserves, with power being 
directed to critical equipment. Energy efficient equipment will also be installed where feasible to maximi se battery life. 
This will include energy efficient cooling and ventilation systems, particularly in shelters where the density of people 
will be relatively high.  Given that the water supply in Antigua and Barbuda is heavily dependent on a reliable energy 
supply, when the national grid goes down water supply is disrupted. To ensure that those buildings that are used as 
shelters or provide critical services have a safe and reliable water supply during and directly after an extreme climate event, the project will provide climate- resilient water harvesting equipment (including solar pumps). This decentralised 
water supply is essential to maintain health and sanitation standards in these buildings.  Coupled with these water 
harvesting systems will be the installation of stormwater drainage solutions on 14 buildings situated less than 30 m 
from inundation zones in Antigua and Barbuda. While flooding is not recognised as a primary hazard at these 14 pr oject 
sites, these solutions will mitigate the risk of potential flooding that may result from heavy rainfall associated with 
Category 4 and 5 hurricanes. This flood risk mitigation will be achieved through installing drainage gutters at the 14


---
*Page 24*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 86 
   
 target site s to ensure that water from these heavy rainfall events is distributed into the existing drainage systems to 
avoid localised flooding.  
 
Activity 1.2. Construct climate- resilient storm shelters built on to five public clinics.  
To facilitate the transition away from using schools as storm shelters, the project will commission five purpose- built 
storm shelters attached to public clinics. These shelters will be managed by the targeted clini cs and serve as multi -
purpose centres for inter alia training and conferences outside of the hurricane season.  Attaching the shelters to clinics 
will not only reduce downtime for schools after being used as shelters but will also improve the health conditions as 
nurses will be present on site to treat the sick and injured. The shelters will also be equipped with renewable energy 
systems and water harvesting equipment to reduce reliance on centralised supply systems (see Activity 1.4 below). To ensure the effective operation of and adherence to nat ional health and safety requirements for storm shelters, an 
emergency protocol will be developed for each shelter. These protocols will include details on the: i) responsible parties; ii) carrying capacity of the shelter; iii) preparation actions ahead of a storm; iv) sanitation, food and water requirements; v) approved duration of stays; and vi) communication channels with the National Office of Disaster Services (NODS).   
 
Activity 1.3. Construct a climate- resilient bunker to store emergency supplies for t he health, energy, building and welfare 
sectors.  
To address the need for a secure location to store such supplies, the project will construct a climate- resilient bunker 
that will service the health, energy, building and welfare sectors. The bunker will be managed by a ministerial sub-
committee for disaster preparedness who will be responsible for coordinating efforts between relevant stakeholders. 
Four specific units will be established within the bunker, each focussing on a specific sector.  These units are described 
briefly below . 
• The first unit will serve the health sector, providing safe storage for medicine and medical supplies which can be 
quickly distributed after an event.  
• The second unit will be managed by Antigua and Barbuda’s Department of Environment (DoE) and will be used to 
store backup solar panels to replace those damaged during a storm.  
• The third unit will service the Public Works Department (PWD), storing timber and other building materials that can be used as shutters during preparation or for repairs after an extreme event.  
• Finally, the fourth unit will be used to store critical food supplies to support emergency responders who have limited opportunity to access personal supplies during and after an extreme event. The distribution of this food will be 
controlled by the Ministry of Social Transformation.  
 The climate -resilient bunker  will be used year -round  to stock medical supplies, RE equipment, building materials, and 
dry food.  
 
Activity 1. 4. Implement measures to preserve vital information/data within public institutions.  
Under this activity, protocols will be developed for how to effectively and efficiently back up all vital information and dat a 
preceding a storm and IT teams within each public institution will be trained on the application of these protocols. Each targeted institution will be responsible for the delivery of this training to relevant staff. Furthermore, physical protection 
measures will be designed and implemented on the relevant public buildings to reduce the risk of critical IT infrastructure 
being damaged by an extreme event.   
 
Output 2. Climate change adaptation mainstreamed into the building sector and relevant financial mechanisms  
Output 2 of the project will contribute to GCF Outcome A5.0 – Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for 
climate -responsive planning and development  – and support the implementation of adaptation interventions under 
Output 1. The strengthened regulatory frameworks, combined with capacity buildings and skills development in the 
building sector, will create an enabling environment for the upscaling and replication of project interventions across the  
country. This upscaling potential will be achieved by: i) mainstreaming climate change adaptation into the building 
sector, as well as the public and private financial sectors; ii) strengthening the capacity of the public and private sectors  
to design, im plement, operate and maintain climate- adaptive measures for the building sector; and iii) raising 
awareness within the public and private sectors on the benefits of adopting these adaptation measures.  
 
Mainstreaming climate change adaptation into the buil ding sector


---
*Page 25*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 86 
   
  
21 entitled:  “Building climate resilience through innovative financing mechanisms for climate change adaptation”  
22 OAS. 2002. Status of Building Codes in the Caribbean. Available at: https://www.oas.org/cdmp/bulletin/codemtrx.htm .. 
23 Simmons, Kevin M., Jeffrey Czajkowski, and James M. Done. "Economic effectiveness of implementing a statewide building code: the case of 
Florida."  Land Economics  94, no. 2 (2018)  
24 entitled: “Building climate resilience through innovative financing mechanisms for climate change adaptation”  
25 The presented costs estimation will also be further amended via lessons learnt derived for this project.  To compl ement the ongoing SCCF project21 described in B1 — which updated the national building code to develop 
standards that account for the impacts of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes —  the proposed project will draft  regulations for  
the Physical Planning Act (PPA) of 2003 to make provision for the inclusion of the updated building code in national 
regulatory frameworks.  These regulations will undergo a strategic  impact assessment to assess the technical, financial, 
social and gender impacts . This process and output will  contribute to establishing a standard for climate- resilient 
development across the country. Antigua and Barbuda’s building code incorporates elements of the Bahamas Building 
Code, which in turn was based generally on the South Florida Building Code22. Applying the Florida Building Code, 
which makes provision for Category 4 and 5 hurricanes, has been shown to reduce the damage caused by hurricanes 
by up to 72%23.  Similar reductions can therefore be expected, and the adaptation impact of this intervention enhanced,  
by: firstly, updating the building code to include design criteria that accounts for Category 4 and 5 hurricanes  (which is 
currently being done under the SCCF -funded project); and secondly, strengthening the technical and institutional 
capacity of technical staff involved in infrastructural design and development (e.g. staff from the MoW, DCA and NODS, 
as well as building inspectors, engineers, architects and draughtsmen; and the private sector)  to apply the updated 
code. To further contribute to th e mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into the building sector, 
recommendations will be made for the Environmental Management Systems plans (EMS plans) to be updated to 
include climate- resilient measures. The mechanism for the development of these r ecommendations will include 
engaging with relevant project partners to review the EMS plans and identify entry points for the inclusion of climate 
change adaptation for the building sector. Following this review, recommendations will be drafted proposing t he relevant 
revisions to the EMS plans and milestones for these revisions will be set. The target for these revisions to be complete is the end of Year 2 of project implementation. Annual meetings will be held thereafter with relevant stakeholders to 
collate and share lessons learned from implementing the EMS plans and ensure that these plans are updated regularly 
where necessary.  
 Mainstreaming climate change into public and private financial sectors  
Under the SCCF -funded project
24, entry points for climate change adaptation financing within the SIRF Fund have been 
established to increase public and private sector access to financial resources for adaptation, including for the building 
sector. The SIRF Fund has two main thematic funding windows, namel y the climate change window and biological 
diversity window, with corresponding programmes under each window.   
 Climate- proofing buildings in Antigua and Barbuda is currently financed by two streams, namely via the SIRF Fund for 
small enterprises that do not always qualify for access to funds from mainstream banking sector and the private banks 
for medium and large enterprises. Under the SIRF Fund’s c limate change window, there is currently a Revolving Fund 
Programme for Adaptation which focuses on providing microfinancing for the incremental cost of implementation of 
adaptation measures to small buildings (i.e. vulnerable households, clinics, schools, etc.).  In its current form, this 
climate change window is optimised for small loans/ grants to vulnerable households, with individual applications 
capped at 5% of the total funds under this window available at a given time.  However, as presented below, the 
anticipated adaptation needs exceed the available funds  particularly for medium and large enterprises.  
 
The overall financing needs
25 of small enterprises to climate- proof their premises accounts for US$ 208.5 million  within 
the next 20 years, while medium and large enterprises require an investment of US$650 million  within the  next 20 years 
to achieve the same goal. The current capitalization of the SIRF Fund accounts for US$8  million  within next 2 years, 
resulting in a financial gap of US$5 million /year  to bring existing buildings up to standard for the Category 4– 5  building 
code. This financial gap will be addressed by  using lessons learned from the proposed project to reduce the cost of  
adaptation interventions , including: i) determining the incremental cost of building adaptations used in small businesses  
and applying these to selection criteria to allow for the development costs to be split between baseline and adaptation 
measures ; and ii) developing sustainabl e bulk procure ment processes to reduce the cost of  building materials required 
for climate- proofing infrastructure.


---
*Page 26*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 86 
   
  
26 Under the GCF project, entitled Integrated physical adaptation and community resilience through an enhanced direct access pilot in the public, 
priva te, and civil society sectors of three Eastern Caribbean small island developing states (referred to as the EDA project in this Funding Proposal), 
the SIRF Fund is being used as a mechanism for financing adaptation at a household level. Lessons learned from this intervention will be used to 
inform interactions with the SIRF Fund under the proposed GCF project.  Although t he trajectory of financial needs of medium  and large  companies for climate -proofing upgrades is not know n 
at this time , the trajectory for the larger companies is currently being assessed by the GoAB . This project will provide 
more information on the policy guidance that the GoAB needs  to consider and adopt  to meet these financial needs .  
 
In addition to the financial needs  for adaptation of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector, several  non-financial market 
barriers  have been identified during project development  and have been considered in the proposed solution. These 
include  limited : i) experience in implementing climate- proofing interventions to fully understand the cost requirements,  
coupled with high costs of bringing materials into the island;  ii) technical capacity within NODS, DCA and PWD for long-
term monitoring, maintenance and planning for adaptation measures in the building sector ; iii) technical knowledge of 
the adaptation options  and approaches  available for the building sector , increas ing the risk of over -engineering and 
overpricing interventions ; and iv) understanding of private sector partnerships in the building sector to promote 
upscaling of and investment in adaptation interventions.  
 
To specifically overcome the abovementioned barriers , as well as those listed in Section B2, the proposed GCF project 
will catalyse the creation of additional entry points to increase the access of both the public and private sectors to 
financial resources for implementing climate- proofing measures. In particular, the project will introduce incremental cost 
reasoning to SIRF Fund selection criteria, which will allow for the development costs to be split between baseline and 
adaptation measures. This will reduce the investment requires from the SIRF F und, with baseline costs being covered 
through alternative development funding sources , such as the GoAB as well as other development agencies  that can 
provide funding to undertake baseline- related interventions for the building sector . During the implementation of Activity 
2.2, options for increasing financial inflows into the SIRF Fund will be investigated to increase the available financial 
resources to be accessed by the public and private sector. This will be done to further bridge the financing gap, including incentive programmes, levies and insurance/risk management products.  To facilitate this process, engagements will 
be held with relevant public and private sector stakeholders in Year 1 of project implementation to identify entr y points 
for unlocking finance for climate- resilient sustainable development in Antigua and Barbuda. Through the consultation 
process, the most appropriate options discussed above will be selected and validated by all project partners. These 
consultations will happen in Year 1 of implementation. The SIRF F und guidelines will be updated and validated by all 
project partners following these discussions by the end of Year 2. To promote the use of the SIRF Fund as a mechanism 
for financing climate- adaptive meas ures for the building sector, decision- makers from NODS, DCA and PWD, as well 
as private sector representatives, will be trained on how to access financial resources under the SIRF Fund — within 
the specified thresholds. This training will be provided regularly commencing in Year 3. Finally, from the beginning of Year 3 to the end of the project implementation period (Year 6), annual engagement workshops will be held to collate 
and share lessons learned from public and private sector interactions with the S
IRF Fund and processes for 
replenishment will be discussed and revised where necessary . 
 
In addition to enhancing access , where appropriate,  of the private sector to the SIRF F und for larger scale adaptation 
investments, th e project will refine the SIRF Fund selection criteria for adaptation interventions. Using an evidence-
based approach that  draws lessons learned from the SCCF and Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) projects26, as well as 
the implementation of on- the-ground adaptation int erventions under Activity 1.1 of this project, the list of adaptation 
options supported by the SIRF Fund will be refined. This process will ensure that all options are optimised for the local conditions and markets, and that clear guidelines are set for as sessing the eligibility of each application.  GCF resources 
will not be used to capitalise this fund, fill funding gaps or retroactively finance activities already under development or implementation other programmes / initiatives.  
 
Capacity building and awareness raising for the public and private sectors  
To ensure the sustainability and upscaling potential of climate- proofing measures implemented under Output 1, training 
programmes will be developed with partner organisations such as the Antigua and Barbuda Institute for Continuing 
Education (ABICE). These  training programmes will focus on how to appropriately apply the regulations of the building 
code during the design, installation and monitoring of climate change adaptation measur es specific to the building 
sector. Appropriate local training institutes such as ABICE will deliver these programmes to public and private sector 
representatives, including staff from MoW and DCA as well as building inspectors, engineers, architects and


---
*Page 27*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 86 
   
 draughtsmen. A certified training course will also be developed for and delivered to the local workforce through these 
training institutions. This training course will focus on how to support the installation, operation and maintenance of 
climate -resilient physical upgrades to buildings as well as RE and climate- resilient water harvesting solutions. To 
contribute to the uptake of these capacity -building interventions, gender -sensitive awareness -raising campaigns will be 
designed and conducted for the public and private sectors. These campaigns will promote the availability of training on 
climate change adaptation for the building sector as well as on the benefits of implementing these measures. The combination of interventions implemented under Output 2 will enable the public and private sector actors to build sufficient capacity for the independent adoption and maintenance of climate- resilient solutions for the building sector. 
This will maximise the adaptation benefits delivered by these solutions and ensure their sustainability beyond the project 
lifetime. Activities that will be implemented under this project output are summarised below . Further details on these 
activities, including on the associated sub- activities and deliverables, are presented in Section E.6 of this Funding 
Proposal and Section 9 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.      
 
Activity 2.1. Mainstream climate change adaptation into the building sector by making provision for the building code in 
the Physical Planning Act (2003)  and updating the EMS plans . 
Under this activity, climate change adaptation will be mainstreamed into the country’s building sector. This will be achieved in three primary ways. Firstly, regulations for the Physical Planning Act (2003) will be drafted to make provision 
for including the updated building code in the national regulatory framework. Doing so will facilitate the formalisation of the code, which addresses Category 4 and 5 hurricanes, into policy. This will in turn contribute to establishing a standard 
for climate- resilient development across the country. Secondly, a Strategic Impact Assessment (SIA) of the building 
code regulations will be conduct ed to assess the environmental and social safeguards and gender risks, consequences 
and mitigation measures related to the enactment of these regulations in the Physical Planning Act (2003). This SIA 
will ensure that the building code is able to be applied  by the most vulnerable groups in the country, particularly persons 
with low income, limited access to financing,  as well as the elderly and those people who have disabilities. Thirdly , 
recommendations will be made for the EMS Plans to be updated to include climate- resilient measures for the building 
sector. Engagements will be held with project partners to review the EMS Plans and identify entry points for the inclusion 
of climate change adaptation for the building sector. Following this review, reco mmendations will be drafted proposing 
the relevant revisions to the EMS Plans. The target for these revisions to be completed is the end of Year 2 of project 
implementation. Annual meetings will be held thereafter with relevant stakeholders to collate and share lessons learned from implementing the EMS plans and ensure that these plans are updated regularly where necessary.  
 
Activity 2.2. Mainstream climate change adaptation for the building sector into public and private financial, insurance 
and banking sectors.   
 
Activity 2.2 will complement the SCCF project to maximise the effectiveness and accessibility of the SIRF Fund’s  
adaptation window. First, public and private sector stakeholders will be engaged to identify additional entry points for 
accessing climate finance through the SIRF fund for investments. Specifically, for resilience building for small micro 
businesses that  are important to community resilience. Lessons learned  from this project will allow the fund to 
accurately calculate the incremental cost of building adaptations used in small businesses. For the segment of the 
private sector, it is not expected that they will  exceed the current 5% cap. Key to this process will be the introduction of 
accurate incremental cost reasoning to selection criteria for these business which will allow for the development costs 
to be split between baseline and adaptation measures. Private sector access to climate finance through the SIRF Fund 
will be further enhanced by enabling Fund (or some mechanism of  the  fund working with the private  sector) to 
sustainably procure bulk building materials required for climate- proofing infr astructure. Private entities — for example, 
businesses, hotels and homeowners — could then buy the materials they need from the Fund  at this reduced price  
and this is included in the loan. This approach is a key option to bridging the financial gap in incremental cost of 
adaptation financing. This approach is currently being demonstrated with the provision of concessional loans to 
purchase grid interactive back -up renewable energy to homeowners .  The RE equipment is purchased by the Fund in 
bulk the solar/ battery grid interactive systems  and made available to loan applicants . Once  demonstrated , the 
effectiveness of the bulk -import model will be reviewed for a potential  viable tool to support the financing  of climate 
change adaptation in Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector.  
 
In addition to enhancing access of the private sector to the SIRF fund for larger scale (but still micro  levels) adaptation 
investments, this activity will refine the selection criteri a for adaptation interventions. Using an evidence- based 
approach that  draws lessons learned from the SCCF and EDA projects, as well as the implementation of on- the-ground 
adaptation interventions under Activity 1.1 of this project, the list of adaptation options supported by the SIRF Fund will


---
*Page 28*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 86 
   
 be refined. This process will ensure that all options are optimised for the local conditions and markets, and that clear 
guidelines are set for assessing the eligibility of each application.  GCF resources will not be used to replenish  this fund, 
fill funding gaps or retroactively finance activities already under development or implementation other programmes / 
initiatives.  
 
Activity 2.3. Train relevant staff from the National Office of Disaster Services (NODS), Develo pment Control Authority 
(DCA) and the Public Works Department (PWD) as well as the private sector on operational procedures for long- term 
monitoring, maintenance and upscaling of climate- resilient renewable energy (RE) and water harvesting technologies 
in accordance with the national building code.  
 
Training will be provided to relevant staff from NODS as well as building inspectors from DCA and building maintenance 
teams from PWD on operational procedures for long- term monitoring, maintenance and upscaling of climate change 
adaptation interventions that will be implemented under Output 1. Building- specific operations and maintenance (O&M) 
plans will be used to inform this training to ensure that the knowledge shared during these trainings is techni cally sound.  
To complement th ese capacity- building interventions , training programmes will be developed with partner organisations 
such as Antigua and Barbuda Institute for Continuing Education (ABICE) for the public and private sector 
representatives, inc luding staff from the Ministry of Works (MoW) and Development Control Authority (DCA) as well as 
building inspectors, engineers, architects and draughtsmen. This training will focus on how to apply the regulations of the national building code during the i nstallation of climate change adaptation measures that are specific to the building 
sector, such as renewable energy and climate- resilient water harvesting solutions. In addition, awareness raising 
campaigns will be designed and conducted to increase the uptake of climate change adaptation measures for the 
building sector across the public and private sectors.  
 
Activity 2.4. Train local workforce on the installation, operation and maintenance of climate- proofing measures for the 
targeted buildings.  
To complement the capacity -building interventions under Activity 2.3 that are focused on long- term operations and 
maintenance of adaptation measures for the building sector, t he local workforce will be trained on how to support the 
installation, operation and maintenance of climate change adaptation solutions that will be installed in targeted buildings 
under Activity 1.1. To facilitate this training, suitable training institutions in the country, such as ABICE, will be engaged to develop and deliver a cert ified training programme that focuses on: i) installing, operating and maintaining climate-
proofing measures for the building sector; and ii) implementing early action protocols (developed under Output 1) 
preceding an extreme climate event. The training course that will be developed under this activity will apply regional 
and international best practices for climate change adaptation measures in the building sector.  
 
Output 3. Climate information services strengthened to facilitate early action within the b uilding sector to 
respond to extreme climate events  
Project interventions under Output 3 will contribute to GCF Outcome A6.0 – Increased generation and use of climate 
information in decision- making – by strengthening Antigua and Barbuda’s early warning sys tem (EWS) as well as the 
capacity of Antigua and Barbuda Meteorological Services (ABMS) to facilitate rapid information sharing and early action 
preceding an extreme climate event. Interventions under this project output will complement the  Caribbean Disaster 
Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA) Early Warning Systems (EWS) Regional Readiness Project . This project 
is currently under development and is focused on improving regional coordination of EWS  across the Caribbean. 
Although the intervent ions under the CDEMA project are thematically aligned with the proposed project, t he scope of 
the CDEMA project is not at a sufficient level to improve the production and dissemination of early  warnings  at a national 
and local level in Antigua and Barbuda to facilitate early action.  Output 3 of the proposed project will  fill this gap in two 
ways. Firstly, a centralised online server will be established and housed within ABMS to process climate data in real 
time, overcoming existing shortfalls in the data processing capabilities. This will enable ABMS to reliably and timeously 
forecast extreme climate events using data from the country’s existing weather stations. The centralised server will be 
equipped to process data in several formats which will reduce processing time given that data is inputted from the 
country’s weather stations using several di fferent operational platforms. To further strengthen the capacity of ABMS to 
produce early warnings, training workshops will be conducted for ABMS staff on how to: i) collect, process and manage 
climate data generated by the server; and ii) use the generat ed data to develop early warning information products, 
including easily interpretable infographics. A knowledge exchange trip will also be conducted to the nearest Regional 
Climate Centre (RCC), which is under the auspices of the World Meteorological Organi sation (WMO). This trip will 
enable these staff to learn from this RCC, which is currently implementing an impact -based forecasting approach to 
early warnings focused on early action.


---
*Page 29*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 86 
   
  
To complement the abovementioned capacity -building interventions and ensure the effectiveness of early warnings, 
communication and early action protocols will be formalised between AMBS and relevant government agencies to 
facilitate rapid information sharing preceding an extreme climate event. The communic ation protocol will define which 
agencies need to be notified at each stage of hurricane development, from initial identification of a tropical disturbance 
through to a full hurricane. The communication protocol will be underpinned by specific early action protocols li nked to 
specific stages of hurricane development. Each stage will require action from different stakeholders, including NODS, 
DoE, the Ministry of Health, Wellness and E nvironment  (MoHWE) , the Ministry of Education Science and Technology 
(MoEST) and the general public. As the threat level increases, so will the required level of response. The early action 
protocols will define what needs to be done at each stage, as well as how it should be done and who is responsible. These prot ocols will include variable responses to allow flexibility depending on the anticipated intensity of incoming 
storms. This will include specific responses for each priority building to ensure that critical services are adequately 
prepared for a hurricane.  
 
The combined effect of the early warnings and early action protocols will complement Output 2 of the project . This 
project output will ensure that relevant public institutions responsible for coordinating emergency response — such as 
NODS — as well as critical service providers — such as hospitals, clinics, police and fire stations —  have the technical 
capacity to implement early acti on protocols preceding an extreme climate event. This will minimise the adverse impacts 
of these events on critical infrastructure and vulnerable local communities. Project activities that will be implemented 
under Output 3 are summarised below . Further details on these activities, including on the associated sub- activities 
and deliverables, are presented in Section E.6 of this Funding Proposal and Section 9 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.      
 
Activity 3.1. Strengthen the capacity of ABMS to collect, process and manage climate data.  
Under this project activity, a centralised online server will be established and housed within Antigua and Barbuda Meteorological Services (ABMS) to overcome the current barrier of an insufficient climate data processing system.  This 
online server will enhance the real -time processing of climate data to ensure that climate threats are detected in 
advance and facilitate impact -based forecasting. To support the establishment of the server, staff within ABMS will 
receive training on: i) efficient and effective methods for collecting, processing and managing climate data in real time; 
and ii) how to develop early warning information products, including infographics that are locally appropriate and easily 
interpreted by vulnerable comm unities. A knowledge- exchange trip , funded by GCF resources,  will be undertaken by 
relevant technical staff at ABMS to the nearest Regional Climate Centre (RCC) , which is under the auspices of the 
World Meteorological Organi sation (WMO) . This trip will enable these staff to learn from this RCC, which is currently 
implementing an impact -based forecasting approach to early warnings focused on early action.   
 
Activity 3.2. Establish a formalised communication protocol to facilitate rapid information sharing and early action 
preceding an extreme climate event.  
A formal communication protocol will be developed and operationalised under Activity 3.2 to support the development of early warning information products and impact -based forecasts (Activity 3.1). This will be done to facilitate effective 
communication of impact -based forecasts from ABMS to decision-
makers within relevant government entities 
responsible for preparation ahead of an extreme climate event. To support this  communication protocol, the capacity 
of ABMS will be strengthened to ensure that the dissemination of climate information is locally appropriate and effective. 
Early action protocols will also be developed for critical public service and community buildings, with variable responses 
built into these protocols to account for variable intensities of incoming storms. Training will then be provided to the 
relevant public and private sector actors on the application of these protocols to ensure decision- makers, that are 
integral to disaster response (such as NODS), have sufficient capacity to respond efficiently and effectively to the threat 
of an extreme climate event.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words , approximately 3 pages plus diagrams ) 
The proposed project will be implemented over a six -year period, from 202 1–2027. Antigua and Barbuda ’s Department 
of Environment (DoE)  will be the Accredited Entity (AE) for this project, as designated by the Government of Antigua 
and Barbuda (GoAB). The AE will be responsible for overseeing the implementation, financial management, evaluation, 
reporting and closure of the project. To support the selection of the DoE as the AE and highlight the DoE’s sufficient 
capacity to oversee the implementation of all project interventions, t he DoE’s Project Implementation Manual has been 
submitted as Annex 25 to this Funding Proposal .   
 
Executing Entity


---
*Page 30*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 86 
   
  
27 The most suitable name for these partnering government bodies in relation project implementation and in line with the AE’s AM A is ‘Affiliates’ 
of the AE as defined in Clause 1 of the AMA. This is because all of these entities, including the AE, are under the ‘common cont rol’ by the 
Government of Antigua and Barbuda.  Antigua and Barbuda’s Ministry of Finance (MoF) will be the Executing Entity (EE) for the project. As the EE, MoF will  
provide overs ight and manage entities in the respective government bodies (e.g. MoW, MoHWE, NODS and ABMS)  
that will be involved in the implementation of project interventions  (Table 3). MoF will be accountable to the AE for the 
project implementation. All operating policies and procedures will follow the DoE policies  and procedures .  
 
Table 3. Project Executing Entity and the preferred implementing partners for each project intervention.  
Project output  Project activity  Implementing Partner s or Affiliates27 
1. Climate -proofing interventions 
implemented in critical public service 
and community buildings to improve resilience to, and recovery from, 
extreme climate events.  1.1. Implement climate -proofing 
measures on critical infrastructure.  MoW  
1.2. Construct climate -resilient storm 
shelters attached to public clinics.  MoH WE; NODS; and MoW  
1.3. Construct a climate -resilient bunker 
to store emergency supplies for the 
health, energy, building and welfare 
sectors.  DoE; MoHWE ; MoW; and MoST   
1.4. Implement measures to preserve 
vital information/data within public 
institutions.  DoE 
2. Climate change adaptation 
mainstreamed into the building sector and relevant financial mechanisms.  2.1. Mainstream climate change 
adaptation into the building sector by making provision for the building code in 
the Physical Planning Act (2003) and 
updating the EMS plans.  DoE; DCA; and MoW  
2.2. Mainstream climate change 
adaptation for the building sector into public and private financial, insurance 
and banking sectors.  DoE  
2.3. Train relevant staff from the 
National Office of Disaster Services 
(NODS), Development Control Authority 
(DCA) and the Public Works Department 
(PWD) as well as the private sector on 
operational procedures for long-term 
monitoring, maintenance and upscaling 
of climate -resilient renewable energy 
(RE) and water harvesting technologi es 
in accordance with the national building 
code.  DoE; NODS; DCA; and PWD  
2.4. Train the local workforce on the 
installation, operation and maintenance 
of climate -proofing measures for the 
targeted buildings.  DoE  
3. Climate information services 
strengt hened to facilitate early action 
within the building sector to respond to 
extreme climate events.  3.1. Climate information services 
strengthened to facilitate early action for 
extreme climate events.  DoE; and ABMS  
3.2. Establish a formalised 
communication protocol to facilitate 
rapid information sharing and early 
action preceding an extreme climate 
event.  DoE; ABMS; and NODS  
 
Accredited Entity  
DoE will be responsible for overseeing the implementation of the proposed project in coordination wi th the national -
level Project Steering Committee (NPSC) and a national -level Project Management Unit (PMU). As the AE, DoE will: i) 
execute an agreement with MoF to establish clear roles and responsibilities for project execution , including the use of 
the DoE grievance redress mechanism and the AML/CTF provisions ; ii) ensure that the project is executed in


---
*Page 31*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 86 
   
  
28 with ad hoc meetings held wherever necessary  accordance with GCF and  DoE standards; iii) supervise, oversee and manage the implementation of project 
interventions; iv) report on project progress ; v) participate in the NPSC; and vi) ensure that project activities are well 
coordinated and aligned with national priorities. A Task Management Team (TM T) will be responsible for project 
supervision to ensure consistency with GCF and DoE policies and procedures. This TM will participate in: i) biannual 
NPSC meetings; ii) facilitating Mid- Term and Final Evaluations; iii) preparing Annual Performance Reports and relevant 
documentation; and iv) technical reviews of project outputs.  Project funds will be channelled through AE. The AE will 
be responsible for the procurement and efficient disbursement of financial resources for the implementation of all project 
activities.  
 
 
National Project Steering Committee  The National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) will comprise representatives from inter alia : i) DoE; ii) MoF; iii) the 
Ministry of Health, Wellness and the Environment (MoHWE); iv) Ministry of Works (MoW); v) Ministry of Education Science and Technology ( MoEST); and vi) Antigua and Barbuda Meteorological Services (ABMS). The committee will 
primarily be responsible for providing technical oversight and advisory support. This includes: i) overseeing project 
implementation; ii) reviewing annual workplans and project reports; and iii) approving any changes to the project’s 
targets, activities or timelines. Biannual NPSC meetings will be held
28 to take management -related and technical 
decisions, discuss the project's main performance indicators and provide strat egic guidance. Any changes made by 
the NPSC to the project’s Results Framework or timeline will be communicated to the PMU. In addition, the NPSC will 
be responsible for: i) overseeing the PMU; ii) providing technical and administrative functions; and iv) serving as the 
focal point for engagements and interactions between project stakeholders and partner organisations.  
  Full-time staff member s will be recruited competitively to fulfil the role of PC and PM.  The PC  who will be responsible 
for the daily on- the-ground implementation and management of the project. The PC will be primarily responsible for 
ensuring that the project achieves the targets set out in the Results Framework (Section E) to the required quality standards and within the specified time and budget allocations. To achieve these targets, the P C will: i) report directly 
to the PSC on project management -related matters; ii) manage the project in accordance with the specified workplans 
and allocated budg et; iii) ensure that all project interventions are implemented according to GCF and DoE guidelines; 
iii) manage and disburse financial resources allocated for the project during project implementation; iv) work closely with national and local authorities t o ensure that the project is managed effectively and that the needs of all beneficiary 
groups are considered; and v) oversee the efficient and effective information and knowledge- transfer to relevant project 
partners.  
 
The PM will be required to manage al l project risks  at all times . Many of the risks are ether medium or high. This is as 
a result of the fact that the project is being implemented on an Island where most of the items are being shipped , as 
well as the high risks of hurricane occurring during project implementation. A full time PM will therefore be employed to 
anticipate risks and address them early , before they can delay the project. The PM will also be responsible to meet with 
the Cabinet and the PMC to coordinate high- level stakeholders. The PM’ s role will be maintained until  project 
completion to allow for the fulfilment of all FAA requirement , including  submission of the terminal evaluation report —  
as well as any other required documentation — to the GCF and DoE . 
 
Project management unit (PMU)  
A PMU  managed by the MoF will coordinate the implementation of project interventions with the AE, EE and other 
implementing partners. This unit will be primarily responsible for coordinating project activities between the AE, EE and relevant stakeholders. The PMU will consist of: i) the PM; ii) a Project Coordinator (PC); iii) a Financial Officer  (FO); iv) 
a Procurement Officer (PO); v) an Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer (ESO); v i) a Communications Officer 
(CO); v ii) a Monitoring and Gender Officer; and vii i) an Administrative Officer (AO). Both the FO , PO and AO will report 
directly to the PM. Their responsibilities will include: i) providing administrative, logistical and technical financial supp ort 
to the PMU; and ii) compiling reports on the disbursement procedures for the project and projected requirements for 
project funding during the implementation phase.  The FO in particular will manage the process of requesting  financial 
disbursements from the AE.  . A full -time PC will be contracted competitively to support the PM in the implementation 
of day-to-day project activities . The PC ’s responsibilities will also include to serve as a focal point for facilitating all 
stakeholder engagements that will be undertaken during the project implementation phase.


---
*Page 32*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 86 
   
 Experience and track record of the Accredited Entity  
The Department of Environment will be the Accredited Entity for the proposed project. The DoE  has a proven track 
record of implementing resilience building projects  from the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF), the Adaptation 
Fund (AF) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF)  and the GCF . Key resilience projects implemented in recent 
years are listed below . 
• An integrated approach to physical adaptation and community resilience in Antigua and Barbuda’s northwest 
McKinnon’s watershed –  Adaptation Fund ($ 10 million USD ) 
• Sustainable Pathways Protected Areas and Renewable Energy UNEP (SPPARE) –  GEF ($2.6 million USD)  
• Building climate- resilience through innovative financing mechanisms for Ecosystem- based Adaptation – SCCF ($5 
million USD)  
• Energy for Sustainable Development in Caribbean Buildings (ESD) –  GEF ($ 0. 9 million USD)  
• Sustainable Energy Facility (SEF) –  GEF (1.02 million USD)  
• Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) project ‘ Integrated physical adaptation and community resilience through an 
enhanced direct access pilot in the public, private, and civil society sectors of three Eastern Caribbean small island 
developing states ’ – GCF  (20 million USD)  
• Resilience Back -Up Energy project –  ADFD Loan (15 million USD  
Experience and track record of the Executing Entity  
Antigua and Barbuda’s Ministry of Finance (MoF) will be the Executing Entity for the proposed project. The MoF has 
been identified as the appropriate government entity to fulfil this role because of it has the necessary technical expertise 
for the implementation of project activities  as well as its ability to provide financial risk mitigation measures (insurance, 
in-kind and cash) . The MoF has a proven track record of manging and imple menting multiple national and regional 
projects with a focus on climate change adaptation, sustainable development and public sector social and digital 
transformation. The projects that the MoF has supported over the last five years are listed below.  
 
• World Bank -  Public Sector Social Transformation Project (US$6 million)  
• 10th European Development Fund Project (€3 million)  
• 11th European Development Fund Project (€2.4 million)  
• World Bank –  Caribbean Resilience Facility (US$15 million)  
• World Bank –  Caribbean Digital Transformation Program (US$2 million)  
• World Bank –  ECPCGC (US$2 million)  
• Government of Canada – Eastern Caribbean Debt Management Advisory Services (CAD US$7 million)  
 
Figure 6 below shows the implementation arrangements for project implementation while Figure 7 shows the flow of 
funds and contractual arrangements .


---
*Page 33*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 86 
   
  
Figure 6. Project management structure for the proposed project.


---
*Page 34*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 86 
   
  
29 Further details on Antigua and Barbuda’s vulnerability to climate threats is presented in Section B.1. of this Funding Proposal and Section 3 of 
Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
30 Further details on climate trends and projections for Antigua and Barbuda are presented in Sections 2 and 3 of Annex  2: Feasibility Study.  
31 Government of Antigua and Barbuda. Antigua and Barbuda Recovery Needs Assessment. Available at: 
https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/Antigua%20and%20Barbuda%20executive%20summary_print_text%282%29.pdf   
32 Government of Antigua and Barbuda. Antigua and Barbuda Recovery Needs Assessment.   
Figure 7. Flow of funds and contractual arrangements for project implementation. The red arrows indicate the flow of funds while 
the blue lines show the contractual arrangements, including the types of contracts, between the relevant parties.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
As a Caribbean SIDS, Antigua and Barbuda is one of the most vulnerable countries to extreme climate events such as 
hurricanes and tropical storms29. These events have a signifi cant impact on the country’s economy, resulting in 
significant damaged to infrastructure losses in across key economic sectors, including tourism. Over the quarter 
century, the intensity and frequency of hurricanes has increased30, exacerbating the impacts of extreme climate events 
on the island nation’s economy. This includes a series of hurricanes and tropical storms hitting Antigua and Barbuda 
in 1995, 1998, 1999, 2008, 2011 and 2017. The impact of such events on the economy is severe. For example, 
Hurricanes Luis and Marylin (1995) resulted in a ~30% decline in the country’s GDP, while Hurricanes Irma and Maria 
(2017) resulted in US$136 million in damages and US$19 million in economic losses across major sectors in the 
country31. To fully recover from the damages and economic losses caused by the 2017 hurricanes, an estimated 
US$222 million in support was  required, including US$5 million for environmental recovery and US$11.5 million for 
disaster risk management. Table 4 below provides a sector -specific breakdown of these damages and losses as well 
as the estimated recovery needs.  
 
Table 4. Damages and losses caused by Hurricanes Irma and Maria as well as the recovery needs of the country .32 
Sector  Damage  
(million US$)  Losses  
(million US$)  Total  
 (million US$)  Recovery needs  
(million US$)  
Infrastructure  20.5 0.61 21 38.3 
Social  54.2 2.7 57 93.3 
Production  59.5 8.7 68.2 70.3 
Governance  0.87 0.75 1.5 2.2


---
*Page 35*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 86 
   
  
33 Caribbean Development Bank. Country Economic Review 2018; Antigua and Barbuda. Available at: 
https://www.caribank.org/sites/default/files/publi cation- resources/CDB%20Economic%20Brief%202018%20-
%20Antigua%20and%20Barbuda_0.pdf .  
34 Bank resolution refers to the restructuring of a bank by a resolution authority through the use of resolution tools in order to safeguard public 
interests, including the continuity of the bank's critical functions, financial stability and minimal costs to taxpayers.  
35 International Monetary Fund. 2015. Antigua and Barbuda. IMF Country Report number 15/189.  
36 A detailed description of project activities is presented in Se ctions B.3 and E.6 of the Funding Proposal.  Culture  1.15 0.76 1.9 1.4 
Total  136 18.9 155 222 
 
To address the impact of extreme climate events on the people and economy of Antigua and Barbuda, it is critical to integrate climate change considerations into development planning and to invest in building the resilience of critical 
public services and t he infrastructure that supports them. To address these impacts, the government of Antigua and 
Barbuda is seeking US$3 2.7 million of GCF grant financing to build the climate resilience of the building sector, focusing 
on climate- proofing critical public ser vice and community buildings. At present, the country has limited capacity to 
finance climate change adaptation interventions through domestic sources of financing – including both private and 
public sector finance.  
 Although Antigua and Barbuda is considered a middle income country on a per -capita basis, its size and small 
population means that it lacks the scale required to invest adequately in adaptation. The country also has a high public 
debt burden which, in 2018 , reached ~US$1. 4 billion — more than 88 % of the country’s GDP
33.  The estimate cost of 
consideration the cost of upgrading all buildings in the country to Cat 4 & 5 is  conservatively estimated about 6.4 Billion 
USD.  This burden is increased by extreme climate events, wit h recovery needs reducing economic growth and the 
ability of the country to repay public debt. Although this debt was expected to decline by 2019, long standing problems 
in the fiscal and banking sectors remain unresolved, including this unsustainable publ ic debt as well as persistent large 
financing gaps, high non- performing loans in the private sector and the  delay in bank resolution34,35. Restoring fiscal 
and debt sustainability has therefore been recommended by the Executive Directors of the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) as an urgent need to be addressed by the GoAB.  Because of this recommendation, the GoAB is prioritising 
overcomin g fiscal imbalances over investing in climate change adaptation.  The recent 2020 global response to the 
CoVID  19 virus all but makes it impossible for the country to further invest in resilience building.  This situation will 
impact both the public and the private sector for the next three years.   GCF support is therefore required to overcome 
the financial barri er to urgent ly addressing the climate crisis and by improv ing the climate resilience of the country’s 
building sector.  
 Several alternative financing options have been considered during project development, including government funding. 
However, fully financing the project through government funds is not feasible, with the GoAB having already extended 
its maximum feasible contribution of US$13  million (~ 33% of the total project cost) as co- financing. The threat of 
hurricanes will ensure however that the Government stay committed to this project regardless of the impact of the 
CoVID 19 response.   
 
GCF financing will be used to overcome the barriers to increasing the resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building 
sector to climate change threats. Grants from the GCF will only be used to address the additional impacts of climate 
change, with government co- finance being used to cover all baseline costs –  including business as usual 
repairs/maintenance to buildings that are necessary to ensure sustainability of cli mate- proofing interventions. With the 
support of GCF grant funding, the proposed project will deliver several adaptation benefits that will contribute to 
achieving a paradigm shift in the country towards climate- resilient sustainable development36.  
 
Without GCF support , and with the recent CoVID 19 pandemic , the public and private sectors in Antigua and Barbuda 
will continue to operate under the existing paradigm of reactively recovering from consecutive hurricanes , with national - 
and local -level deci sion- makers being limited in their capacity to plan for, and respond to, the increasing impacts of 
climate change. Moreover, Antigua and Barbuda’s critical public service and community buildings will become 
increasingly vulnerable to extreme climate events  such as hurricanes and tropical storms. This will result in: continued 
declines in the efficiency and effectiveness of critical services, including emergency response units, during and following 
these events; and increased damages and loss of life under f uture climate change conditions.      
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max.  500 words, approximately 1 page)


---
*Page 36*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 86 
   
 Participatory approach to climate -resilient sustainable development  
Proposed project interventions have been designed to deliver maximum adaptation benefits to vulnerable communities 
beyond the project lifetime. These benefits are centred around increasing the climate resilience of critical public services 
and will be high lighted during numerous workshops that will be conducted during the implementation phase. Uptake of 
climate resilience technologies within the building sector requires buy -in and commitment from all project partners to 
ensure that adaptation solutions cont inue to provide benefits to the population over the long term. The proposed project 
has been developed through a participatory and consultative process, which has allowed all relevant stakeholders to 
contribute to the design of the project interventions. U ndertaking the development of the project in this way has 
promoted the country -driven nature of the project, which is a key to ensuring sustainability of project interventions over 
the long term. An extensive stakeholder engagement plan (Section 10  of Annex 6 :  Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment and Management Plan) has also been developed to ensure that this participatory approach is continued during implementation. The impact and sustainability of project interventions will be further enhanced thr ough the 
project’s focus on ensuring gender -equal benefits are provided to project beneficiaries. Gender sensitive targets for all 
project activities have therefore been set in the project’s Gender Action Plan (Annex 8) to ensure that project 
interventions  are not gender -bias. This will contribute to the ownership of project activities by both women and men 
which, in turn, will result in gender -sensitive adaptation benefits being conferred beyond the project lifetime.  
 Upskilling public and private sector representatives for climate- resilient development  
Innovative solutions to increasing the climate resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector will be implemented under the project. Such solutions include: i) increasing the structural integrity of c ritical public service and community 
buildings to withstand high -intensity storms; ii) installing decentralised renewable energy and climate- resilient water 
harvesting solutions; and iii) establishing a climate- resilient bunker for the stocking of critical  supplies for the energy, 
medical, welfare and building sectors. Efficient and effective knowledge transfer is critical for achieving sustainability and encouraging scaling up and replication of these innovative solutions. As a result, public and private s ector 
stakeholders will be trained on climate- resilient adaptation solutions for the building sector, incorporating a training- of-
trainers approach to ensure that institutional knowledge of these solutions is maintained regardless of staff turnover. 
Techni cal staff from DCA (e.g. building inspectors) and MoW (e.g. building maintenance teams) as well as the local 
workforce will be trained on how to effectively implement, operate, maintain and monitor climate- adaptive measures 
installed on buildings in line w ith the requirements of the updated national Building Code. This updated code makes 
provision for climate change threats, detailing how buildings should be designed and upgraded to withstand Category 
4 and 5 storm events. Consumers and producers within the private sector will also be targeted to receive training on 
the application of this code, including: i) private user groups — 
for example, business owners and homeowners; and ii)  
private sector service providers — for example, architects, engineers and private contractors. The provision of such 
training will ensure that new building designs and upgrades are sufficiently developed to adhere to the updated Building Code. Moreover, it will enable business owners and homeowners to hold private contractors acc ountable to adhering 
to the Building Code when upgrades to private buildings are being conducted. Mainstreaming the use of the Building Code into national policy and regulation will further initiate a shift towards climate- resilient development across Anti gua 
and Barbuda’s building sector.     
 
Unlocking Private and Publica Secto rs investment into climate -adaptive technologies for the building sector 
beyond the project lifetime  
Funding for climate resilience infrastructure is available to the private sector by the Private Banks, Credit Union and 
the Government owned SIRF Fund.  The SIRF Fund will serve as the main mechanism to unlock private financing in 
several  segment of the po pulation, including : i) low income home owners and first responders  to upgrade existing 
homes to Category 4 and 5; ii) community buildings important for hurricane shelter and recover y, including churches, 
schools, clinics and community buildings ; and iii) small businesses that are important to the community and that 
traditionally provide services such as child care, small shops, bakeries etc. These sectors account for just over 50% of 
the buildings in Antigua and Barbuda. The SIRF Fund does  not provide grants to individuals but can provide grants to 
communities. In addition,  the Fund only provides funding for incremental cost therefore leveraging funding from the 
Government and or the pr ivate Banks.   
 
This GCF project r esources will be used to support the Government’s efforts catalyse the creation of additional entry 
points to  promote investment into climate- adaptive measures in Antigua and Barbuda (Activity 2.2).  Specifically, these 
resources will be used to expand and inform the Government of Antigua and Barbuda interventions via its SIRF Fund,  
as well as other financial enti ties for Cat 4 and Cat 5 infrastructure.  In particular, this will further strengthen the enabling 
environment for private sector access to information and finances from the SIRF Fund for adaptation in the building


---
*Page 37*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 86 
   
  
37 UNDP. 2011. Pacing the Way for Climate- Resilient Infrastructure. Available at: 
https://www.uncclearn.org/sites/def ault/files/inventory/undp_paving_the_way.pdf   
38 GIZ. 2011. Climate proofing for development. Available at: https://www.adaptationcommunity.net/?wpfb_dl=34  sector, in accordance with the guidelines  and criteria for the adaptation list of options. The GCF project outputs will 
assist the technology and capacity risks currently faced by the  SIRF Fund  with current Cat 4 & 5 construction consists 
of over engineering and not really a thoughtful attempt t o meet the standards via technical design and new technologies.  
Further this project will provide a new cadre of trained personnel which will increase skilled capacity for construction  
and for Renewable energy installations. Notwithstanding the lessons learn ed and success of this GCF project there will 
be a need to  increase capital into the SIRF Fund to meet the private sector demand . During the implementation of 
Activity 2.2, options for increasing financial inflows into the SIRF Fund is currently under consideration with the aim  to 
increase the available financial resources to be accessed to meet the funding gap to be experienced wit hin the private 
sector .   
 
To unlock Public Sectors investment in resilient infrastructure the Government of Antigua and Barbuda does not intend 
to use the SIRF Fund.   The Government however in 2020 announced the establishment of the Climate Resilience and 
Development Fund.  The purpose of the fund is to provide funding for climate resilience public sector projects.  This Fund receives funding from current taxes and levies on the tourism sector. Lessons learnt from this GCF project as 
with the SIRF Fund  will be providing this new Government Facility with technical guidelines on appropriate technologies 
and project design.   With the CoVID 19 outbreak however, it is not expected that these funds will be available for 
adaptation until the financial impact of the CoVid 19 pandemic  
has been addressed. Based on very early IMF 
discussions (no documents at this time) the CoVID 19 response will cost the Government over six  months of income 
and estimates that this will take the economy three years to recover .   
 
This project will  promot e the benefits of implementing adaptation solutions in the buildings in both the  public and private 
sector s. Stakeholders may be encouraged to further invest in climate change for future development. At present, there 
is limited  financial capacity for such investment, in both the private and public sectors  and this project will provide much 
needed information and trained capacity to use what resources available even more efficiently .   
 
Operation and maintenance beyond the project lifetime  
The sustainable operation and management of construction- related project interventions has been secured by 
identifying key government institutions to oversee specific project activities , with a commitment from the Government 
of Antigua and Barbuda to finance a ll operations , & maintenance and insurance activities required under the project. 
Interventions under Activity 1.1, focused on increasing the structural integrity of priority critical public service and 
community buildings, are expected to deliver adaptation benefits for 50 years37,38, while the installation of solar PV 
panels and climate -resilient  water harvesting solutions on targeted buildings are expected to deliver adaptation benefits 
for 20 years.  The expected lifetime of project interventions was determined based on consultations with local engineers  
as well as experts and representatives from the DoE, MoW and DCA. MoW  will oversee the implementation of climate-
proofing measures on critical infrastructure (Activities 1.1 and 1.4), while the Ministry of Health, Wellness and the Environment (MoHWE) will be responsible for managing the shelters that will be built on to five clinics in the country (Activity 1.2). Fur thermore, site-specific operational procedures will be developed for long- term maintenance of climate-
proofing interventions for each priority building, and these procedures will be integrated 
into the project O&M 
Framework.  The maintenance plans and costs  for the climate change adaptation measures to be installed on priority 
buildings are presented below.   
 
Table 5 below highlights the required maintenance interventions , including the frequencies , for the priority  buildings 
that will receive climate- proofing interventions under the project. The level of maintenance required for each activity is 
categorised as follows: i) minimum requirement, ii) recommended, iii) according to manufacturer specification, and iv) site-dependant. During project implementation, assessment s of the targeted priority buildings  as well as the associated 
maintenance should be carried out in accordance with the plan presented in Table 5 below.  
 
Table 5. Operation and maintenance works required for the climate adaptation upgrade of target priority buildings.  
Maintenance activity  Level of importance  Frequency


---
*Page 38*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 86 
   
  
39 CIDB. Infrastructure Maintenance Budgeting Guideline. Retrieved from: 
http://www.cidb.org.za/publications/Documents/Infrastructure%20Maintenance%20Budgeting%20Guideline.pdf  General Building Repairs ( minor 
repairs)  Minimum requirement  Yearly  
General Structural Repairs ( major 
repairs)  Recommended  Yearly  
Roof Structural Assessment  / Repair  Recommended  Yearly  
Windows, doors and shutters 
maintenance  Recommended  Yearly  
Electrical infrastructure and energy  
efficiency measures  Recommended  Yearly  
Maintenance of on-site water supply  Recommended  6 Months  
Storm water maintenance and 
cleaning Recommended  6 Months  
Wastewater  treatment  Recommended  Yearly  
 
Maintenance Cos t 
The cost estimates of annual O&M are represented as a percentage of the replacement costs, ranging from 4– 6%39. 
Table 6 outlines the base costs for the routine maintenance of interventions per building, to be conducted during the 
project lifespan,  according to the frequency presented in Table 8. In addition, Table 7 outlines the cost of maintaining 
project interventions beyond the scope of biannual and annual maintenance works.  
 
Table 6. Annual operations and maintenance costs per building.  
Maintenance activity  Cost per frequency (USD)  Total Cost/ 50 Year Period (USD)  
General Building Repairs (Minor 
Repairs)  500 25,000 
General Structural Repairs (Major 
Repairs)  200 10,000 
Roof Structural Assessment  500 25,000 
Storm Shutter Maintenance  500 25,000 
Electrical Infrastructure and Energy 
Efficiency Measures  500 25,000 
Maintenance Of On -Site Water 
Supply  200 20,000


---
*Page 39*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 86 
   
 Storm Water Maintenance and 
Cleaning  250 25,000 
Wastewater  Treatment  250 12,500 
 
Table 7. Cost of additional repairs beyond the scope of biannual and annual maintenance works.  
Maintenance activity  Cost of Additional Repairs (USD)  
General Building Repairs (Minor Repairs)  2,500  
General Structural Repairs (Major Repairs)  5,000  
Roof Structural Assessment/Repair  3,000  
Windows, Doors and Shutter Maintenance  3,000  
Electrical Infrastructure and Energy Efficiency 
Measure  4,500 
Maintenance of On-Site Water Supply  2,500  
Storm Water Maintenance and Cleaning  1,500  
Wastewater  Treatment  2,500  
 
Solar PV panels  
Table 8 outlines indicative maintenance tasks and frequencies for each component of the solar PV system. The level 
of importance of each maintenance task falls into four categories , namely:  i) minimum requirement, ii) recommended, 
iii) according to manufacturer specification, and iv) site dependant. In addition, the maintenance extent falls into two 
categories , namely:  i) total system (T) and ii) random unit (R).  
 
Table 8. Maintenance tasks and frequency for Solar PV arrays.  
Equipment  Task  Level of importance  Frequency  Extent  
Modules  Integrity inspection and 
replacement  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Thermography inspection  Recommended  Yearly  T 
Check tightening of clamps 
and bolts  Minimum requirement  Quarterly or before any 
major storms  R 
Module cleaning  Site-dependant  As required  T 
Internal inspection of 
junction boxes  Recommended  Yearly  T


---
*Page 40*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 86 
   
 Electrical cabinets 
and switchboards  Integrity inspection and 
cleaning Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
 
Check labelling  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
 
Electrical protection 
inspection and test  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
 
Check fuse status  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
 
Check surge protection  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
 
Check cables and terminals  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
 
Sensor verification  Recommended  Yearly  T 
 
Thermographic inspection  Recommended  Yearly  T 
 
Lubricate locks  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
 
Check tightening  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Cables  Integrity inspection and 
replacement  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
Check labelling  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
Check terminals  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
Inverter  Integrity inspection and 
replacement  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check labelling  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Electrical protection 
inspection and test  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
Check fuse status  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check surge protection  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Thermographic inspection  Recommended  Yearly  T 
Sensor verification  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
Check parameters  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Test Ventilation system  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check/replace batteries  According to 
manufacturer 
specification  Yearly  T 
Replace fans  According to manufacture 
specification  Yearly  T 
 
Safety equipment inspection  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
 
Clean/replace filter  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Transformers  Integrity inspection and 
cleaning Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check labelling  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R


---
*Page 41*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 86 
   
 Thermographic inspection  Recommended  Yearly  T 
Sensor verification  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check parameters  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check oil level  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check cooling system  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check MV surge discharge  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
MV switchgear  Integrity inspection and 
cleaning Site-dependant  Yearly  T 
Safety equipment inspection  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
Check labelling  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Electrical protection 
inspection and test  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Thermographic inspection  Recommended  Yearly  T 
Sensor verification  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check correct operation  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check fuse status  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check terminals  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check/replace batteries  According to 
manufacturer 
specification  Yearly  T 
Check lubrication  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check protection 
parameters  According to local code  Yearly  T 
Power Analyser  Integrity inspection and 
cleaning Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check labelling  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
Software maintenance  Recommended  Yearly  T 
Monitoring operation test  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check parameters  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Energy Meter  Integrity inspection and 
cleaning Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check labelling  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
Check parameters  Recommended  Yearly  T 
Check communication 
devices  Recommended  Yearly  T 
UPS Integrity inspection and 
cleaning Minimum requirement  Yearly  T


---
*Page 42*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 86 
   
 Check/replace batteries  According to 
manufacturer 
specification  Yearly  T 
Test Ventilation system  Recommended  Yearly  T 
Lights  Integrity inspection and 
cleaning Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Check operation  Minimum requirement  3 years  T 
Lightning protection  Integrity inspection and 
replacement  Recommended  Yearly  R 
Fences and Gates  Integrity inspection  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Lubrication of locks  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Vegetation  Clearing  Minimum requirement  Site dependant  T 
Safety Equipment  Integrity check and 
replacement  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
PV Support Structure  Check operation  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Integrity check  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
Check tightening  Minimum requirement  Yearly or before major 
storms  R 
Check potential equalization  Minimum requirement  2 years  T 
Weather station  Integrity check and 
replacement  According to 
manufacturer 
specification  Yearly  T 
Sensor verification  According to 
manufacturer specification  Yearly  T 
Check operation  According to 
manufacturer specification  Yearly  T 
Check/replace batteries  According to 
manufacturer specification  Yearly  T 
Monitoring operation test  According to 
manufacturer specification  Yearly  T 
Irradiation sensors  Integrity check and 
replacement  According to 
manufacturer 
specification  Quarterly  T 
Calibration  According to 
manufacturer 
specification  2 years  T


---
*Page 43*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 86 
   
  
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
32,706,59540 million USD ($)   
GCF financial instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter amount    Enter  % equity 
return  
 
(iv) Guarantees  Enter amount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  Enter amount     
(vi) Grants  32,706,595     
(vii) Result -based  payments  Enter amount     
(b) Co -financing information  Total amount  Currency  
13,458,035  million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
GoAB  In kind  8,508,370  million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
GoAB  Grant  4,899,665  million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
40 This value includes a contingency fee, which will only be used when required and in accordance with agreements between the AE  and GCF. 
The contingency fee is calculated a Monitoring operation test  According to 
manufacturer 
specification  Yearly  T 
Communication 
board  Communications test  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Stock of spare parts  Inventory of stock  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Inspection of stock  Minimum requirement  Yearly  T 
Test of stock  Minimum requirement  Yearly  R 
Stock replenishment  Minimum requirement  Monthly  T 
 
In addition to the operations and maintenance plan for climate -proofing interventions described above, multiple project 
partners have been engaged to ensure the management and restocking of critical supplies that will be housed within 
the climate- resilient bu nker (Activity 1.3). Responsibilities for the stocking of these supplies will be as follows: i) RE 
stock will be maintained   by the DOE, ii) medical supplies will be maintained by the MoHWE; ii) i food supplies will be 
maintained by the Ministry of Social T ransformation; and iii) building supplies will be maintained by MoW. To ensure 
that climate change adaptation measures to be constructed under the project provide maximum benefits, relevant 
project partners have committed to maintaining all climate proofing measures implemented under the project (including 
physical upgrades as well as decentralised RE and climate- resilient water harvesting solutions) for at least 20 years 
after implementation of the project. A framework for effective operations and maintenance of these measures is 
presented in Annex 21.


---
*Page 44*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 86 
   
 (c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
(d) 46,164,630  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max.  250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page )  
The following are financial resources flows that will run alongside this project  which 
are earmarked for similar outcomes  and are consistent with general mitigation and 
adaptation measures  (i.e. ‘Para llel Finance ’ as outlined in P aragraph 6(h) of the GCF 
Policy on Co-financing):  
 
• Global Environment Facility  Sustainable Energy Facility Project  exec uted by 
the C aribbean Development Bank  – USD 1.2 million (Grant)  – Focus on installing 
Back -Up RE Solutions for 10 public buildings (main ly clinics and school s) 
 
• Abu Dhabi Fund for D evelopment  Project  – USD 1.5 million (Loan) – Back -up 
RE Generation – Focus on installing Back -Up RE Solutions for 10-11 publi c and 
community buildings  
 
• Adaptation Fund Project  – USD 1.5 million  (Grant)  – Focus on installing Back -
up RE Solutions and Cat egory  5 Hurricane resilient climate proofing interventions  
via microfinancing for private households within a vulnerable community   
 • Italian Government Bilateral Grant  – USD 0.5 million  (Grant) – Back -up RE 
Solutions and EMS development for 19 schools  
 • Indian Government Bilateral  Grant  – USD 1 million  (Grant) – Back -up RE 
Solutions  and EMS development for 10 school s 
 
Total Pa rallel Finance = USD 4.2 milli on (Grant) + USD 1.5 million (Loan) 
 
It should be noted that some of these streams of parallel finance focus on providing 
RE solutions some of the remaining 20 priority buildings that  are not receiving RE 
which are not receiving RE solutions under Sub -activit y 1.1.5 of this project . 
C.2. Fin ancing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component  and output  as outlined in section B. 3. above and 
disaggregate by source of financing.  More than one co- financing institution can fund a single component  or output.  
Provide the summari sed cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget  plan as annex 4. 
Output  
 Indicative cost 
(USD)  
 GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Output 1. Climate-
proofing interventions implemented in critical public service and community buildings to improve resilience to, and recovery from, extreme 
climate events.  37,340,858  
25,082,823  Grants  12,258,035  Grants  GoAB


---
*Page 45*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 86 
   
  
Output 2. Climate 
change adaptation 
mainstreamed into 
the building sector 
and relevant financial 
mechanisms.  
 3,050,740  2,880,740  Grants  170,000  Grants  GoAB  
Output 3. Climate 
information 
services 
strengthened to 
facilitate early 
action within the 
building sector to 
respond to extreme climate 
events.  
 846,012  746,012  Grants  100,000  Grants  GoAB  
Total 
contingency fee  
requested from 
the GCF41 2,689,620  2,689,620  Grants     
Project 
management costs, including 
M&E costs (USD)  2,237,400  1,307,400  Grants  930,000  Grants  GoAB  
Indicative total 
cost (USD)  46,164,630  32,706,595  13,458,035  GoAB  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
Technology transfer  
Output 1 of the proposed project will facilitate technology transfer by implementing innovative climate change adaptation 
interventions within Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector. These interventions include: i) strengthening the structural 
integrity of priority buildings to withstand the impacts of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes  (Activity 1.1) ; ii) installing renewable 
energy (RE) and climate- resilient water harvesting solutions  to ensure continued power and water supply to critical 
public services during and immediately after a storm (Activity 1. 1); iii) constructing a climat e-resilient bunker  to store 
critical supplies such as renewable energy equipment, building materials, food and medicine (Activity 1. 3); and iv) 
constructing climate- resilient storm shelters attached to public clinics  (Activity 1.2) . The total cost of project activities 
that support technology transfer is US $37,340,858.  
 
The technologies  to be implemented under the project are not entirely new to Antigua and Barbuda, having all been 
implemented to some extent through various channels, including through private sector investment. What is novel under 
this project , is the approach of mainstreaming these technologies into the building sector . So, instead of being 
implemented on an ad hoc basis, these interventions will become the new standard approach for th e country .  
 
 
41 The contingency fee will only be used when required and in accordance with agreements between the AE and GCF. The total contingency fee 
amount is calculated as the sum of the following: i) 10% of the total GCF cost for project interventions under Output 1; ii) 5% of the total GCF 
cost for project interventions under Output 2; and iii) 5% of the total GCF cost for project interventions under Output 3. Further details on the 
contingency fee is presented in Annex 4: Detailed budget.


---
*Page 46*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 86 
   
 In the public sector, Antigua and Barbuda has begun developing/implementing several initiatives focused on increasing 
the resilience of infrastructure, including physical engineering work, installing solar panels on selected buildings and 
installing climate -resilient water harvesting solutions. Although these initiatives are limited in scale, they have 
capacitated the Government of Antigua and Barbuda’s procurement and legal systems to support the implementation of the proposed project inte rventions. While these legal and procurement systems are adequate for the project, there 
is limited capacity within the public and private sector, including the local workforce to implement, monitor and maintain the climate- proofing interventions proposed under this project. To address these limitations, capacity -building initiatives 
in the form of training and awareness will be delivered under Activities 2.3 and 2.4 to ensure that project interventions achieve maximum adaptation impact.  Capacity -building i nitiatives to be implemented under the project are described in 
further detail below.  
 
Capacity- building interventions  
Technical and institutional capacity of decision- makers and the local workforce will be built under Outputs 2 and 3 of 
the project. Capacity -building activities under Output 2, in particular, include: i) partnering with local training institutions 
such as Antigua and Barbuda Institute of Cont inuing Education ( ABICE)  to develop and deliver certified courses to the 
public and private sectors  focusing on  implementing, monitoring and maintaining  climate change adaptation measures 
specific to the building sector  (Activity 2. 3); ii) developing train ing programmes for relevant staff from the Ministry of 
Works (MoW) and Development Control Authority (DCA), as well as building inspectors, engineers, architects and 
draughtsmen on climate change adaptation technologies, and how to apply the updated national building code (Activity 
2.3); iii) training relevant staff from the National Office of Disaster Services (NODS), Development Control Authority 
(DCA) and the Public Works Department (PWD) on operational procedures for long- term monitoring, maintenance and 
upscaling of climate- resilient RE a nd water harvesting technologies in accordance with the national building code 
(Activity 2.3); and iv) training the local workforce on the installation, operation and maintenance of climate -proofing 
measures for the targeted buildings  (Activity 2.4) . The t otal cost of all capacity -building activities to be implemented 
under Output 2 is US $2,508,430.  
 
Under Output 3 of the project, capacity -building activities will focus on increasing the capacity of Antigua and Barbuda 
Meteorological Services (ABMS) to process climate data in real time and disseminate early warning information 
products. Specifically, Activity 3. 1 will strengthen the capacity of staff within ABMS to collect, process and manage 
climate data in real time, a s well as  develop early warning information products, including infographics that are locally 
appropriate and easily interpreted by vulnerable communities in the country. Activity 3.2 will  strengthen the capacity of 
ABMS to disseminate these early warning information products to critical service providers as well as the private sectors 
to facilitate early action.  The total cost of capacity -building activities to be implemented under Output 3 is US$ 846,012 .


---
*Page 47*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 86 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
The proposed project will contribute to the GCF’s fund -level adaptation objective of increased climate -resilient 
sustainable development by improving the resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s bui lding sector to extreme climate 
events — particularly Category 4 and 5 hurricanes. To accomplish this objective, project interventions have been 
designed to achieve two GCF fund- level impacts and three fund- level outcomes, as presented below42.  
 
Fund -level Impacts  
The proposed project will enhance the resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector by achieving the following 
fund- level impacts:  
• A1.0 — Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions; 
and 
• A3.0 — Increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment to climate change.  
 
Project Outcomes  
The proposed project will be evaluated against several relevant GCF impact assessment factors, as specified in the 
GCF Performance Measurement Framework. It is anticipated that the project will achieve three Fund- level Outcomes, 
described below43. 
 
A5.0 Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate- responsive planning and development.  Output 2 of 
the projec t will build the institutional capacity of decision -makers in Antigua and Barbuda to mainstream climate change 
adaptation into the building sector. This will be achieved through several elements of project design. Firstly, building 
codes that are currently  being updated through the SCCF -funded project will be integrated into legal frameworks and 
regulations at the national level to ensure effective uptake across all future infrastructural developments  (Activity 2.1) . 
Secondly, climate change adaptation will  be mainstreamed into public and private financial, insurance and banking 
sectors, which will facilitate investment in climate- resilient measures for the building sector such as RE and water 
harvesting measures  (Activity 2.2) . This will include increasing public and private sector access to financial resources 
through the SIRF Fund to finance the uptake of climate- adaptive measures in the building sector beyond the project 
lifetime. And finally, the effectiveness of adaptation options will be sup ported by the development of technical training 
programmes on the implementation, operation and maintenance of climate- resilient technologies for the building sector  
under project Activities 2.3 and 2.4.  
 
A6.0 Increased generation and use of climate infor mation in decision- making. The effective use of climate information 
will be a central component of early action in response to an anticipated extreme climate event. Output 3 of the proposed 
project will build on existing early warning initiatives by establ ishing a communication framework for Antigua and 
Barbuda’s Meteorological Services  (ABM S) that will maximise efficiency in reporting on early warnings to the relevant 
national disaster response agencies (including NODS). Furthermore, early action protocols  will be established under 
Activity 3.2  of the project  that link directly to the impact -based forecasts currently under development by ABMS . These 
protocols will be sector - and building- specific, detailing actions that need to be taken in preparation for a hurricane. By 
linking the protocols to impact -based forecasts, the timing and extent of preparation actions can be determined relative 
to the perceived risk. Establishing such a system for early action in Antigua and Barbuda will create a transformational  
shift in how the country responds to climate threats in the future.  
 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. Output 1 of the project will strengthen the 
adaptive capacity of local communities by installing climate change adaptation technologies on 54 priority buildings in 
the country. These adaptation measures include: i) increasing the structural integrity of priority critical buildings to 
withstand high- intensity storms; ii) installing decentralised renewable energy and climate- resilient water harvesting 
solutions on priority buildings; and iii) establishing community storm -shelters. By securing critical buildings, including 
 
42 Detailed information on the assumptions and estimates of the impact potential of the proposed project are provided in the project’s results 
framework and economic analysis (Section E of this document and Annex 3, respectively).  
43 A detailed description of the project activities that will be implemented under each output to achieve the GCF project outcom es is pr esented in 
Section E.6 of the Funding Proposal.


---
*Page 48*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 86 
   
 storm-shelters, the project will ensure that critical services44 remain operational throughout an extreme climate event, 
thereby increasing the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities. In addition, a climate- resilient bunker will be 
established to store emergency supplies that are urgently required for effective preparation, response and recovery. 
The availability of these supplies will help secure the critical health, energy, building and welfare sectors during and 
directly after an extreme event.   
 
Mitigation co -benefits of install ing solar PV panels on target infrastructure  
While the i nstall ation of solar PV panels on 34 target buildings under Activity 1.1  is primarily an adaptation solution 
proposed under the project, th e implementation of this intervention will also deliver mitigation co -benefits .  
 
The methodology used for calculating the avoided emissions that will be reali sed under the proposed project through 
installing solar PV panels on 34 target critical buildings is presented below.  
 
Climate additionality of the project   
The project is located in Antigua and Barbuda, which is a SIDS. According to CDM methodological tool f or 
demonstration of additionality of microscale project activities (Version 09.0), paragraph 11(a), project activities that are 
located in SIDS, employ renewable energy and have total installed capacity equal to or less than 5 MW are considered 
automatical ly additional.  Therefore, the proposed project is considered to meet the climate additionality requirements.  
 
Applied methodology.  
The proposed project activity involved the installation of PV generation systems in buildings that are connected to the 
grid. The PV system supplies electricity to the end users and does not supply electricity to the grid. Therefore, the 
emission reduction for the project can be calculated using CDM methodology AMS – I.F.: Renewable electricity 
generation for captive use and mini -grid (Version 3.0).  
 
Emissions reduction calculations  
The formula used to calculate the avoid ed emissions that will result from project interventions is presented below.   
 
yCO yBL y EF EG BE, ,2×=  
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑦𝑦 = 1,923 t  CO 2/yr 
𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵 ,𝑦𝑦 = 2,776 MWh/yr                                 [Calculated based on Annex 26]  
𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶2,𝑦𝑦 = 0.693 tCO 2eq/MWh                         [IFI TWG default grid emission factors]  
 
ER y = BE y = 1,923 tCO 2/yr 
 
Based on the above assumptions and calculations , installing solar PV panels on 34 critical public service and 
community buildings in Antigua and Barbuda will result in an estimated 1,923 tCO2/yr of avoided CO2 emissions.  
Further details on the methodology for calculating the emissions reduction potential of installing these solar panels are 
presented in Annex 26b : Emissions reduction analysis.  
 
Adaptation impact   
The distribution of project interventions covers the majority of built -up areas in Antigua and Barbuda, with increased 
coverage in the more densely populated and exposed communities. Because of this distribution, project interventions 
will directly benefit ~73,216 people in Antigua and Barbuda45 (52% women and 48% men) by securing the provision of 
critical services to these people during and directly after an extreme climate event , and indirectly benefit the entire 
population of the country . Overall, project interventions will increase the climat e resilience of 54 priority buildings in 
Antigua and Barbuda, which represents nearly one- third of the country’s public building portfolio of 254 buildings. The 
GCF investment into climate- proofing high- priority critical public service and community buildi ngs will be enhanced by 
the GoAB’s commitment to increase the climate resilience of the remaining public buildings. This commitment is 
evidenced by the government’s annual budget allocation for undertaking the necessary adaptation upgrades to 
 
44 including hospitals/clinics, police and fire stations as well as buildings that serve as storm shelters  
45 Further details on how project beneficiaries were calculated are presented in Section E2.4 of the F unding Proposal.


---
*Page 49*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 86 
   
 strengthen th e structural integrity of these buildings to withstand Category 4 and 5 hurricanes. Moreover, project 
interventions will facilitate public and private sector investment into climate change adaptation through demonstration 
of the adaptation and economic ben efits of climate- proofing existing infrastructure,  as well as  by creating entry points 
for increased access of  the public and private sector s to resources for financing adaptation upgrades, particularly in the 
building sector. The combined effect of projec t interventions will contribute to the creati on of an enabling environment 
for future upscaling and replication of climate change adaptation intervention within the public and private sector, locally,  
nationally and across the Caribbean region.     
 
A map showing the spatial distribution of the priority buildings to receive climate- proofing interventions under the 
proposed project are presented in  Figure 8  and 9 below.


---
*Page 50*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 86 
   
  
Figure 8. Priority buildings selected on Antigua island to receive climate-proofing measures under the proposed project. A) the 
spatial distribution of all priority buildings across Antigua island; and B) the spatial distribution of priority buildings i n St. John’s.


---
*Page 51*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 86 
   
  
Figure 9. Priority buildings selected on Barbuda island to receive climate-proofing measures under the proposed project. A) the 
spatial distribution of all priority buildings across Barbuda island; and B) the spatial distribution of priority buildings i n Codring ton. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
The proposed project will catalyse a paradigm shift within Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector from conventional 
development to an approach that prioritises the adoption of innovative climate -resilient solutions and early action. 
Details on how the project will contribute to GCF’s paradigm shift objective are presented below.  
 
Potential for scaling up, replication and strengthening policy, Financial and regulatory frameworks


---
*Page 52*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 86 
   
 The Caribbean is seeing for the first-time category 5 hurricanes  the first being in 2017.  There is no well-known  studies 
to show category 5 construction in public buildings,  including homes as well as costings and strategy for cost red uction 
in the Caribbean. The project will catalyse a paradigm shift in the building sector by establishing a new standard for the 
adoption of climate- resilient interventions that could be readily scaled up and replicated across the country’s public 
building portfolio46 as well as within the private sector. This process will be supported by: i) implementin g climate -
proofing measures on critical infrastructure, including RE and climate- resilient water harvesting solutions; ii) making 
provision for the b uilding code47 in the Physical Planning Act (2003); ii i) increasing the capacity of the public and private 
sector to apply the building code during all phases of development; i v) increasing the technical and institutional capacity 
of relevant user groups to install, operate, monitor and maintain climate- proofing measures  and v) potential fiscal and 
other policy interventions , including bulk purchasing. Through the implementation of these transformative adaptation 
interventions, the project will facilitate the wide- scale replication of climate- resilient development practices  nationally 
and across the Caribbean region. Table 9 below supports the regionally replication potential of the proposed project 
interventions  by showing that similar interventions have been identified as appropriate and viable solutions for these 
countries to adapt to the impacts of extreme climate events.  
 
Table 9. Countries in the Caribbean region where similar adaptation interventions to those proposed under this project are being 
implemented.  
Country  Project name and date  Intervention  Reference  Project cost (US$)  
Antigua and 
Barbuda, 
Dominica, 
Grenada  Integrated physical adaptation and 
community resilience through an 
enhanced direct access pilot in the 
public, private, and civil society 
sectors of three Eastern Caribbean 
small island developing states  • Enhanced direct access 
for CSOs and NGOs to 
adaptati on financing 
 https://www.greencli
mate.fund/project/fp
061 22.6 million  
Barbados  Water sector resilience nexus for 
sustainability in Barbados  • Enhanced access of the 
public to adaptation 
financing related to the 
water sector  
• Installation of rainwater 
harvesting and water 
storage systems in 
critical buildings or 
vulnerable residences  
 https://www.greencli
mate.fund/project/fp
060 45.2 million  
Barbados  Disaster risk and energy access  • Installation of solar 
panels in critical 
community buildings to 
be used as shelters  https://unctad.org/m
eetings/en/Presenta
tion/MSatoh_UNDP
_OECS_BBWorksh
op_p06_en.pdf  1.7 million  
Dominica  Disaster vulnerability reduction 
project  • Investment in  climate -
resilient infrastructure  https://projects.worl
dbank.org/en/projec
ts-
operations/project -
detail/P166540?lan
g=en&tab=overview  31 million  
Dominica  Dominica Community Resilience 
Enhancement Project  • Off-grid water and 
renewable energy 
supplies for emergency 
shelters  https://www.greencli
mate.fund/documen
t/dominica-
community -
resilience -10 million  
 
46 This portfolio identifies 200 public buildings for implementation of climate- resilient measures.  
47 The updated Building Code outlines design and construction standards for buildings to withstand high- intensity storm events (such as 
Cate gory 4 and 5 hurricanes).


---
*Page 53*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 86 
   
 • Resilience building of 
critical agricultural 
infrastructure  enhancement -
project -domcrep  
 
Knowledge sharing, awareness and the creation of an enabling environment  
To support the shift away from the current paradigm of reactive development and recovery48, climate change adaptation 
for the building sector will be mainstreamed into public and pri vate financial, insurance and banking sectors. This will 
facilitate a proactive approach to climate- resilient planning and development by the GoAB and the private sector. This, 
combined with awareness -raising activities promoting the benefits of installing climate change adaptation measures in 
the building sector, will encourage further investment opportunities into resilience building , thereby  enabling a greater 
percentage of the population to access financial resources for adaptation.  
 
The uptake and sus tainability of climate- resilient adaptation solutions will be enhanced through awareness campaigns 
that highlight the benefits associated with investing in climate- resilient practices. These benefits include: i) reductions 
in insurance premiums as a result  of a reduced risk to climate- proofed buildings; and ii) reductions in the economic 
losses caused by extreme climate events as a result of improved structural integrity of critical buildings. Efficient and 
effective knowledge transfer through the aforement ioned awareness campaigns will not only improve the uptake of 
climate -resilient building practices, but will also improve the preparedness of critical public services, local communities, 
business owners and other private sector stakeholders for the onset of extreme climate events.  
 
In addition to facilitating the uptake of climate- resilient building practices, the project will shift disaster response by the 
GoAB  from a reactive approach towards  a proactive climate -responsive planning. This will be focused on increased 
preparedness for extreme climate events such as hurricanes and tropical storms. The adoption of such an approach 
will be achieved through: i) establishing formalised communication channels betw een ABMS, national - and local -level 
decision -makers to communicate climate change- related information; ii) developing building- specific protocols for early 
action ahead of an extreme climate event and iii)  establishing a centralised online platform to all ow for user -friendly 
climate change knowledge products to be disseminated to all relevant decision- makers to facilitate early action in the 
building sector. Improved communication channels between ABMS and decision makers will become increasingly 
important  as the severity of storms increases with climate change. By facilitating rapid information sharing between 
ABMS, decision- makers and emergency response units, the project will create an enabling environment for early action. 
This will increase disaster -readiness as clear guidelines will be established for how to efficiently and effectively prepare 
for a high- intensity storm hitting the country, as well as highlighting the appropriate actions to take at different stages 
of storm development.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The proposed project will contribute towards achieving nine of the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
including: SDG 3 — Good health and well -being; SDG 4 — Quality education; SDG 5 — Gender equality; SDG 6 — 
Clean water and sanitation; SDG 7 — Affordable and clean energy; SDG 9 — Industry, innovation and infrastructure; 
SDG 11 — Sustainable cities and communities; and SDG 13 — Climate action. The c ontribution of the proposed project 
to these SDGs aligns with the country’s Medium- Term Development Strategy49 by providing the Necessary Conditions 
(NCs ) to achieve the country’s Sustainable Development Dimensions (SDD).  Firstly, b y contributing to SDGs 7, 9 and 
11, the project will assist in the achievement of SDD  1 — Optimal generation  of national wealth , by providing several 
NCs including i) technological adaptation and innovation ( including green technology); ii) inclusive growth (growth with 
equity); iii) adequate infrastructure (including energy, water and telecommunications); and iv) adequate skills and 
capacity to support sustainable development.  Secondly, by supporting SDGs 4 and 5, the project will contribute to the 
country’s SDD 2 — Enhanced social cohesion, by providing the NCs: i) adequate access to health care; ii) adequate 
access to education and lifelong learning for all; and iii) social inclusion. Lastly, by contributing to SDGs 3, 6 and 13, 
the proposed project will assist the country in achieving its SDD 3 — Improved health of the natural environment and 
sustained historical and cultural assets, by providing the NCs: i) water resource management; ii) disaster risk 
management and climate change resilien ce; iii) rural and urban planning; and iv) waste management and pollution 
 
48 Several barriers to adaptation (described further in Section B.2 of the Funding Proposal ) prevent Antigua and Barbuda from r ecovering 
effectively from extreme events. Rebuilding activities do not consider the increasing impact s of climate change, resulting in the country’s building 
sector becoming increasingly vulnerable to these impacts.  
49 GoAB Ministry of Finance and Corporate Governance. 2015. Medium -Term Development Strategy 2016 to 2020.


---
*Page 54*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 86 
   
 control. In addition, numerous environmental, social and economic co -benefits will be achieved through project 
interventions as described below.  
 
Environmental co -benefits  
Increasing the climate resilience of priority buildings through implementing climate- resilient water harvesting and 
renewable energy (RE) measures will yield several environmental co- benefits. These are listed below.  
 
• Increasing the water harvesting capacity of priority buildings will provide an additional source of freshwater for local 
communities. This will alleviate pressure on natural water resources by reducing the need for extraction from 
groundwater and surface r eserves.   
• Improving the water harvesting capacity of priority buildings will reduce stormwater runoff from priority buildings. 
This will result in reduced peak flow volume and velocity of stormwater runoff, therefore, contributing to reduced 
flood impacts  and erosion.  
• Currently, electricity is supplied by fuel oil -powered plants on Antigua and by diesel generators on Barbuda. The 
installation of energy -efficient appliances, solar water heaters and rooftop solar PV systems as an alternative 
renewable energy source in priority buildings will consequently reduce households’ dependency on fossil fuel 
energy sources and minimise the overall emission of GHGs.  
• Installing solar PV panels on 3 4 critical public service and community buildings in Antigua and Barbuda will result 
in an estimated 1,923 tCO2/yr of avoided CO2 emissions .50  
 
Social co -benefits  
Climate- proofing priority buildings will increase the resilience of vulnerable communities t o extreme climate events and 
provide several social co- benefits, which are described below.  
 
• Climate- proofing priority  critical public service and community buildings will reduce the exposure of these buildings 
to more frequently occurring high- intensity storms. This will contribute significantly to reducing the risk of injuries 
and loss of life during such events.  
• Installing decentralised renewabl e energy technologies on priority buildings will ensure the continued provision of 
energy during and immediately following extreme climate events. As a result, communication networks will continue 
to be operational, and businesses will be able to resume operations after an extreme event sooner than would be 
possible in the absence of decentralised power.   
• Installing climate- resilient water storage measures on priority buildings will lead to continued sanitation services as 
well as improved provision of and access to clean drinking water during and immediately following extreme climate 
events. This will have considerable health benefits for all users of these buildings and reduce the risk of waterborne 
diseases such as hepatitis A, cholera and typhoid fever that may result from storm or flood events.  
• Increasing the water storage capacity of priority buildings will increase national water supply during drought events 
and therefore reduce the adverse impacts of such events on vulnerable communities in Antigua and Barbuda.  
• Strengthening the technical and institutional capacity of the local workforce  on how to support the installation, 
operation and maintenance of climate change adaptation solutions that will be installed on targeted buildings  will 
contribute  to increased job security. This will in turn contribute to improved livelihood security as well as enable 
these individuals to apply similar interventions at scale in their private capacity, which will further increase their 
resilience to the impacts of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes.   
• Climate change knowledge products disseminated to all user groups through a centralised platform will lead to 
improved preparedness of critical services before the onset of extreme climate events.  
• Improving the dissemination of climate change knowledge products will increase the technical and institutional 
capacity of emergency services to deliver efficient and effective climate- responsive planning and early action.    
 
Economic co -benefits  
Project interventions will increase the resilience of priority buildings and critical services, resulting in improved climate-
responsive planning and early action. These factors will lead to reduced economic losses from extreme climate events 
and provide several s ignificant economic co- benefits, as listed below.  
 
 
50 The methodology for calculating the estimated total CO2 emissions that will result from the installation of 34 solar PV panels is presented in 
Annex 26b: Emissions reduction analysis.


---
*Page 55*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 86 
   
 • Employment opportunities will be created through the implementation of innovative climate -proofing technologies 
on priority buildings in Antigua and Barbuda. These opportunities include construction work for installing, operating, 
monitoring and maintaining climate change adaptation technologies, including decentralised RE and climate-
resilient water harvesting solutions. The creation of such employment opportunities will enhance the sustainability 
of proj ect interventions beyond the project lifetime.   
• The cost to repair priority infrastructure following extreme climate events such as hurricanes will be reduced through 
increasing the capacity of priority buildings to withstand the impacts of these events.  
• Increasing the climate resilience of priority buildings will decrease the time required for economic sectors to become 
operational and for communities to recover immediately following extreme climate events. This will reduce 
economic inactivity after a storm.  
• Improving preparedness of local communities for extreme climate events through strengthening climate information 
services in the country will reduce personal financial losses of community members. This is because communities 
will be better prepared to secure their personal assets in anticipation of an extreme event.  
• Using decentralised renewable energy and energy -efficient appliances will reduce the associated costs, allowing 
for additional funds to be made available for maintenance of the systems.  
  
Gender -sensitive development impact  
Climate- proofing critical public institutions  in Antigua and Barbuda will help to limit the disruptions  to core health, 
education and care services  following extreme climate  events . Given  the gendered demographics of the employees 
and users of these institutions, as well as gendered vulnerability to climate impacts , this will induce a gender -sensitive 
development impact, as described below.  
 
• Although certain institutions are predominantly operated and inhabited by men, women often dominate the users 
and employees of  — or more critically dependent upon  — the public buildings targeted for climate- proofing 
interventions. By reducing the disruptions to the functioning of these buildings and delivery of primary services, the 
project will ensure both women and men’s economic  and household  activities are able to resume without 
unnecessary delay, following an extreme climate event.  
• The project gender action plan (GAP) has outlined actions to promote gender equality in project implementation: i) 
implement an apprenticeship program for supporting the participation of persons 16 –  24 in construction activities 
of the project ; ii) implement training and certification opportunities provided to men to learn new techniques to 
transition to more resilient construction; iii) Development of gender responsive knowledge and communication 
products to include the promotion of women in construction;  
• Through these measures, the project disrupts underlying factors contributing to gender inequality in the country , 
thereby contributing to gender -sensitive sustainability  beyond the projects’ timeline.  
• Disseminating climate change knowledge products to all user groups through a centralised platform will help 
overcome gendered accessibility to information and resources, thereby ensuring gender -sensitive preparedness of 
critical services and increased response capacity of emergency as a result.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Vulnerability of the country  
As a SIDS, Antigua and Barbuda is particularly vulnerable to extreme climate events  such as hurricanes and tropical 
storms . In 2017, the country was ranked 13th on the global Climate Risk Index (CRI) and third in terms of losses per 
unit of GDP51. The country’s NDC identifies five primary reasons for the country’s vulnerability , includ ing: i) inefficient 
planning and management of the built environment; ii) high costs of repairing damage caused by recurrent extreme 
climate events; iii) the composition of the country’s economy52; iv) high population density in the coastal zone; and v) 
limited  availability of freshwater resources.  
 
The frequency of C ategory 4 and 5 hurricanes is already increasing and this is expected to continue under future climate 
change conditions. Such hurricanes have severe impacts on the country, including loss of life, economic losses and 
damage to infrastructure. For example, in 2017 Hurricane Irma caused an estimated US$222 million in damages and 
economic losses in Antigua and Barbuda53 and resulted in ~129 fatalities across the Caribbean and south -eastern 
 
51 Germanwatch. 2019. Global Climate Risk Index.  
52 The economic composition clarifies the miscellaneous economic, demographic and cultural attributes of Antigua and Barbuda, which form the 
basis for region's social and economic development.  
53 UNDP. 2018. Hurricane Irma and Maria: One year on.


---
*Page 56*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 86 
   
 region of the United States. The impacts of these extreme climate events on the country are further exacerbated by the 
country’s economic composition. For example, t ourism makes up the largest proportion of the country’s GDP (~60%) 
and accounts for the highest overall investment , at ~40%. The onset and aftermath of extreme events , including those 
events that had regional impacts , but did not directly  hit Antigua and Barbuda, significantly reduces tourist activity in 
the country . This not only affects revenue generation, but also leads to increased unemployment in the tourism sector . 
Such unemployment results from the closure of tourism- driven businesses and a subsequent reduction employment 
demand in the sector. Antigua and Barbuda is also heavily reliant on imports of basic supplies, including food, medicine 
and building materials. Extreme climate events have major impacts on these imports as shipping routes becoming 
unsafe and insurance premiums for shipping companies becoming unaffordable.  
 
Vulnerability of beneficiary groups  
Extreme climate events cause severe damage to critical public service infrastructure in Antigua and Barbuda, increasing 
the vulnerability of local communities in two primary ways. Firstly, these  events disrupt emergency services, disaster 
response, electricity and water supply, as well as telecommunications54. This results in critical services becoming non-
operational , which leads to reductions in economic productivity and mobility as well as increases in personal injury and 
loss of life. S econdly, extreme climate events cause damage to community buildings that are used as shelters, such as 
schools , churches , clinics and police stations . As a result, these buildings are rendered structurally insecure to provide 
places of safety to local comm unities during a storm, especially vulnerable groups such as women, children, the 
disabled and the elderly.    
 
Socioeconomic status  
Antigua and Barbuda’s GDP per capita and Human Development Index (HDI) are both relatively high (~US$16,86455  
and 0.7856, respectively) . This high GDP per capita is primarily the result of  persons  with high income relocating to the 
country. I n reality the per capita of the local people is much lower. The country’s small tax and market base as well as 
its high public debt — more than 88% its GDP in 201857 — constrain the government’s ability to allocate funding from 
the national budget for adaptation. Moreover,  limited opportunities exist  for the public and private sector to access 
financial resources for addressing climate change impacts, which was estimated to cost the country ~ US$20 million 
per annum58. This is nearly fifteen times greater than the DoE’s national budget was in 201759.   With climate predictions 
this cost is likely to increase substantially under future climate conditions. External investment is therefore critical to 
increase the pace needed to achieve climate resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s population to climate change.  
 
Institutional capacity needs  
Antigua and Barbuda’s National Capacity Needs Self -Assessment identified limited technical and institutional capacity 
as a major constraint inhibiting the implementation of adaptation interventions in the country. In particular, the GoAB 
has limited capacit y to mainstream climate change adaptation into policy - and decision- making as well as into relevant 
financial mechanisms for access by the public and private sector. This is largely a result of: i)  insufficient knowledge of 
climate change adaptation benefi ts, including on how to effectively implement, monitor and maintain climate change 
adaptation measures; and ii) the absence of formalised processes to enforce such mainstreaming.  
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The proposed project is strongly aligned with Antigua and Barbuda’s national priorities, having been designed in 
collaboration with project stakeholders at all levels. These priorities are summarised below.  
 
• Antigua and Barbuda’s GCF Country Programme  will achieve its target impact potential by integrating 
adaptation into development processes, thereby avoiding lock -in of long -lived, climate -vulnerable infrastructure. 
 
54 Hurricane Irma caused moderate damage to several hospitals and it resulted in the complete disruption of the electricity grid, which took six 
months to reconstruct. Damage to power stations also resulted in a shortage in water supply because of reduced pu mping and desalination 
capacity. Additionally, the hurricane resulted in widespread damage to roads and housing stock; 70– 95% of houses on Barbuda were damaged 
by the hurricane, leaving thousands homeless.  
55 World Bank. 2018. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=AG  
56 UNDP. 2017. Inequality -adjusted Human Development Index. Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/IHDI  
57 Caribbean Development Bank. Country Economic Review 2018; Antigua and Barbuda. Available at: 
https://www.caribank.org/sites/default/files/publication- resources/CDB%20Economic%20Brief%202018%20-
%20Antigua%20and%20Barbuda_0.pdf .  
58 NDC 2015.  
59 The 2017 budget for the DoE was EC$3,638,601, which is equivalent to US$1,347,629. This amount included provisions for: i)  staff salaries, 
training and travel allowances; ii) advertising and promotional costs; and iii) office supplies and repairs. It consequently leaves almost no 
resources for implementing climate change adaptation in terventions.


---
*Page 57*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 86 
   
 Specifically, the country programme identifies the bui lding, water and energy sectors as priority sectors to receive 
GCF support to increase their climate resilience. The proposed project is strongly aligned with these priorities in 
that it focuses on increasing the resilience of priority buildings to extreme  climate events, and decentralising power 
and water supply to ensure continued provision of power and water during and immediately after an extreme event. 
Moreover, these interventions have been designed to be scalable and replicable both nationally and re gionally, 
therefore, enhancing the adaptation impact of the interventions.     
• The Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) of 2015 outlines  the country’s commitments to addressing 
climate change threats through reducing GHG emissions (Article 2) and increasing the adaptive capacity of the 
population of Antigua and Barbuda (Article 4). The proposed project aligns specifically with the country’s adaptation 
priorities in that project interventions will increase the climate resilience of priority buildings.  
• Antigua and Barbuda’s Readiness Proposal contributes  to the climate change adaptation objectives outlined in 
the Paris agreement by: i) engaging in adaptation planning processes; ii) supporting the adaptation planning in the 
country by developing national climate assessments that include climate- resilient sector plans for six sectors; iii) 
synthesising priority actions into a National Adaptation Plan (NAP); and iv) conducting technical studies in 
preparation for the implementation of new climate change regu lations. The proposed project will build on the 
outcomes of the Readiness Proposal  in several ways . Firstly, Output 1 of the project will contribute to reduc ing the 
risk of critical public service and community buildings in Antigua and Barbuda. This output links directly to 
Readiness Proposal Sub- outcome 2.1: Country Programme for climate finance developed across the climate 
finance landscape, specifically with regards to identifying major interdependencies and vulnerabilities within the 
water, power and telecommunications sectors and for critical infrastructure in general. Secondly, Output 2 will 
enhance the technical and institutional  capacity of the GoAB and r elevant projec t stakeholders for climate-
responsive planning. This intervention links directly with Readiness Proposal Sub- outcome 2.3: stakeholder 
engagement. Lastly, under Activity 2.2 of the project climate change adaptation will be mainstreamed into public 
and private financial, insurance and banking sectors . This intervention is linked directly to the Readiness Proposal 
Sub-outcomes 2.1: Country Programme for climate finance developed across the climate finance landscape;  and 
4.5: private sector engagement.    
• Antigua and Barbuda’s Medium -Term Development Strategy (MTDS) outlines the strategies and actions to be 
undertaken from 2016 –2020 to meet the national goal of becoming a developed country in 15 –20 years60. Within 
the MTDS, seven Flagship Priorities are emphasised, with two of these directly relating to improved buildings and 
infrastructure. The technical and institutional capacity of the local workforce, as well as private sector consumers 
and producers61 will be built through developing and delivering trai ning programmes under Output 2 of the project. 
These programmes will focus on the application of the updated Building Code as well as on effective techniques 
for implementing, monitoring and maintaining climate change adaptation measures on infrastructure62. This output 
aligns closely with Flagship Priority One of the MTDS, which focuses on inter alia the renewal and maintenance of 
critical infrastructure.  
 
Stakeholder engagement  
The proposed project was designed following an extensive consultative process  with the DoE, which is National 
Designated Authority (NDA) for Antigua and Barbuda and is responsible for the overall management of Antigua and 
Barbuda’s GCF portfolio, as well as all other relevant project stakeholders. These stakeholders included representatives 
from DoE, Met Office, NGOs and local communities. Three in- country missions have been conducted during the project 
development phase.  
 
In March 2017, an initial scoping mission was undertaken during which consultation workshops wer e held with multiple 
project partners63 to: collect baseline information, discuss project implementation arrangements; identify potential risks 
to the project; and establish methods for ensuring the sustainability of project interventions. Following the in itial scoping 
mission, a second in- country mission was conducted in August 2017 which included technical discussions with relevant 
government representatives on site selection processes. Shortly after the second mission, Hurricane Irma made landfall 
on the  island of Barbuda, necessitating further discussion on national priorities. This led to the identification of target 
 
60 Medium -Term Development Strategy 2016 to 2020 (MTDS). 2015. Government of Antigua and Barbuda.  
61 private sector consumers include business owners and homeowners, while private sector consumers refer to architects, engineer s and private 
contr actors.  
62 such measures include climate- resilient water harvesting and decentralised renewable energy  
63 including: i) the Chief Fire Officer; ii) Archives Housing; iii) Antigua State College and Five Island Campus; iv) Ministry o f Finance; v) National 
Parks; vi) MSJMC; vii) Analytics Lab; viii) Assistant Commissioner of Police; ix) All Saints Service Complex; x) PWD; xi) NODS; and xii) the 
Deputy Director of the DoE.


---
*Page 58*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 86 
   
 priority buildings to receive climate -proofing interventions64. Following these discussions, site visits to the identified 
target buildings were undertaken to validate the selection of these buildings to receive adaptation measures under the 
project.  
 
A final mission was undertaken in August 2019 to: i) collect additional baseline information; ii) visit the identified target 
buildings that w ill receive climate- proofing measures under the project; iii) collect necessary climate data to strengthen 
the climate rationale of the project; iv) identify and validate potential project interventions — including appropriate 
climate -proofing measures — in collaboration with relevant stakeholders; v) engage with the DCA  —  as the link to the 
private sector — and MoF to discuss how the private sector could contribute to and benefit from integrating climate 
change adaptation into their relevant plans and proc esses; vi) discuss project financing — including co- financing; and 
vii) determine roles and responsibilities of the relevant implementing entities for the project.   
 
Further details on the stakeholder engagement process are presented in Section 10 of Annex 6: Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment and Management Plan.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The proposed project is requesting US$32.7 million  in grant finance from the GCF to enhance the climate -resilience of 
Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector to extreme climate events. This GCF investment will be supported by the 
Government of Antigua and Barbuda (GoAB), which has committed approximately  US$13 million in co- financing. GCF 
financing will be used to overcome the barriers to increasing the resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector to 
climate change threats. Grants from the GCF will only be used to address the additional impacts of cli mate change, 
with government co- finance being used to cover all baseline costs –  including business as usual repairs/maintenance 
to buildings that are necessary to ensure sustainability of climate- proofing interventions. With the support of GCF grant 
fundi ng, the proposed project will deliver several adaptation benefits that will contribute to achieving a paradigm shift 
in the country towards climate- resilient sustainable development65.The combined amount of US$46.1 million  will be 
used efficiently and effectively to: i) increase the climate resilience of critical public service and community buildings; ii) 
mainstream climate change adaptation into the building sector and therefore unlocking opportunities for investment into 
innovative climate -adaptive solutions for public and private sector buildings; and iii) strengthen the technical and 
institutional capacity of decision- makers in Antigua and Barbuda’s public and private sector for early action and rapid 
response to climate threats. T he cost -effectiveness of proposed project interventions as well as a summary of the 
international best practices and lessons learned used to inform project development are presented below.   
 
Cost -effectiveness of project interventions  
 
64 including: i) Police Headquarters, Antigua; ii) MSJMC, Antigua; iii) DoE Office, Antigua; iv) Police Station, Barbuda; v) Fire Station, Barbuda; 
vi) Community Centre, Barbuda; vii) Barbuda Clinic; viii) Barbuda Secondary School; ix) Fisheries Complex, Barbuda; x) Revers e Osmosis 
Plant, Barbuda; and xi) NODS, Barbuda  
65 A detailed description of project activities is presented in Sections B.3 and E.6 of the Funding Proposal.


---
*Page 59*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 86 
   
 In recent years , Antigua and Barbuda  has experienced  several Category 4 and 5 hurricanes, resulting in serious 
damage levels. In order to take decisions regarding the type of climate change adaptation options that the government 
should respond with, it is necessary to understand the adaptation expenditure options and the associate d likely avoided 
hurricane impact costs. As the two options will have very different cost and impact implications, it is necessary to 
analyse the intervention expenditure and impact avoidance of the different adaptation options. A cost -effectiveness 
analys is has been employed to inform the decision- making. This analysis will identify which adaptation options will offer 
the greatest levels of cost -avoidance,  or in other words, which option will be the most effective spend for the 
Government of Antigua and Barbuda. Four plausible scenarios facing Antigua and Barbuda society were developed 
and are outlined in Figure 10 below.     
 
Business as usual with ‘normal’ weather scenario . Under  this scenario government chooses to respond in a manner 
like the past, where infrastructure is repaired anticipating the past ‘normal’ weather. Buildings are repaired using 
conventional repairs, and the centralised water an d energy supply system is maintained. To all intents, it is a business 
as usual response. In terms of the climatic conditions, hurricane phenomena are assumed to be similar to the past, 
with occasional Category 3 hurricanes.  
 
Business as usual with extreme weather scenario . In this scenario,  government also responds in the past manner, 
where infrastructure is repaired in a conventional manner anticipating ‘normal’ weather. Buildings are repaired using 
standard responses, and the centralised water and energy supply system is maintained. However, in terms of climatic 
conditions, the Antigua meteorological data from 1970 to 2013, and 2017 is adopted, which includes hurricanes of 
greater frequency and greater intensity (at C ategory 4 and 5 levels).     
 
Resilient response with ‘normal’ weather sce nario . In this scenario , government responds in a climate resilient 
manner, by anticipating future extreme weather.  In terms of the response to infrastructure, 54 key government buildings 
are strengthened to resist C ategory 5 hurricanes (that is, 25% of 200 key government buildings), and water and energy 
supply is decentralised to allow for multiple supply options (to reduce the risks associated with a single supply system).  
In terms of human and institutional capital, technical capacity is built in the p ublic and private sector, building codes are 
regulated, innovative finance facilities to promote building adaptation is provided and an early warning system is 
established.  In terms of the climatic conditions, hurricane phenomena and trends are assumed to be like the past (1900 
to 1950).   
 
Resilient response with extreme weather scenario . Here government responds in a climate resilient manner by 
strengthening 54 key government buildings to resist Category 5 hurricanes, and water and energy supply is 
Figure 10. The four plausible scenarios  analysed to determine the cost -effectiveness of proposed project interventions.


---
*Page 60*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 86 
   
 decen tralised to allow for multiple supply options. Technical capacity is built in the public and private sector, building 
codes are regulated, innovative finance facilities to promote building adaptation is provided and an early warning system 
established. Climate change projections under both the RCP4.5 and 8.5 scenarios66 indicate that, although the total 
number of storms is not expected to change significantly, there will be an increase in the frequency of high -intensity 
storms (Category 4 and 5 hurricanes) experienced by Antigua and Barbuda.  
 
The expenditure on alternat ive intervention options were clustered into two broad packages, namely:  
• A baseline package representing the conventional response to C ategory 3 hurricane impacts and includes a total 
capital cost of US $10.4 million and an annual operating expenditure of U S$64,800. 
• A climate resilient package representing a retrofit of 54 buildings for C ategory 5 hurricanes, capacity building 
interventions to lever climate resilient private sector responses and includes a total capital cost of US$23 .2 million  
and an annual operating expenditure of US $717,910.  
 
The Net Present Value (NPV) of the baseline or business as usual intervention package is US$13.8 million , and the 
climate resilient retrofit is US$36.9 million — the climate resilient option being 2.6 times  greater than the baseline. The 
proposed project’s climate resilient NPV is comparable to the cost of similar interventions  within the Caribbean. For 
example, a project in Barbados  addressing enhanced access of the public to adaptation financing in the water sector 
and the installation of rainwater harvesting systems cost  US$45.2 million, whereas a project in Dominica addressing 
the investment in climate- resilient infrastructure cost US$31 million ( Table 9). To judge the whether the expenditure is 
justifiable, it is necessary to quantify the interventions’ impacts in the four scenarios. The impacts of the scenarios were 
estimated by:  
• Firstly, analysing the impacts of single hurricane events (both C ategory 3 and 5 hurricanes) when combined with 
government intervention packages – either a business as usual response or a climate resilient response.  
• Secondly, summing the costs of repeat hurricane events ( Category 3 or 5 or both) in either the ‘normal’ or extreme 
weather scenarios over the next 50 years.  
 
The quantum of the impacts were estimated as avoided losses  using i) direct market values with respect to 
manufactured capital as a proxy for the loss in infrastructure, ii) loss in income as a proxy f or the impact on the economy 
and welfare of people, and iii) the human capital approach as a proxy for the impact on the productive capability of the 
population as well as pain and suffering.  
 
The analysis then used ‘normal’ hurricane trends (i.e. more C ategory 1,2 and 3 hurricanes) reflected in the period 
1900 –1950 and extreme hurricane trends (i.e. more Category 4 and 5 hurricanes) reflected in the period 1970 –2013 
and in 20017 to count and sum the different hurricanes and to combine these with the impact  costs over 50 years for 
each scenario. A comparison of the four scenarios’ intervention costs and hurricane impacts is outlined in Figure10 .. 
Note the following:  
• In a business as usual with ‘normal’ weather , the cost of the interventions is USD 13.8 million, with a USD 551.9 
million impact cost. However, in a business as usual with extreme weather , while the intervention costs are the 
same, the impact cost is USD 17.2 billion, orders of magnitude greater.   
• On the other hand, in a climate resilient with ‘normal’ weather , the intervention cost is USD 36.9 million, some USD 
23 million  more than the business as usual  costs.  However, in this scenario, the impact costs are USD 214, some 
USD 338 less than in a business as usual with ‘normal’ weather . The additional USD 23 million spend buys a cost 
avoidance of USD 337.9 million.  Therefor e, even in a ‘normal’ weather scenario, a climate resilient intervention is 
a no- regret investment.  In terms of a climate resilient with extreme weather  scenario, the impacts costs are USD 
8 billion, some USD 9.1 billion less than business as usual with extreme weather .  In this case, the additional USD 
23 million resilient intervention buys a USD 9.1 billion cost avoidance. This is a highly cost effective spend. Error! 
Reference source not found.  below presents a comparison of intervention costs and associated hurricane losses 
under the four scenarios.  
 
 
66 These representative concentration pathways (RCPs) are based on the main forcing agents of climate change, including GHG emis sions, 
GHG concentrations and land -use change. RCP4.5 represents the likely best -case scenario with a peak radiative forcing of 4.5 W/m2 (~650 
ppm CO2 eq) at stabilisation after 2100. RCP8.5 represents a very high GHG emission scenario with a peak radiative forcing of  8.5 W/m2 
(~1,370 ppm  CO2 eq) and no expected stabilisation in emissions. RCP8.5 indicates a business as usual scenario where the rate of GHG 
emissions continues to increase with no mitigation measures.


---
*Page 61*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 86 
   
 Table 10. Comparison of intervention costs and associated hurricane impact costs in the four scenarios.  
 
  Net present value (NPV) of 
the expenditure on 
interventions (USD 
millions)  NPV of "Normal" 
hurricane impact costs 
(USD millions)  NPV of extreme 
hurricane impact costs 
(USD millions)  
Baseline: BaU interventions   
$                                       13.8   
$                               551.9   
$                          17,253.0  
Resilient interventions   
$                                       36.9   
$                               214.0   
$                            8,091.4  
Differences between Business 
as usual and Resilient spend 
and cost avoidance   
$                                       23.1   
$                               337.9   
$                            9,161.7  
 
The cost -effectiveness analysis identifies which options provide the greatest magnitude of avoided losses to society 
per dollar spent on interventions. Note the following:  
• The ‘normal’ hurricane exposure with a business as usual intervention, constitutes the baseline or the standard by 
which the other interventions are evaluated. In the comparative ratio, the baseline becomes ‘1’. Furthermore, in 
this scenario, a US $1 spend on interventions is associated with a hurricane impact cost of US $39.6. On the other 
hand, a climate resilient response with ‘normal’ weather , is associated with a US$5.8 hurricane impact cost to 
society per dollar spend, or some 15% of the baseline – a much lower impact.  
• In the business as usual response with extreme weather  scenario, the loss could be as high as US$1,246 per dollar 
spend or 31.3 times greater than the baseline scenario. In terms of a climate resilient response with extreme 
weather  scenario, the loss could be US$219  per dollar spent, orders of magnitude lower than the baseline.   
• In both weather scenarios, the resilient interventions offer more cos t-effective responses than a business 
as usual response,  with the expected avoided losses under the project at US$1.15 billion reduction in loss 
of assets at mid -term and US$3.34 billion reduction in loss of assets at final term   
 
Application of best practices in the building sector  
Best practices from the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Building Code and the Caribbean Disaster 
Mitigation project were used to inform the design of climate proofing interventions to be implemented under the 
proposed project. Lessons learned from numerous baseline investments into climate change adaptation in Antigua and 
Barbuda were also used to guide the design of all project interventions. Such lessons include appropriate mechanisms 
for ensuring that project activities are i mplemented in a participatory, gender -inclusive and sustainable way. The specific 
international best practices and lessons learned that were applied to the design of the proposed project and that will  
contribute to the efficiency and effectiveness of project interventions are summarised below. Specific details on all best 
practices and lessons learned relevant to the project are presented in Section 7 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
 
International best practices and lessons learned identified for the project  include:  
• using climate- resilient materials for increasing the structural integrity of critical public service and community 
buildings, such as pitch pine and / or mahogany wood for hurricane shutters and window frames, as well as straps, 
bolts or clamps f or securing roofs;    
• ensuring that designs of buildings under future climate change conditions do not include long overhangs, which are 
at risk to high -intensity storms;  
• incorporating traditional knowledge into training for engineers, architects, draught smen on how to design and 
implement climate- resilient solutions in the building sector;  
• increasing compliance with the standards and guidelines stipulated in the national building code;  
• updating the national and local policy framework for the building sect or to ensure that future development adopts 
changes in international standards regarding the technical specifications required by all buildings under changing 
climate conditions;


---
*Page 62*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 86 
   
 • drawing on regional experiences and resources to increase capacity to respond  to the impacts of extreme events;  
• applying an integrated, systemic and coordinated approach to disaster response through the establishment of 
formalised communication channels;  
• developing appropriate strategies for securing financial resources for project  development and implementation;  
• effectively managing the available financial and human resources to ensure the efficient and cost -effective 
implementation of project interventions;  
• undertaking regular monitoring and evaluation of climate- adaptive interventions to ensure that the most effective 
and appropriate solutions are being implemented under future conditions of climate change;  
• engaging and collaborating extensively with all relevant project stakeholders will encourage buy -in from national - 
and loca l-level decision -makers therefore contributing to the sustainability of proposed adaptation interventions 
over the long term; and  
• implementing effective financial and project management strategies to ensure the efficient use of financial 
resources and avoi d delays during the implementation phase.


---
*Page 63*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 86 
   
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Frameworks  under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes 
as a whole, including in respect of any co- financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☐ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
 
67 Details on the vulnerability analysis conducted that generated beneficiaries’ figures, including the methodology, are presented in Section 10 of Annex 2: Feasibility 
Study.  E.2. Core indicator targets  
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A.  
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
and cross -cutting only)  Annual  1,923 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  38,460 t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project financing   47,403,933 million    USD     
(b) Requested GCF amount    33,945,898  million   USD  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  _____  t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO 2eq (d = a / c)  _____   Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO 2eq removed 
(e = b / c)  _____   Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross- cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged    13,458,035  million   USD  
(g) Public source co- financed    13,458,035   million  USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  _____   Choose an item.  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 0.4  
(j) Public source co- financing ratio (j = g / b)  0.4  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  _____  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  73,216 people67 
38,072 women and 35,144 men  
Indirect  94,400 people;  
49,088 are women and ~45,312 are men  
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 17.


---
*Page 64*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 86 
   
  
E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of 
the most vulnerable 
people, communities 
and regions  A1.1 Change in 
expected losses of 
lives and economic 
assets (US$) due to 
the impact of extreme 
climate -related 
disasters  Initial Situation 
Overview68  
 
Initial Damage 
Human Needs 
Assessment69  
 
Detail Sector 
Damage 
Assessment70  
 
Recovery needs 
assessments/Post 
Disaster Needs 
Assessment 71,72 
 
Mapping of affected  
area using GIS 
 
Report/assessment  
of losses  avoided  
 
Building 
Maintenance  
Reports  
 
 
 
 US$6.6 billion in 
economic losses per 
Category 4 or 5 
event  
 
 $1.5 billion 
reduction in 
loss of 
assets  $3.34 
billion 
reduction 
in loss of 
assets  Climate change 
adaptation measures 
implemented on 
target buildings 
will be adequate 
to meet current 
climate 
projections.  
 
 
 
 
68 Conducted by a Rapid Needs Assessment Team of national and local authorities. The team is mobilized within 24 hours and the a ssessment report is 
availabl e within 3 days and is shared by the National Emergency Operation Center (NEOC)  
69 This assessment is mobilized within 7 days and is conducted by CARICOM as well as national and local authorities. A report is  produced within 14 days 
shared by NEOC  
70 Mobiliz ed after 14 days and is conducted by national and sector experts  
71 If a Category 4 or 5 hurricane hits the country within the project implementation period 
72 Following an extreme climate event, the GoAB conducts a recovery needs assessment, supported by organisations such as the Global Facility for Disaster 
Reduction and Recovery, United Nations, European Union, Caribbean Development Bank and the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank.  Focuses on (i) the 
valuation of physical damages and economic losses; and, (ii)  the identification of human recovery needs of the affected population.  E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  73,216 people (~78% of the total population)  
Indirect  Project interventions will indirectly benefit 100% of the total 
population of Antigua and Barbuda (i.e. ~94,400 people).  
For a multi -country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.


---
*Page 65*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 86 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final


---
*Page 66*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 62 OF 86 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
A3.0 Increased 
resilience of 
intrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate change  A3.1 Number of 
physical assests made 
more resilient to 
climate variablility and 
change, considering 
human benefits  
 
 Building resilience 
scorecard73, 
 
Government 
building upgrade 
reports/construction 
logs  
 
Government asset 
registers  
 
Site surveys  
 
 52 priority buildings 
at Level 0  
 2 priority buildings 
with value USD 
8,617,188 at Level 
1
74   
 27 priority 
buildings at Level 2 with 
value USD 
53,354,316.
5375 54 priority 
buildings at Level 3 
with value  
USD 
106,708,6
33.07  
76 Climate change 
adaptation 
measures 
implemented on 
target buildings 
are adequate for 
predicted 
extreme climate 
events.  
 
Persons working 
in the climate-
proof priority 
buildings are able to return to 
work and provide 
critical services 
during and after 
a storm.   
 
 
 
 
 73 Level of scale measures the potential to withstand a Category 4 or 5 hurricane -  Level 0: Building infrastructure cannot withstand a Cat 4 or 5 hurricane and 
is fully reliant on centralised water and energy systems; Level 1: Building infrastructure will withstand a Cat 4 or 5 hurricane but still fully rel iant on centralised 
water and energy systems; Level 2: Building infrastructure will withstand a Cat 4 or 5 hurricane and still part ially reliant on centralised water and energy systems; 
Level 3: Building infrastructure will withstand a Cat 4 or 5 hurricane and fully equipped with self -sustaining water and renewable energy systems.  
77 The baseline to be confirmed in year one to maintain midterm and final targets relative to the baseline.  
 E.4. Fund -level outcomes  
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumption
s Mid-term Final  
A5.0 Strengthened institutional 
and regulatory systems for 
climate -responsive planning 
and development  A5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems 
that improve 
incentives for climate 
resilience and their 
effective 
implementation   DCA applications 
for each year  
 
 
Antigua and 
Barbuda 
Investment 
Authority (ABIA) 
Construct Antigua 
and Barbuda 
Initiative report  Total value 
of category 
4/5 resilient 
buildings 
annually 
approved by 
DCA is USD 
6,388,875 
(i.e. 25 
buildings )77   
 
 Total value of 
category 4/5 
resilient 
buildings 
annually 
approved by 
DCA is USD 
12,777,750 
(i.e. 50 
buildings ) 
 
 Total value of 
category 4/5 
resilient 
buildings 
annually 
approved by 
DCA is USD  
63,888,750 
(i.e. 250 
buildings ) 
 Increase in 
construction 
costs and 
greater 
longevity of 
buildings with 
climate 
resilient 
investments.  
Increase in 
the minimum 
strength 
requirement of 
buildings to a


---
*Page 67*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 63 OF 86 
   
  
75 Aggregate Value of 1 square foot of climate interventions  = USD 130 
   Post -Climate Interventions Value of 1 square foot of a priority building = Current Market Value of 1 square foot of a priority building + 
Aggregate Value of 1 square foot of climate interventions (i.e. USD 298 = USD 168 + USD 130)  
   Post -Climate Intervent ions Value of a priority building  = Total square footage of a priority building X Post -Climate Interventions Value of 1 
square foot of a priority building  
76 Aggregate Value of 1 square foot of climate interventions  = USD 130 
   Post -Climate Interventions Value of 1 square foot of a priority building = Current Market Value of 1 square foot of a priority building + 
Aggregate Value of 1 square foot of climate interventions (i.e. USD 298 = USD 168 + USD 130)  
   Post -Climate Interventions Value of  a priority building  = Total square footage of a priority building X Post -Climate Interventions Value of 1 
square foot of a priority building  
77 The baseline to be confirmed in year one to maintain midterm and final targets relative to the baseline.  
78   The (CIS) uptake scorecard seeks to measure the extent of use of climate change information in relevant early action protocols and procedures. 
Level 0: Early warnings are not used for disaster preparedness and response; Level 1: First responders receive unclear communications from 
early warning systems, without formal categorisation of the level of threat. As a result, uncertainty over the level of threat delays action while 
decisions makers debate on what both the level of threat and the response that needs t o be taken. Level 2: First responders receive clear 
communications from early warning systems that categorisation of the level of threat but do not have standardised response pr otocols. As a result, 
response is delayed while decisions makers debate on what  actions need to be taken for each escalation of the threat level. Level 3: First 
responders receive clear communications which indicate the level of threat and have clear protocols in place detailing the appropriate level of 
response. As a result, respons e is immediate and can be escalated rapidly as the threat level increases, without having to wait for decision makers 
to reassess the situation.   
Customs Report  
 
  high-end Cat 
4 and a low -
end Cat 5 
development.  
 
A6.0 Increased generation and 
use of climate information in 
decision- making  A6.1 Use of climate 
information 
products/services in 
decision- making in 
climate sensitive 
sectors   Climate 
information 
services (CIS) 
uptake scorecard 
for the application 
of the updated 
building codes78 
 
Standard 
Operating 
procedures and 
protocols for early 
warning  
 
National 
Emergency Centre 
reports  CIS uptake 
at Level 1  
 
 
Decision-
makers in 
critical public 
services rely 
on 
traditional, 
informal 
communicati
on channels 
to prepare 
for and 
respond to 
an extreme 
climate 
event.  
 CIS uptake at 
Level 2  
 CIS uptake at 
Level 3  
 
 Effective 
dissemination 
of early 
warnings 
leads to ear ly 
action and 
increased 
resilience.  
 
Sectors are 
better 
prepared to 
respond to 
threats of 
extreme 
climatic 
events.  
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure 
to climate risks  A7.2 Number of 
males and females 
reached by [or total 
geogrpahic coverage 
of] climate -related 
early warning 
systems and other 
risk reduction 
measures 
established/strength
ened  MoW 
Assessments of 
critical public 
service and 
community      
 
Visitor Logs 
maintained by 
security and 
administrative 
personnel 
indicating  0 
 19,000 women 
and 17,000 
men (36,000 
people in total) 
reached by 
climate -related 
early warning 
systems and 
are supported 
by climate-
resilient critical 
services 
secured 38,072 women 
and 35,144 
men (73,  216 
people in total) 
reached by 
climate -related 
early warning 
systems and 
are supported 
by climate-
resilient critical 
services 
secured Climate 
proofing 
measures are 
sufficient to 
secure the 
provision of 
critical 
services to 
communities 
during a 
Category 5 
hurricane 
event.


---
*Page 68*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 64 OF 86 
   
  
 
79 The GoAB is responsible for these assessments, which will be conducted to measure project progress and performance.  
80 Workers need time to clean up their homes and then the buildings after any storm and more so after Cat 4 and Cat 5.  Also, the Government 
needs at least 48 hrs t o clear roads;  
81 Workers need time to clean up their homes and then the buildings after any storm and more so after Cat 4 and Cat 5.  Also, the Government 
needs at least 48 hrs to clear roads;  people serviced by 
these buildings  
 
Public works 
records  
 
Census records of 
people in the 
vicinity of the 
buildings that are 
at risk to the 
impacts of 
extreme climate 
events79 
Annual project 
reports measure 
the progress 
achieved for 
installing climate 
proofing measures 
on target buildings  through 
climate 
proofing 
meas ures on 
critical public 
service and 
community 
buildings 
(corresponding 
to the reach of 
50% of the 
target 
buildings)  
 
 
 
 through 
climate 
proofing 
measures on 
critical public 
service and 
community 
buildings  
(corresponding 
to the reach of 
100% of the 
target 
buildings)  
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline  Target  Assumption
s Mid-term Final  
1. Climate -proofing 
interventions implemented 
in critical public service 
and community buildings 
to improve resilience to, 
and recovery from, 
extreme climate events.  
 Number of priority 
buildings that can reopen  
with in 2 days  after a 
category 4 or 5 hurricane 
and be fully functional to 
serve vulnerable persons  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 • Catalogue of 
surveys/ 
assessments 
from the climate-
proofed buildings  
• Commissioning 
reports  
• Results of drills 
conducted by 
NODs as part of 
the National 
Hurricanes 
readiness 
exercises.  2 priority 
buildings are 
able to 
withstand the 
impacts of 
Category 5 
hurricanes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Total of 27 
priority 
buildings can 
reopen within 
2 days80 after 
a category 4 or 
5 and be fully functional to 
serve 
vulnerable 
persons  
 
Of which:  
Schools = 8  
Police stations 
= 5 
Healthcare 
buildings = 7  
Government 
Office 
buildings = 6  Total of 54 
priority buildings are at level 3 
and can reopen 
within 2 days
81 
after a category 
4 or 5 and be 
fully functional to 
serve vulnerable 
persons  
 
 
Of which:  
Schools = 13  
Police stations = 
11 
Healthcare 
buildings = 15  
Government 
buildings = 14  Climate -proofing 
interventions 
related to 
buildings only 
and include the 
installation of RE 
solutions.   
 
Climate -proofing 
priority critical 
service buildings 
is the major but 
not the only 
factor in critical 
services 
remaining  
operational 
during and 
immed iately 
after extreme 
climate events.


---
*Page 69*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 65 OF 86 
   
  
82 Total Expected Number of People to occupy a priority buildi ng = Total square footage of a priority building ÷ 100 square feet  
Total Minimum Water Storage Capacity of a priority building  = Total Expected Number of People to occupy a priority building X 10 gallons  
  
 Community 
Building=1  
 
 Community 
Building=1  
 
Change in gallons of water 
stored at 54 priority 
buildings to enable 
continuous water supply 
when centralised utilities 
are disrupted by a storm  
 • Design and QS 
reports;  
• Contracts with 
contractors;  
• Commissioning 
reports;  
• Catalogue of 
surveys/ 
assessments 
from the climate-
proofed buildings  
 3 priority 
buildings 
fitted with 
climate -
resilient 
water 
harvesting 
solutions  with 
an average of 
1,989.35 
gallons 
stored82   27 priority 
buildings fitted 
with climate -
resilient water 
harvesting 
solutions  with 
an average of 
17,904.14 
gallons stored  54 priority 
buildings fitted 
with climate -
resilient water 
harvesting 
solutions  with an  
average of 
35,808.27 
 gallons stored  The water 
harvesting and 
other retrofits on 
the buildings will 
be done 
together.   
 
Water 
harvesting 
solutions 
improve water 
availability 
during and after 
a storm.  
 
The water 
storage capacity 
at each building 
is sufficient to 
meet the critical 
needs of the 
facility for at 
least 2 days 
after a storm.  
 
Change in recovery time 
for critical data linked to 
priority services such as 
healthcare, safety and 
security  • Commissioning 
reports for 
climate -proofing 
of on- site data 
servers;  
• System logs for 
servers secured 
within the 
climate -resilient 
bunker  
 Data 
recovery 
takes several 
months as 
data is not 
backed up on 
secure 
servers and 
is lost if a 
storm 
damages on -
site servers.  Data recovery 
can be done 
within 2 days 
of a storm 
using backup 
data stored on 
secure servers 
housed in a 
climate -
resilient 
bunker.  Data recovery 
can be done in a 
few hours using 
data backup on 
on-site climate-
proofed servers, 
with additional 
backups 
accessible within 
2 days using 
backup data 
stored on secure 
servers housed 
in a climate -
resilient bunker.  Data backed up 
on secure 
servers can be 
manually 
downloaded if 
internet services 
are disrupted.  
 
On-site climate -
proofed data 
servers ar e 
connected to a 
resilient, 
decentralised 
backup power 
source.  
2. Climate change 
adaptation lessons 
mainstreamed into the 
building sector and 
relevant financial Change in the % of 
applications to the DCA 
for buildings that can meet 
category 4 & 5 standards;  • DCA reports  
 Approximatel
y 5% of 500 
applications 
approved 
annually by 10% of 500 
applications 
approved 
annually by 
the DCA are 50% of 500 
applications to 
the DCA are for 
buildings that 
can meet Technical 
training is 
sufficient to 
increase the 
capacity of the


---
*Page 70*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 66 OF 86 
   
  
83 Baseline Survey to be conducted in project Year 1, and reported in first APR   institutions and 
mechanisms.  
  
 
 • Reports 
generated by 
consultants;  
 
• Consultation 
and workshop 
reports;  
 
• Regulations 
drafted and 
submitted to 
the office of 
the Attorney 
General;  
 
 the DCA are 
CAT 4 or 5 
 
 for buildings 
that can meet 
category 4 & 5 
standards.  
 
 
 
 category 4 & 5 
standards;  
 
 
 local workforce 
to implement, 
maintain and 
monitor climate 
change 
adaptation 
measures 
installed on 
buildings in 
accordance with 
the national 
building code 
and Physical 
Planning Act 
(2003).  
 
Public and 
private sector 
representatives 
participate in the 
capacity building 
programmes.  
  
Change in the level of 
awareness and 
understanding of updated 
building codes for 
government officials in 
MoW and DCA as well as 
building inspectors, 
engineers, architects and 
draughtsmen  
 Training 
certificates;  
Awareness 
surveys  
 
 
 TBD83  
 
MoW and 
DCA as well 
as building 
inspectors, 
engineers, 
architects, 
and 
draughtsmen 
are required 
to build to 
meet Cat 3 
standard.  
 
DCA is 
implementing 
a project with 
Compete 
Caribbean to 
digitalize 
processes for 
construction 
permits in 
Antigua and 
Barbuda and 
these 
stakeholders 
will be 
registered on 
an online 
platform.  
 Baseline + 
20%  Baseline + 40%  
 
 
 Training and 
awareness 
programs lead to 
lasting retention 
of knowledge.


---
*Page 71*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 67 OF 86 
   
  
84 There is a limit associated with this mechanism controlling the total amount of financial resources that may be accessed by public and private 
enterprises.  
85 Baseline drills to be conducted in project year 1 and baseline reported with confirmed frequency of drills in the first APR .  % reduction of 
incremental cost for 
climate interventions as a 
result of lessons learnt 
and interventions 
implemented  SIRF Fund 
evaluation reports  Average 
baseline 
incremental 
costs of 
climate 
interventions 
is USD$130 
 
SIRF Fund 
has a 
mechanism 
for private  
access to 
financial 
resources for 
the 
incremental 
cost of 
adaptation to 
climate 
change.84    
 
The 
incremental 
cost is very 
high and can 
exceed ability 
to pay.  10% reduction  20% reduction   Lessons learned 
will allow the 
Fund to 
calculate the 
incremental cost 
of building 
adaptations 
used in small 
businesses.  
3. Climate information 
services strengthened to 
facilitate early action within 
the building sector to 
respond to extreme 
climate events.  
[This output links to GCF 
Outcome A.6.]  Change in r esponse times 
of critical service providers 
and NODS to alerts and 
warnings received  
 
 
 
 Rate of response 
drills 
Drill reports  
 TBD85 
 
The Antigua 
and Barbuda 
Meteorologic
al Service 
(ABMS) 
issues four 
main bulletins 
at least every 
6 hours 
between 5 
am-11pm.  
 
Intermediate 
Bulletins are 
produced at 
times every 
hour between 
main bulletins 
based on the 
severity of 
the situation.  
 
Bulletins 
increase 
based on if 
the hazard 
draws closer.  30 minute 
reduction of 
NODS 
response time 
to bulletins, 
alerts and 
warnings  
 
 1 hour  reduction 
of NODS 
response time to 
bulletins, alerts 
and warnings  First responders 
and decision-
makers will be 
the main users 
of the data;  
The private 
sector will be 
allowed access 
to the data as 
well. 
 
There is 
sufficient 
demand for 
community level 
uptake and use 
of early warning 
information 
products among 
national -level 
decision-
makers, the 
private sector 
and the entities 
responsible for 
the coordination 
of disaster 
response,


---
*Page 72*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 68 OF 86 
   
  
  
 
86 Baseline drills to be conducted in project year 1 and baseline reported with confirmed frequency of drills in the first APR .   
NODS takes 
at least 2 
hours to start 
taking action 
after they 
receive 
bulletins from 
met services.  including ABMS 
and NODS  
% of early response 
protocols actioned through 
the formal communication 
protocols  
 Rate of response 
drills 
 
Drill reports;  
 
NODS annual 
Disaster 
Management Plan 
 TBD86 
 Baseline + 
30% 100%  First responders 
have access to 
early response 
protocols and 
understand the 
threat levels.


---
*Page 73*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 69 OF 86 
   
  
E.6. Activities  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1.1. Implement climate -
proofing measures on critical 
infrastructure.  Activity 1.1 will ensure that critical public 
services remain functional during and directly 
after a Cat 5 hurricane. Targeted infrastructure 
will include hospitals/clinics, police and fire 
stations, storm shelters, relevant government buildings and schools. A comprehensive list of 
target buildings is provided in Section 10 of 
Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
 
Adaptation measures will include actions to 
protect the buildings during a storm 
(structural alterations), as well as operations 
after a storm by ensuring a continuous supply 
of power and water. Specifically, the actions 
will include water harvesting and structural 
upgrades to windows, doors and roofs.   
 
 1.1.1. Develop site -specific 
engineering designs for climate 
proofing 52 priority buildings.  
 
1.1.2. Install climate proofing 
measures on 52 priority buildings 
based on engineering designs 
developed in Sub- activity 1.1.1.  
 
1.1.3. Develop site- specific 
operational procedures for long-
term maintenance of climate-
proofing interventions for each 
priority building and integrate 
these procedures into the project 
O&M Framework.  
 
1.1.4. Design climate- resilient 
renewable energy solutions for 
priority buildings taking into 
consideration energy efficiency 
(EE) and indoor air quality for those buildings that have heating, 
ventilation and air conditioning 
(HVAC) systems.  
 
1.1.5. Install EE and RE solutions 
at priority buildings.  
 
1.1.6. Design water harvesting 
solutions for priority buildings as 
well as stormwater drainage 
solutions for buildings in flood risk 
areas.  
 
1.1.7. Install water harvesting 
solutions for priority buildings as well as stormwater drainage 
solutions for buildings in flood risk 
areas.  
 • Site-specific engineering 
designs for climate- proofing 
52 priority buildings to 
withstand the impacts of 
Category 5 hurricanes  
• 52 priority buildings 
retrofitted with climate -
adaptive measures  
• Operation and maintenance guidelines developed and 
integrated into existing 
O&M plans for 54 priority 
buildings  
• Site-specific engineering 
designs for climate- resilient 
RE solutions for 34 priority 
buildings that provide 
power for 24 –  48 hrs 
before needing to be 
recharged 
• 53 priority buildings have 
EE solutions installed.  
• Climate -resilient water 
harvesting solutions 
installed in 51 priority 
buildings  
• Restocking protocol   
• Stormwater drainage solutions installed at 14 
project sites  
1.2. Construct climate -
resilient storm shelters 
attached to public clinics.  To facilitate the transition away from using 
schools as storm shelters ( a recommendation 
of the ESS and gender assessment), the 
project will commission five purpose- built 
storm shelters attached to public clinics. This 
will not only reduce downtime for schools after 1.2.1. Develop de tailed, site -
specific construction plans for hurricane shelters at five public 
clinics.  • Five custom -built hurricane 
shelters with decentralised 
water and renewable 
energy supplies.


---
*Page 74*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 70 OF 86 
   
 being used as shelters but will also improve 
the healthcare response as medical facilities 
will be readily accessible to users of the 
shelters during a storm event.   
1.2.2. Construct hurricane shelters 
based on the designs developed 
under Sub- activity 1.2.1.  
 
1.2.3. Equip hurricane shelters 
with renewable energy and 
climate -resilie nt water harvesting 
systems.  
 
1.2.4. Develop emergency 
protocols for each shelter 
according to national guidelines.  • Emergency protocols for 
each shelter  
1.3. Construct a climate -
resilient bunker to store 
emergency supplies for the 
health, energy, building and 
welfare sectors.  After an extreme event, emergency supplies 
are rapidly required to return the country to 
normalcy. These supplies include equipment 
requi red for the generation of renewable 
energy, building materials, food and medicine.  
The project will therefore construct a purpose 
built bunker of ~749 m2 (8,050 sq. ft.) to store 
supplies needed immediately after a storm.    1.3.1. Complete a detailed des ign 
and construction plan for the 
bunker.  
 
1.3.2. Construct the bunker based 
on the design in Sub- activity 1.3.1.  
 
1.3.3. Develop an operational 
protocol for the stock and 
distribution management of 
emergency supplies that will be 
stored within the bunker.    
 
1.3.4. Develop a battery recharge 
and replacement protocol for 
critical services.  • One climate -resilient 
bunker  
• One operational protocol  
1.4. Implement measures to 
preserve vital information/data within public 
institutions.  Extreme climate events cause long -lasting 
disruptions to power supplies in Antigua and 
Barbuda, as well as physical damage to 
computer servers that store vital medical and 
security information from hospitals, police 
stations and other critical sectors. As a result, 
it is essential for vital information and data 
housed within public institutions to be 
protected and backed up to ensure that no 
losses are experienced during a storm. Under 
this activity, protocols will be developed for 
effective and efficient data back -up 
procedures before a storm and IT teams within 
each public institution will be trained on the 
application of these protocols. Each targeted 
institution will be responsible for the delivery of 
this training to relevant staff. Additionally, 
physic al protection measures will be designed 
and implemented on the relevant public 
buildings to reduce the risk of critical IT 
infrastructure being damaged by an extreme 
event.   1.4.1. Develop backup protocols 
for critical information.  
 
1.4.2. Train IT teams on the 
implementation of backup 
protocols.  
 
1.4.3. Design physical protection 
measures for critical IT infrastructure.  
 
1.4.4. Implement physical 
protection measures for critical IT infrastructure.  • Backup protocols.  
• Training modules 
developed.  
• Training workshops  
• Site-specific engineering 
designs for the physical protection of critical IT 
systems  
 
2.1. Mainstream climate 
change adaptation into the To promote the uptake of climate -resilient 
development across Antigua and Barbuda, 2.1.1. Draft regulations for the 
Physical Planning Act (2003) that • Regulations for the Physical 
Planning Act (2003)


---
*Page 75*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 71 OF 86 
   
 building sector by making 
provision for the building code 
in the Physical Planning Act 
(2003) and updating the EMS 
plans.  
 
 climate change adaptation standards will be 
mainstreamed into the country’s building 
sector. This will be achieved through three 
primary measures. Firstly, regulations for the 
Physical Planning Act (2003) will be drafted to 
make provisions for the inclusio n of the 
updated building code in the national 
regulatory framework. Secondly, a Strategic 
Impact Assessment (SIA) of the building code 
regulations will be conducted to assess the 
environmental and social safeguards and 
gender risks, consequences and mitigation measures related to the enactment of these 
regulations in the Physical Planning Act 
(2003). This SIA will ensure that the building code is accompanied by other policies and 
measures to safeguard the most vulnerable groups in the country — particularl y those with 
low incomes that have reached their 
borrowing capacity, the elderly (retired) and those people who have disabilities — so that 
they are able to meet the requirements of the 
new code. Finally, recommendations will be 
made for the EMS Plans to be updated to 
include climate-
resilient measures for the 
building sector.  makes provision for the Building 
Code for submission to and enactment by parliament.  
 
2.1.2. Conduct Strategic Impa ct 
Assessment (SIA) of the building 
code regulations to assess the 
environmental and social 
safeguards and gender risks, 
consequences and mitigation 
measures related to the enactment 
of these regulations.   
 
2.1.3. Make recommendations for 
the EMS Plans to be updated to 
include climate change adaptation 
measures for the building sector.   
 
2.1.4. Conduct annual meetings 
with participation from relevant 
stakeholders to collate and share 
lessons learned from 
implementing the EMS plans and 
ensure that these pl ans are 
updated regularly where 
necessary.  • Strategic Impact 
Assessment (SIA)  
• Recommendations report 
for updating the EMS Plans  
• Annual stakeholder meetings  
2.2. Mainstream climate 
change adaptation for the 
building sector into public and private financial, insurance 
and banking sectors.  Activity 2.2.  will complement the SCCF and 
GCF EDA projects to maximise the 
effectiveness of scaling up of financing for adaptation in the building sector.  This will be 
achieved by mainstreaming lessons learned from these projects into the financial sector 
and related mechanisms. The first of these will 
be the SIRF Fund’s adaptation window.  
Stakeholders will be engaged to identify 
additional entry points for accessing climate 
finance through the SIRF fund for 
investments. Specifically, this will be for 
building the resilience of small businesses that 
are important to the functioning of local 
communities. This sector is currently not being 
funded under the SI RF Fund.    2.2.1. Consult with representatives 
from the public and private sectors 
to identify entry points for 
accessing government financial 
support to reduce the barrier of 
high cost of Cat 4 and 5 
construction as well as to partner 
with the  SIRF fund  to track current 
activities being undertaken by the fund to pilot incentive 
programmes, insurance/risk 
Mitigation products, and 
opportunities for fund raising.   
 
2.2.2. Refine the SIRF Fund’s list 
of adaptation options using an 
evidence- based approach that  
draws lessons learned from the 
SCCF, EDA projects, as well as 
lessons learnt the implementation 
of adaptation interventions under 
Activity 1.1 of this project.   
 
2.2.3. Train decision- makers from 
NODS, DCA and PWD on how to (a) assess, calculate  and report 
on the incremental cost of 
adaptation in public sector projects 
for the purposes of tracking the 
implementation of Article 2.1c of • Evaluation report  on 
funding processes and 
procedures for climate 
proofing infrastructure 
• Updated SIRF Fund guidelines  
• Training workshops  
• Lessons learned report  
• Private sector climate 
finance options analysis report


---
*Page 76*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 72 OF 86 
   
 the Paris agreement (b)  
implement the new building codes 
and regulations to assess planning 
applications (c)  to prov ided 
trained technical assistance to the 
SIRF Fund in the evaluation of 
private sector applications for 
loans and grants.   
 
2.2.4. Collate and share lessons 
learned from SIRF Fund 
application & funding process, with 
the rest of the Private Financial 
secto r and the Government’s 
newly formed Resilience and 
Development Fund (2020) .  
2.3. Train relevant staff from 
the National Office of Disaster 
Services (NODS), 
Development Control 
Authority (DCA) and the 
Public Works Department 
(PWD) as well as the private 
sector on operational 
procedures for long- term 
monitoring, maintenance and 
upscaling of climate- resilient 
renewable energy (RE) and 
water harvesting technologies 
in accordance with the 
national building code.  Training will be provided for relevant staff from 
NODS, building inspectors fr om DCA and 
building maintenance teams from MoW on 
operational procedures for long- term 
monitoring, maintenance and upscaling of 
climate change adaptation interventions in the 
public and private sectors that will be 
implemented under Output 1.  
 
Training pr ogrammes will be developed for 
public and private sector representatives —  
including staff from the Ministry of Works 
(MoW) and Development Control Authority 
(DCA), as well as building inspectors, 
engineers, architects and draughtsmen — 
with the assistanc e of partner organisations 
such as the Antigua and Barbuda Institute for 
Continuing Education (ABICE). This training 
will focus on how to apply the new building 
code.    2.3.1.  Train building inspectors 
from DCA, building maintenance 
teams from PWD as wel l as 
technical staff from NODS and 
other relevant institutions on the 
implementation of the operational 
procedures for the long- term 
maintenance of climate- proofing 
interventions in the target 
buildings, based on building-
specific O&M plans and updated 
national building code.  
 
2.3.2. Design and implement a 
long- term monitoring framework 
for building- specific climate -
proofing measures –  including 
cost-benefit analyses –  to 
demonstrate the long- term 
adaptation benefits.  
 
2.3.3. Partner with local training 
institutions such as ABICE to 
develop training programmes for 
relevant technical staff from MoW 
and DCA; building inspectors, 
engineers, architects and 
draughtsmen; and the private 
sector on best practices for 
implementing, monitoring and 
maintaining climate change 
adaptation technologies, including 
climate -resilient RE and water 
harvesting solutions, and how to 
apply the updated national building 
code during the installation of these technologies.  
 
2.3.4. Design and conduct a 
gender -sensitive awar eness 
campaign targeting the public and • Stakeholder consultations  
• Training workshops  
• Awareness campaigns  
• Installation of relevant 
software and equipment to 
monitor buildings  
• Stakeholder workshops with Ministers, Heads of 
Departments etc.  
• Monitoring and Evaluation 
operational guidelines for 
buildings  
• Sign MoUs between DoE 
and training institutions 
such as ABICE to formalise 
partnershi ps for developing 
and delivering training on 
climate change adaptation  
• Training workshops   
• Awareness raising 
campaigns


---
*Page 77*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 73 OF 86 
   
 private sectors on the updated 
building code, the benefits of 
taking up climate- adaptive 
solutions within the building sector as well as the availability of certified climate change courses.  
 
2.3.5. Develop and implement a 
gender -sensitive awareness -
raising campaign within the 
government system on the 
availability of the courses 
developed under Sub- activity 
2.3.3.    
2.4. Train the local workforce 
on the installation, operation 
and maintenance of climate-
proofing measures for the 
targeted buildings.  The local workforce in both the private and 
public sectors will be trained on how to support 
the installation, operation and maintenance of  
the climate change adaptation solutions that 
will be installed in targeted buildings under 
Activity 1.1. To facilitate this training, suitable 
training institutions in the country, such as ABICE, will be engaged to develop and deliver 
a certified training programme that focus ses 
on: i) installing, operating and maintaining 
climate -proofing measures for the building 
sector; and ii) implementing early action 
protocols (developed under Output 1) 
preceding an extreme climate event. The 
training course that will be developed under 
this activity will apply regional and 
international best practices for climate change  
adaptation measures in the building sector.  
Furthermore, the course will align with the 
national building code to ensure that there is 
uptake of building standards and procedures 
that account for Category 4 and 5 hurricanes.  2.4.1. Engage with suitable 
training institutions such as ABICE 
to develop and deliver a training 
programme that targets the local 
workforce on how to install, 
operate and maintain climate 
change adaptation technologies in 
the building sector as well as 
implement early action protocols.  
 
2.4.2. Develop training modules in 
line with regional and international 
occupational standards for climate 
change adaptation in the building 
sector.  
 
2.4.3. Deliver training modules 
developed under Sub- activity 
2.4.2.  
 
2.4.4. Design and conduct an 
awareness building campaign on 
the opportunity for training on the 
installation, operation and 
maintenance of climate change 
adaptation technologies in the 
building sector, with the support of 
training institutions.    • Engagement workshops  
• MoUs signed between DoE 
and relevant training 
institutions such as ABICE  
• Training modules  
• Training programme  
• Training workshops  
• Awareness raising 
campaigns  
3.1. Climate information 
services strengthened to 
facilitate early action for 
extreme climate events.  Under this project activity, a centralised online 
server will be established and housed within 
Antigua and Barbuda Meteorological Services 
(ABMS) to overcome the current barrier of an 
insufficient climate data processing system. 
This online server will enhance the real -time 
processing of climate data to ensure that 
climate threats are detected in advance and 
facilitate impact -based forecasting.   3.1.1. Establish a centralised 
online server to enhance real -time 
processing of climate data.  
 
3.1.2. Increase t he technical 
capacity of staff within ABMS to 
collect, process and manage 
climate data in real time.  
 
3.1.3. Conduct a knowledge 
exchange trip to the nearest • Centralised online server 
established  
• Communication protocol 
developed and 
operationalised  
• Knowledge exchange trip  
• Training workshops


---
*Page 78*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 74 OF 86 
   
 Regional Climate Centre, which is 
under the auspices of the World 
Meteorological Organi sation 
(WMO ), to strengthen the 
technical and institutional capacity within ABMS for impact -based 
forecasting.  
 
3.1.4. Increase the technical and 
institutional capacity of AMBS to develop early warning information 
products, including infographics 
that are locally appropriate and 
easily interpreted by vulnerable 
communities.  
3.2. Establish a formalised 
communication protocol to facilitate rapid information 
sharing and early action 
preceding an extreme climate 
event.  A formal communication protocol will be 
developed and operationalised under Activity 
3.2 to support the generation of early warning 
information products and impact -based 
forecasts (Activity 3.1). This will be done to 
facilitate effective communication of impact -
based forecasts from ABMS to decision-
makers within the relevant government 
entities responsible for preparation ahead of 
an extreme climate event.  3.2.1. Desi gn and operationalise a 
formal communication protocol to facilitate effective communication 
of impact -based forecasts from 
ABMS to decision- makers within 
relevant government entities 
responsible for preparation ahead 
of an extreme climate event.  
 
3.2.2 Des ign and implement early 
action protocols for critical public 
service and community buildings 
with variable responses dependent 
on the anticipated intensity of the 
incoming storm.  
 
3.2.3. Train public and private 
sector actors on the application of 
the earl y action protocols designed 
and developed under Sub- activity 
3.2.2.   
 
3.2.4. Improve the capacity of 
ABMS to disseminate early 
warning information products to 
critical service providers as well as 
the private sector to facilitate early 
action.  • Standardised protocol  
• Training modules  
• Stakeholder workshops  
• MoUs  or other partnership 
agreement  signed 
• Coordination mechanism developed


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 75 OF 86 
   
  
87 The project’s gender targets as well as the associated gender -disaggregated indicators are presented in Annex 8: Gender Assessment and 
Action Plan.  E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The Project Manager, under the oversight of Antigua and Barbuda Department of Environment (DoE), will be 
responsible for monitoring the progress of all project activ ities against the outcome- based indicators during project 
implementation. This monitoring of all project interventions will be undertaken on an annual basis. A Monitoring and 
Evaluation (M&E) Plan detailing the type of specific monitoring activities to be conducted during implementation, as 
well as the responsible parties for undertaking activities, is presented in Annex 11. Such activities include field 
observations, key informant interviews and focus group sessions. Reporting on the M&E of project interventions will be 
conducted by Project Manager and CTA.  
 
During the implementation phase, specific means of verification will be used to assess the: i) progress of project 
interventions towards achieving GCF Fund- level impacts, Fund- level outcomes; and ii) p erformance of interventions 
against the project performance indicators presented in Section E.5 of the Funding Proposal. Th e salaries of the 
relevant project management staff that will perform M&E activities will cover the work required for the necessary 
assessments, interviews and field assessments required to inform project evaluations. The M&E costs, as well as the 
salaries of the project management staff are presented in Annex 4: Detailed budget.     
 
For on- the-ground monitoring of project interventions, a part -time Monitoring and Gender Officer will be employed to 
conduct and coordinate the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the project and ensure that gender targets are met. 
The Monitoring and Gender Officer will design and operationalise a performance monitoring framework to track the 
project’s progress towards achieving its targets. This will be achieved by: i) measuring the performance against the 
project indicators (Sections E.3– 5) to evaluate the progress of the project; ii) reporting the project’s performance to the 
Project Steering Committee (PSC) and Project Management Unit (PMU); and iii) providing technical support to the 
Project Manager (PM). Additionally, the Monitoring and Gender Officer will be responsible for overseeing and 
monitoring the application of gender -disaggregated indicators87. At particular milestones (i.e. baseline, annual 
performance reports, mid- term and end of project), the project team will carry out evidence- gathering exercises to verify 
this progress. These internal reports will be validated by two independent evaluations at the mid- term and end of the 
project implementation, as described below.  
 
DoE will be responsible for managing the Independent Interim Evaluation and the Final Evaluation Report of the proj ect 
and will oversee the process of contracting these positions. For the Interim Evaluation Report, an independent 
consultant will be contracted to provide an assessment of project performance against its targets at the project’s mid-
point (end of Year 3).  This will be an outcomes -based assessment and will include analysing whether the project is on 
track, what problems and challenges the project is encountering, and what corrective actions are required, so that the 
project can achieve its intended outcomes  by project completion in the most efficient and sustainable way. The PSC 
will participate in the Independent Interim Evaluation and develop a management response to the evaluation 
recommendations along with an implementation plan. It is the responsibility  of DoE to monitor whether the agreed 
recommendations are being implemented during the remainder of the project’s operational life.  
 
An independent consultant will be contracted by DoE to conduct the Final Evaluation Report at the end of project 
implement ation. DoE will be responsible for overseeing the Final Evaluation Report, which is a summative evaluation. 
This evaluation will include an independent assessment of the project’s overall performance against standard 
evaluation criteria (e.g. strategic rel evance, effectiveness, efficiency, likelihood of impact and sustainability) as well as 
against the project indicators presented in the Logical Framework. This evaluation will be based on inter alia  
documentaries of evidence, field observation visits and key informant interviews.  
 
The draft Final Evaluation Report will be sent to project stakeholders during a commenting process managed by DoE. 
Formal comments on the report will be shared by DoE in an open and transparent manner. This evaluation report will 
be publicly disclosed and will be followed by a recommendation on compliance processes.  
 
The costs for results monitoring and performance evaluation are included in the project budget (Annex 4).


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 76 OF 86 
   
  Risk Management  
 
The AE, supported by the project management unit (PMU) and specifically the Project Manager, will be responsible for 
managing all environmental and social risks, as well as those risks related to project implementation and management. 
Processes and procedures for this risk management are presented in Annex 25: Project Implementation Manual. The 
audit plan for the project will also include a detailed assessment of identified risks to track assumptions during the 
implementation period. Potential project risks  that may arise during implementation will be monitored by the AE and EE 
and escalated to the PMU in accordance with the project risk register where necessary. The PMU will then be 
responsible for implementing the appropriate risk mitigation measures during project implementation. Further details 
on risk screening, management and mitigation during project implementation are presented in Annex 6: ESIAMP, with 
specific details on the AE’s protocols for managing risk presented in Annex 25: Project Implementati on Manual.


---
*Page 81*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 77 OF 86 
   
  
RISK  ASSESSMENT  AND  MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistle- blowers or witnesses, as 
well as fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Medium  
Description  
Limited collaboration and coordination between project stakeholders, including relevant government departments, 
ministries and the private sector will reduce the timely delivery and effectiveness of the project.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Extensive stakeholder consultations were undertaken throughout the project development to secure buy -in from 
the relevant project partners and ensure coordination of project interventions. Moreover, a stakeholder engagement 
plan has been developed and included in Section 10 of Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
and Management Plan (ESIAMP) , as well as in Annex 7,  and the Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan  to 
ensure that all project stakeholders are involved in the i mplementation of project interventions.  
• The PMU will be responsible for ensuring coordination between all relevant project stakeholders during the 
implementation phase. In particular, a full -time Project Coordinator will be contracted competitively under the project 
to support the PM in the implementation of project activities. The PC’s primary responsibilities will be to serve as a 
focal point for facilitating all stakeholder engagements that will be undertaken during the project implementation 
phase.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Bulk importing of timber may compete unfairly and impact negatively impacts the private sector that rely on sale of 
these materials for their livelihoods.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• To reduce the impact of timber imports on local suppliers in Antigua and Barbuda, a protocol will be developed for 
managing the timber stock that is not used at the end of  each hurricane season (Activity 1.3). This protocol will 
include provisions for the resale of timber to local suppliers at bulk discount rates. The government will make the 
initial purchase of these supplies ahead of the storm season, which will reduce costs of individual suppliers 
importing timber in small batches. As a result, local timber suppliers in the country will be able to maintain their 
businesses and will not be negatively impacted by a change in market conditions that could disrupt their liveli hoods.  
Selected Risk Factor 3


---
*Page 82*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 78 OF 86 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High Medium  
Description  
Renewable energy systems may not have the storage capacity to provide power to critical buildings for the duration 
of a storm when solar panels have been removed.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Additional batteries will be stored in the climate -proof bunker that can be used to rotate supply during and after an 
extreme climate event. A protocol will be developed for keeping spare batteries fully charged throughout the 
hurricane season and for recharging batteries as they are cycled out during and after a storm. Priority will also be 
given to restoring power to the bunker after a storm to facilitate the recharging process.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High High 
Description  
Extreme climate events, such as hurricanes and tropical storms  may disrupt project implementation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Based on current Climate change projects it is almost certain that a hurricane will occur during project 
implementation.  Adaptation solutions will include:  
• (a) construct the Hurricane Warehouse (Activity 1.3) very early in the project implement so that m aterials needed 
for the project are stored in the warehouse and protected in the event of a hurricane.  
• (b) Purchase Construction insurance throughout the life of the project;  
(c ) Limit critical construction outside of the hurricane season;  
(d ) After a Hurricane the country will be concentrating on clean up and recovery, the project will have to be 
slowed down after these events to allow for these vital activities.   
(e) All project contracts including the FAA  as should note this and have a flexible time for project extension due 
to force maj eure clause   
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description  
Delays in the installation of climate proofing measures and construction of the bunker and shelter extensions (entire 
outcome 1) . could result in increased costs. Such delays could occur because of delays in materials being shipped to 
the island, and the shipment, limited construction workers, workers strikes and Contract disputes.   Further delays 
can occur in the construction of the buildings since some buildings cannot close;  work will therefore have to continue 
while the upgrades are taking place.   This is particularly important for the upgrades of the clinics  and c ritical 
government buildings .    
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 83*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 79 OF 86 
   
 • The implementation plan (Annex 5) has been designed to include a buffer for potential delays in construction 
activities.  
• A full- time Project Manager , in additional to the project coordinator, will be contracted to be dedicate to the 
management of project risks and  to work with the relevant government agencies to ensure that risks are carefully 
anticipated and addressed early.   Further details on the implementation arrangements for the project are presented 
in Section B.4 of the Funding Proposal.  
• Workers will have to upgrade some buildings on the weekends . Labour laws require that they get additional 
compensation;  
• The Project will use the Ministry of Works (MOW) as a service provider to ensure access to stable work force. This 
allows the government to guar antee its co- financing and there is provision to pay overtime on the weekends ; 
• The Clinics will be construction no more than one per year since they have to be closed the entire time of construction;  
• Schools will have to be address during the summer or Christmas holidays.  The summer holidays is also the Hurricane season;  
• detailed construction contingency plans will hav e to be devised for each building  in advance of contracting and 
construction ; 
Selec ted Risk Factor 6   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Limited technical capacity of relevant government authorities, contractors and the private sector will lead to the 
insufficient implementation, monitoring and maintenance of climate proofing measures.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Relevant technical staff from the DCA, NODS and Public Works Department (PWD), as well as contractors and 
engineers, will be trained on how to design and imple ment climate proofing measures effectively (Activity 2.3).   
• The local workforce will be trained under Activity 2.4 on the installation, operation and maintenance of climate proofing measures for the targeted buildings. Furthermore, training modules will b e developed in line with regional 
and international occupational standards for climate change adaptation in the building sector. These modules will be presented to relevant public and private sector representatives.  
• The project provides budget for external expertise to design programs for local staff;  
• The MOW will be a service provider to the project as a way to reduce several risks.  The project will also have 
contracts with private sector  who wil l be working with their MOW counterparts which will allow for an exchange of 
expertise.  This approach is being used on the current roads project being executed by the MOW along with a loan 
from the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) and a private contractor.  The team at the MOW has been learning 
how to build resilient roads.  This approach with respect to this project will increase impact of outcomes particular 
those related to training as well as reduce risks.   
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Turnover in key government staff could result in protocols developed during the project  (e.g. those that will be developed 
under Activities 1.3 and 1.4)  not being followed correctly in the case of future extreme climate events such as a 
hurricanes or tropical storms.


---
*Page 84*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 80 OF 86 
   
 Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Although the probability of staff turnover adversely affecting the implementation of project interventions is low, 
regular stakeholder consultations will be held with all project partners involved in the implementation of project 
activities to ensure that institutional capacity built under the project is retained beyond project closure. Clearly 
defined arrangements for stakeholder engagements  are presented in Annex 7: Stakeholder engagement plan, as 
well as in Annex 6: ESIAMP.  
• The bunker wil l be managed by a ministerial sub- committee for disaster preparedness who will be responsible for 
coordinating efforts between relevant stakeholders to ensure that the institutional knowledge around the application 
of the protocols  developed under Activity  1.3 is retained amongst project partners.  
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  High Medium  
Description  
Project activities, specifically those related to construction, could exceed budgeted costs.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• A contingency fee has been built into Annex 4: Detailed budget to ensure that higher -than-expected construction 
costs do not have any lasting adverse effects on construction activities to be implemented under the project.     
• The Government is committed to maintain its labour force and therefore the project will utilize  the Government’s 
MOW as a service provider to provide in kind labour  to the project .    
Selected Risk Factor 9  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
There may be limited uptake of climate change adaptation measures in future development planning and construction.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Training will be provided to the relevant project stakeholders (Activity 2. 3) on the application of the updated building 
codes that include climate change considerations in future development.  
• Under Activity 2.2, climate change adaptation for the building sector will be mainstreamed into public and private 
financial, insurance an d banking sectors.  
• Building Codes that were updated as part of the SCCF project will be mainstreamed into national regulations under the proposed project.  
• With hurricane intensity increasing, Banks and Insurance are requiring their clients to build to Code as a condition 
of funding.  The Banks normally sends their own engineers to check the progress of construction to ensure that the 
building is built to code.   
• With hurricane intensity Homeowners are anxious to ensure their homes are safe and they do not have to go to a 
shelter.  There is a high motivat ion therefore for homeowners  to build to code.  
• Project outcomes can provide advice on how to reduce the high cost construction to Code  so it is expected that 
cost reduction measures will increase uptake;  
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 10


---
*Page 85*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 81 OF 86 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Medium  
Description  
The private sector may not take up the proposed adaptation solutions in future private sector development.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Gender -sensitive awareness raising campaigns targeting the private sector will be conducted under Sub -activity 
2.3.5. These campaigns will promote the benefits of installing climate proofing measures on infrastructure in Antigua 
and Barbuda. Such benefits include reduced damages to infrastructure and reduced economic losses as critical 
services will become operational more rapidly following extreme climate events.    
• Segments of the private sector  will also have increased access to financial resources through the SIRF Fund to 
finance the incremental costs of the implementation of adaptation interventions (Activity 2.2).  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• A Gender Action Plan (Annex 8) has been developed that details how gender considerations will be included in 
the imp lementation of each project activity. A portion of the project budget has been allocated to ensure that 
activities are conducted in a gender -sensitive manner.  
•  
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
The environmental and social risk associated with the project was evaluated in accordance with GCF’s Environmental 
and Social Safeguards (ESS) as well as the environmental, social and economic policies of Antigua and Barbuda’s 
Department of Environment (Do E), which is the Direct Access Entity (DAE). The DoE has assessed the risk category 
of the proposed project to be a Category B Risk. This categorisation is supported by the comprehensive Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessment and Management Plan (ESIAMP)88 developed by the DoE specifically for the purpose 
of the project. The assessment and management plan comply with both GCF and DoE standards by: i) defining the context and baseline in which the interventions will be implemented; ii) identifying all ne gative and positive impacts 
associated with the proposed project interventions; and iii) providing a management plan to describe how any adverse 
impacts identified during risk screening will be accounted for and / or mitigated throughout the project implem entation 
period. The primary environmental and social risks that may arise as a result of project interventions — as identified by 
the ESIAMP— are presented below.  
 
Overall, the environmental, social and gender risks assessed to be present under this project are minor and associated 
with activities under Output 1, whereby climate- proofing interventions will be implemented in critical public sector service 
and community buildings. While the project is expected to result in significant  net-positive benefits in the long term — 
specifically with regards to the provision of healthcare, emergency response and other critical public sector services 
during the aftermath of increasingly severe hurricanes — retrofitting of public sector buildings may cause temporary 
closures, which will restrict access to services for the population of Antigua and Barbuda.  
 
Environmental impacts  
All potential environmental impacts associated with the project are linked with the construction or renovation of publ ic 
infrastructure and include the generation and subsequent disposal of waste from demolition processes and construction 
activities as well as concerns regarding the sourcing of materials. Because the majority of construction will focus on in-
situ upgrading of facilities — as opposed to the breaking of new ground — many of the potential environmental impacts 
that are normally associated with construction activities are not applicable. Additionally, because the required 
construction activities are relatively  small in scale, require limited landscaping and will be implemented within urban or 
 
88 The ESIAMP is included as Annex 6 in the Funding Proposal submission package.


---
*Page 86*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 82 OF 86 
   
 peri-urban vicinities, impacts on biodiversity, critical ecosystems and soils are assessed to be minor and limited in scale. 
Further information on proposed actions to red uce, manage or mitigate potential negative environmental impacts — 
where required —  are detailed in Annex 6: ESIAMP.  
 
Social impacts  
As previously stated, the main social impacts associated with the project are temporary restrictions on access to public 
sector buildings and services. Where services provided by these buildings are critical —  such as hospitals and police 
stations — constr uction activities will be implemented in a phased approach to ensure that limited services can still be 
provided during construction. Additionally, advance notice of closure will be provided to communities and other similar 
facilities to prepare for an inc rease in the average number of patrons. There are also several minor social risks that 
have been identified by the ESIAMP and are associated with construction activities. These include labour practices, 
construction site safety and social disruptions adjac ent to construction sites. These additional minor impacts are all 
temporary in nature and can be mitigated through regular monitoring and management. Because the project prioritises 
the provision of services to the most vulnerable people, including women, children, the elderly and people living with 
HIV or mental disabilities no long- term social impacts are associated with the project. Further information on potential 
social impacts and associated management strategies are detailed in Annex 6: ESIAMP.  
 
Grievance Redress Mechanism  
The established DoE Complaints Mechanism (CM) will be used as the project level Grievance Redress Mechanism 
(GRM). This mechanism has been previously approved by the GCF. It provides three approaches to lodging 
complaints89 with the DoE Complaints Officer. Complaints are presented to the Ethics committee as an independent 
body, whereby a series of actions are taken until the complaint is resolved. The CM will be used at all stages of the 
project and will provide an accessibl e, rapid, fair and effective response to concerned stakeholders, especially any 
vulnerable groups who may lack access to formal legal systems or support. Further information on the redressal process 
is provided in Annex 6: ESIAMP.   
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )  
In general, there are no known institutional and legal bias against men or women in Antigua and Barbuda.   Even though 
this is the case and due to the lack of gender disaggregated data however many of the internationally known biases 
against women are many times included in project design.  To ensure the project is truly gender responsive to the local context, during project preparation, a gender assessment was conducted to understand the differ ential vulnerability to, 
and impact of, climate change on women and men in Antigua and Barbuda. From the findings of this assessment, and 
an analysis of the proposed project  solution, a gender action plan (GAP) was developed. The  process to produce these 
components included a desktop review of available literature and an analysis of relevant 
legislation, policy and 
programmes in the country , as well as interviews and consultations with project and beneficiary stakeholders . These 
direct stakeholders ’ assessment s span the years  2016 – 2020 and interestingly the gender perspective noticeably  
change after the Country experienced its first Cat 5 in 2017. After the hurricane there is more acceptance of the impacts 
of climate change and the need to become more resilient.  
 
The project seeks to build resilience in buildings that project a range of social services.  These are education, Health, 
Security, Social services and oper ations.   Some buildings provide services that can be easily differentiate the impacts 
by gender. For example,  general observations of project activities are:  
• project outcomes , for Her Majesty’s Prison, the Fiennes Institute and the Clarevue Psychiatric Hospitals90 hold 
predominantly male inhabitants , so interventions to increase the resilience of  these sites will benefit mainly 
men.   
• Women mainly benefit from the resilience strategies in health, educational and security services.    Since mainly  
women work in these service sectors (except security) construction will mainly disrupt women working in these 
buildings;  
• Training components  of the project will mainly target the men in the construction sectors which represent over 
the 95% of the workers    
 
89 These approaches include electronic reporting by email, reporting in person or submission of a hard- copy written complaint to the Complaints 
Officer at the DoE.  
90 2013 data shows that men consisted 77% of in- patients at Clarevue facilities whilst women represented 55% of out -patients (55%), although 
the former category would be more highly affected by disruption of services following a hurricane, given the extent of their 
treatment/accommodation.


---
*Page 87*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 83 OF 86 
   
 • Overall women will be most disrupted by construction conducted under the project in the short -term, they also  
stand to gain from intervent ions to build the resilience of buildings in  certain  sectors.   
 
The GAP seeks to promote gender equality by including activities which will increase women’s representation and 
awareness,  as well as ensur ing that training programmes are gender -sensitive and -inclusive  of the predominately male 
population. It includes clear targets, gender -sensitive design features and quantifiable performance indicators to 
promote ensure gender equal  benefits from the project.  
 The actions of the GAP include the following:  
• Courses in construction were made available a few years ago to women.  The first graduates are expected over 
the next few years; the project will establish an apprentice program for  these women newly coming into the field;  
• The transition of the current workforce means the training of predominantly men.  The project notes the difference 
in learning between men and women and girls and boys and seeks to provide gender sensitive training;  
• Most of government building do not have access for persons with special needs, while the project acknowledges 
this, the budget is not adequate to make significant changes.  
• The impacts of climate change in the infrastructure sector, mainly impact on persons based on income levels rather 
than gender.  I n general persons with disabilities, and older persons are most vulnerable;  
 
Implementation arrangements of the project also include procuring a full time  Monitoring and Gender Officer  at annually  
hosted within the project management unit that will provide technical advice and oversight for project delivery  as well 
as an Apprenticeship program for supporting the participation of person 16 – 24 in construction activities of the project;  
 
The full Gender Assessment and project -level Gender Action Plan are included as Annex 8.  
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page)  
The Department of Environment  (DoE)  has expertise in working with donor funds and has a track record in implementing 
27 projects in 4 program areas.   The DOE is accredited to the adaptation Fund as well as the  GCF and for  this project, 
the D oE will be responsible for fiduciary aspects and will be accountable for all financial activities. The financial 
management and procurement within the project will be guided by procedures and policies of the DOE, which  meet s 
the requirements of multilateral and bilateral agreements . The Ministry of Finance (MoF), who will serve as Executing 
Entity, is a GoAB authority and as such follows the government’s financial and procurement rules and standards.  The 
DOE will therefore manage the funds while the EE implements the activities of the project.  
 
International accounting and financial reporting standards will be applied to all aspects of  the project. The D oE follows 
standard accounting  procedures for auditing project expenditure and assumes overall responsibility for financial 
manageme nt of the project, ensuring that funds are used efficiently to support the funded activities. A qualified, 
internationally recognized auditing firm, competitively selected by the AE, will audit the project in compliance with 
International Standards on Audi ting, and will submit all project -related accounts to the GCF on an annual basis. The 
audits are documented by a signed audit report.  
 
Procurement  
The D oE’s Procurement Policy is in accordance with the GCF standards and national laws. The policy facilitates 
procurement within a standardized framework. These are procedures for which the D oE was accredited to the GCF in 
2017.  The tables below describe the thresholds in the DOE Procurement Policy for purchasing of goods, works and 
non-consulting serv ices ( Table 11), and for consulting services ( Table 12). 
 
Table 11. Thresholds in the DOE Procurement Policy –  Purchases (Goods, Works and non -Consulting Services).  
Cost Threshold (EC$)  Method of Procurement  Approval Authority  
Less than $10,000  Price verification – non-
competitive – Shopping  Director  
$54,338 (or US$20,000) or below  Competitive – RFQ - 3 
Quotations  Director (Final Approval)  
Project Coordinator (initial approval of the requisition)


---
*Page 88*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 84 OF 86 
   
 Over $54,338 (or US$20,000) to 
$1,358,450 (or US$500,000)  Competitive – ITB Director (final approval with endorsement from the PMC)  
Project Coordinator (initial approval of requisition)  
Over $1,358,450 (or US$500,000)  Competitive – ITB Minister of Finance (final approval)  
Director (initial approval of requisition with endorsement 
from PMC)  
 
Table 12. Thresholds in the DOE Procurement Policy –  Purchases (Consulting Services).  
Cost Threshold (EC$)  Method of 
Procurement  Approval Authority  
$54,338 (US$20,000) or below  Competitive – 
RFP 
 
3 Bids/Proposals  Director (final approval)  
Project Coordinator (initial approval of 
requisition)  
Over $54,338 (US$20,000) to 
$1,358,450 (US$500,000)  Competitive – 
RFP Director (final approval with endorsement from 
the PMC)  
Project Coordinator (initial approval of 
requisition)  
Over $1,3 58,450 (US$500,000)  Competitive - 
RFP Minister of Finance (final approval)  
Director (initial approval of requisition with 
endorsement from PMC requisition)  
 
The project’s procurement plan is included in the Annex 10.  
Oversight  
The Department of Environment will ensure: i) the substantive quality of the project implementation and compliance 
with procurement guidelines ; ii) the effective use of resources including value for money ; iii) the availability of national 
contributions to support project implementation;  and iv) the proper coordination among all project stakeholders.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that  the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and programme 
funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submi ssion to the Board, subject to the 
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one 
of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the document contains 
specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.   
 
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the followi ng two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
 
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for c onfidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 89*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 85 OF 86 
   
 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3a Economic and /or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 3 b Cost-effectiveness analysis report  
☒ Annex 3 c Sensitivity analysis  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed b udget  plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation  timetable  including  key project/programme milestones  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):   
(ESS disclosu re form  provided)  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify  – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People ’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan , etc.)  
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex  14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  N/A ( Multi- country project/programme information)  
☐ Annex 18  N/A ( Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up- scaling or 
replicating a pilot project ) 
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)


---
*Page 90*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 86 OF 86 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. ☒ Annex 22  Building Assessment  
☒ Annex 23  Design of the climate resilient bunker  
☒ Annex 24  Design of the hurricane shelter s 
☒ Annex 25  Project Implementation Manual  
☒ Annex 26 a  Methodology for calculating avoided emissions  
☒ Annex 26b  Emissions reduction analysis  
☒ Annex 27  Operations and Maintenance Commitment Letter  
☒ Annex 28  Temporary annex for co- financing policy requirements


---
*Page 91*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 92*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Resilience to hurricanes in the building sector in Antigua 
and Barbuda  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  No 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Department of Environment, Antigua and Barbuda  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Antigua and Barbuda  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Thursday, May 21, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language  English is the official language  of Antigua and Barbuda.  
Link to disclosure  https://environment.gov.ag/projects -reports#/Resilience -
to-hurricanes -in-the-building -sector -in-Antigua -and-
Barbuda  
Othe r link(s)  https://environment.gov.ag/news -
events#news/article/75  
Remarks  An ESIA  consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment and Management Plan .  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Thursday, May 21, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  https://environment.gov.ag/projects -reports#/Resilience -
to-hurricanes -in-the-building -sector -in-Antigua -and-
Barbuda   
Other link(s)  https://environment.gov.ag/news -
events#news/article/75  
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment and Management Plan . 
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A


---
*Page 93*
---

Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Thursday, May 21, 2020  
Place  Department of Environment, Antigua and Barbuda - Front 
Desk  
#1 Victoria Park Botanical Gardens  
Factory Road, St John’s  
St John’s, Antigua and Barbuda  
DOE@ab.gov.ag  
+1 268 464 7962
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Tuesday, June 23, 2020  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 94 
 
 
Secretariat ’s assessment  of FP133 
Proposal name:  Resilience to hurricanes in the building sector in Antigua and 
Barbuda  
Accredited entity:  Department of Environment, Antigua and Barbuda  
Country/(ies) : Antigua and Barbuda  
Project/ programme size : Small  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat   
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks:  
Strengths  Points of  caution  
The p roject presents  a robust approach to  
addressing  the resilience of building 
construction in the country , embracing 
investments, law enforcement, technical and 
financial capacity and system s, as well as a well -
designed  post -disaster response   
A separate funding modality will be established 
under the existing Sustainable Island Resource 
Framework Fund ( SIRF Fund ). This funding 
modality is intended to enable  resilient 
infrastructure projects to be accessed by other 
actors, including  the private sector    
The analysis of the p roject shows exemplary 
considerations of the following:   
• Disaster -responsive , robust planning ; 
• Economic analyses based on climate 
rationale;  
• New resilience indicators used , such as 
‘avoided losses’ ; 
• Stakeholder engagement used for 
design ing operations and maintenance;  
and 
• The most advanced hurricane- proofing 
design protocols develop ed for wind 
speed s of over 270  kilometres per hour


---
*Page 95*
---

G
CF/B.2 6/02/Add.05 
Page 95 
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms 
and conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XV III ti tled “List of 
proposed conditions and recommendations”.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2
.1 Project background  
2.1.1.  Background/history of the project to inform the assess ment of  the funding 
proposal  
3. Currently, Antigua and Barbuda’s infrastructure is only designed to withstand the
impacts of hurricanes up to Category 3. While buildings designed to withstand up to a Categ ory
3
 hurricane was sufficient in the past, the increasing intensity of hurricanes hitting the country
is having severe impacts on the country’s built environment and population.  Furthermore, the
country has limited capacity to fully address the impacts of  Category 4 and 5 hurricanes on
critical public service buildings with existing sources of financing. In order f or Antigua and
Barbuda to adapt to the increasing severity of hurricanes it is currently experiencing due to
climate change, it is necessary to strengthen the climate -resilience of the building sector .
4. Significant damages occur regularly  on critical public infrastructure , including hospitals,
clinics and emergency services. In addition, there are blockages and cuts in  centrali zed power
and water supplies  and telecommunication services,  which lead to disruptions in  the country’s
economic activities  and places  a heavy burden on the g overnment due  to the high recovery cost s
aft
er every  extreme weather  event . This problem is exacerbated by  the limited capacity for and
coordination of early warning systems in the country , which reduce s the ability of communitie s
an
d government agencies to prepare for an extreme event. Therefore, this project is designed to
address the  need to build  the resilience of the most critical public buildings across the country .
I
t also introduces corresponding measures to ensure disaster preparedness as well as  the
operations and maintenance of such resilient infrastructure .
2.1.2.  Climate objective 
5. Hurricanes and tropical storms are the main climatic hazards affecting Antigua and
Barbuda. Since 1995, the country has experienced 15 hurricanes and 14 tropical storms .
W
arming conditions over the Atlantic Ocean are resulting in an increased intensity of
hurricanes in the Caribbean, with Antigua and Barbuda experiencing their first recorded
Category 5 hurricanes – Irma and  Maria – in 2017. Climate change projections under both th e
R
epresentative Concentration Pathways ( RCP ) 4.5 and 8.5 scenarios indicate that although th e
t
otal number of storms is not expected to change significantly, there will be an increase in the
freque ncy of high- intensity storms , such as Category 4 and 5 hurricanes. Urgent adaptation
measures for the building sector are therefore needed to address the impacts of climate chang e
o
n the country. Hurricane impact s are multiface ted, and both wind speed and  water load will be
addressed by the building design. However, a feasibility stud y for the 54 selected critic al
b
uildings demonstrates the strongest impact of the wind on the resilience of the structures.
6. Experience in Antigua and Barbuda show that, for example, following a Category 5
hurricane, power and water supply can be disrupted for up to 24 months, while damage t o
co
mmunication and transport infrastructure disrupts associated services for up to 6 months .
Di
sruption to these services caused by damag es to critical infrastructure reduces the efficiency
and effectiveness of emergency response and delays recovery. This vulnerability is furtherexacerbated by  the limited capacity within Antigua and Barbuda Meteorological Services
(ABMS) to carry out  early warning and preparatory action , in particular with regard to


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 96 
 
 
collecting and sharing information/data , which reduced the ability of communities and 
government agencies to prepare for an extreme climate event .  
2.1.3.  Financing information and  environmental and so cial safeguards category 
7.  This project will use incremental finance in the form of GCF grant resources t o support 
the resilience -building  and climate -proofing  of key critical buildings and the mainstreaming of 
climate resilience in the building sector and relevant financial mechanisms . These interventions 
will also  create an enabling environment, which will facilitate the upscaling of such measures 
across all buildings in the country.  Finally, the project will strengthen climate information 
services to improve the dissemination of early warnings and facilitate early action for disaster 
preparedness.  
8. The project is requesting total financing of USD 3 2.7 million in the form of grants, with 
co-financing of USD 13 .4 million f rom the Government of Antigua and Barbuda. GCF resources 
will be used to  (i) retrofit existing critical public sector buildings and strengthen the structural 
integrity of buildings to withstand the wind shear forces, as well as (ii)  decentrali ze power and 
water supplies to reduce communities’ reliance on vulnerable centrali zed systems. These 
interventions will build on and complement existing initiatives and are designed to a chieve 
maximum adaptation impact .  
9. The p roject ’s environmental and social safeguard s (ESS) are assessed as category B, and 
the entity has submitted relevant documentation ( environmental and s ocial management 
framework) as part of the f unding proposal package . 
2.2 Component -by-component analysis 
Component 1 : Climate -proofing interventions implemented in critical public service and 
community buildings to improve resilience to and recovery from extreme climate events  (total cost : 
USD 37.3 million ; GCF  cost : USD 2 5.1 million , or 67 per cent ) 
10. Under this component, the project aims to  strengthen  the structural integrity of selected 
priority buildings through the installation of hurricane shutters and the  use of  hurricane straps 
to secure roofs. These interventions will physically protect buildings, thereby reducing damag es 
and maintaining  the operability  of critical  services during and after an extreme event. The 
climate -resilience of critical services will be further enhanced through the decentrali zation of 
power and water supplies , which will reduce the dependence of cr itical services o n vulnerable 
central systems. Renewable energy systems will be installed, comprising solar photovoltaic  (PV)  
panels and battery packs. These systems will be grid -interactive , and the necessary regulatory 
process will be  pursued w ith the utility authority.  The battery  storage  packs will be put in place 
to meet basic electricity demands for 24 –48 hours , with the aim of lasting  in the event of a 
hurricane . The effectiveness of battery packs will be enhanced through the installation and use 
of energy -efficient equipment in priority buildings , and climate -resilient rainwater harvesting 
solutions  will also be put in place.  
11. Secondly, the project will construct five climate -resilient storm shelters to be built onto 
selected public clinics. Those shelters  will also be equipped to protect community members and 
provide the necessary services during an extreme climate event. Attaching shelters to selec ted 
clinics will improve  the health and safety  of affected people , as nurses will be present on site to 
treat the sick and injured . Health risk s will be further reduced as  overcrowding will be avoided 
in public schools , which are currently used as shelters . All five shelters will be equipped with 
renewable energy -based climate -resilient water harvesting equipment to reduce their reliance 
on central ized supply systems.


---
*Page 97*
---

G
CF/B.2 6/02/Add.05 
Page 97 
12. The t hird activity under this component includes building a climate- resilient bunker ,
w
hich will be constructed at a central location to store supplies required by critical service s
d
uring and immediately after an extreme event. The bunker will be operated by a sub -
committee for disaster preparedness, comprising representatives from the health , environment,
public works and welfare sectors, who will be responsible for maintaining supplies of medicine,
renewable energy  equipment, building materials and food. This bunker will also serve as a
b
attery recharge site, allowing for battery packs to be recharged and swapped out in  priority
buildings if renewable energy  systems cannot be made operational again before battery systems
run out.
13. The design solutions for the building structures follow the engineering protocols of the
building codes of the State of Florida  in the United States of America . This is an excellent
example of building design t hat sustain s wind speed s above 270 kilometres per hour.  Lastly,
back -up protocols will be developed and operationalized  to secure vital information within
critical public institutions, including hospitals, clinics, schools, police stations and fire stations .
I
n so doing, critical service providers will have increased access to emergency supplies and vital
information will be preserved.
14. These adaptation measur es therefor e present a comprehensive approach to building
resilience to hurricanes  for the most critical  buildings, taking into account the needs of the most
vulnerable  part s of the population. Furthermore, those measures were introduced after using
robust  planning and vulnerability assessment tools,  which  correspond to the highest standard s
o
f disaster risk management.
Component 2 : Climate change adaptation mainstreamed into the building sector and relevant 
financial mechanisms  (total cost : USD 3.1 million ; GCF cost: USD 2.9 million , or 93 per cent ) 
15. Under this component, climate change adaptation measures will be mainstreamed into
the country’s building sector. Regulations for the Physical Planning Act (2003) will be drafted tomake provision s for including the updated building code s in the national regulatory framework
.
S
trategic impact assessment s (SIA s) of the building code regulations will be conducted to assess
the ESS and gender risks,  and consequences of and mitigation measures related to th e
en
actment of these regulations in the Physical Planning Act (2003). This SIA will ensure that th e
b
uilding code is able to be applied by the most vulnerable groups in the country, particularly th e
e
lderly and people  with  disabilities, and r ecommendations will also be  made for th e
envi
ronmental management plans to be updated to include climate- resilient measures for th e
b
uilding sector.
16. Furthermore, the project will explore  additional entry points for accessing climate
finance through the SIR F fund, w hich will include the introduction of incremental cost reasoning
to project selection criteria . This will allow for the development costs to be split between
baseline and adaptation measures.  Following this, a list of adaptation options supported by the
SIRF Fund will be refined, and SIRF guidelines will be updated  to allow the private sector to
access finance for resilient infrastructure investments. This process will ensure that all options
are optim ized for the local conditions and market s and that clear guidelines are set for accessing
the SIRF Fund resources for resilient infrastructure investments.
17. Lastly, various training packages will be developed  and relevant staff trained on the
oper ations and maintenance of climate -resilient infrastructure. These include (i) training
relevant staff from  the National Office of D isaster Services (NODS) as well as building inspector s
f
rom  Development Control Au thorities and building maintenance teams on operation al
p
rocedures for long -term monitoring, maintenance and upscaling of climate change adaptation
interventions ; and (ii) training of the local work force , including the private sector , on how t o
s
upport the installation, operation and maintenance of climate change adaptation solutions
installed in the targeted buildings .


---
*Page 98*
---

G
CF/B.2 6/02/Add.05 
Page 98 
Component 3: Climate information services strengthened to facilitate early action within the 
building sector to respond to extreme climate events (t otal cost: US D 0.85 million ; GCF cost: USD 
0.75 million , or 90 per cent ) 
18. Under this component, a centralize d online server will be established to process climate
data in real time, overcoming existing shortfalls in data processing capabilities. This will allow
for the forecast ing of  extreme climate events in a timely manner  using data from the country’s
existing weather stations. The central ized server will be equipped to process data in sever al
f
ormats , which will reduce processing time given that  the data is input from  the country’s
weather stations using several different operational platforms. To further strengthen th e
c
apacity of ABMS to produce early warnings, training workshops will be conducted for ABMS
staff on how to ( i) collect, process and manage climate data generated by the server; and ( ii) use
the generated data to develop early warning information products, including easilyinterpretable infographics.
19. Lastly, communication and early action protocols will be formal ized between AMBS and
relevant government agencies to facilitate rapid information -sharing before an extreme climat e
e
vent.
20. Contingency:  the project cost s include  a budgeted  contingency amount of USD  3.9
million , of which the GCF portion is USD  2.7 million , prorated according to GCF financing  in the
project . The total contingency fee amount is the sum of ( i) 10 per cent  of the total cost of project
interventions under Output 1; ( ii) 5  per cent  of the total cost of project interventions under
Output 2; and (iii) 5  per cent  of the total cost of project interventions under Output 3 . This
contingency  amount is needed to account for cost  overruns due to price inflation given that
building materials are to be imported to the country.
Component 4: P roject m anagement a nd monitoring a nd e valuation costs (total c ost: US D 2.2 
million ; GCF cost : 1.3 m illion, or 59 per cent )  
21. The project m anagement costs (PMC) will be used for project management a nd 
monitoring a nd e valuation co sts, a nd in clude the establishment and operations of the National 
Project S teering C ommittee, the P roject Ma nagement U nit (PMU) within th e Mi nistr y of Finance 
(MOF) and the recruitment of an International Chief Technical Advisor.
III. Assessment of the performance against investment criteria
3
.1 Impact potential    Scale: High  
22. The project will directly benefit 73,216 people in Antigua and Barbuda , representing 78
per cent of the total population , by securing the provision of critical services to these people
during and after an extreme climate event , and it will  indirectly benefit the entire population of
the co untry. Project interventions will further increase the climate resilience of 54 priority
buildings in Antigua and Barbuda, which represent s one third  of the country’s total number of
public building s, and create new shelters and bunker s for disaster preparedness and
management .
23. A climate vulnerability analysis was conducted t o determine the most appropriate sites
for project interventions and ensure that maximum benefits are real ized as a result of these
interventions. This analysis included a hydraulic fl ood analysis as well as a walk- time analysis to
determine the total coverage of project interventions and support justification s for the project
to primarily address the impacts of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes.
24. A vulnerability -driven selection process was f ollowed for targeted critical public service
and community buildings to ensure that climate -proofed critical services provide maximu m
c
overage to vulnerable areas with high population density, the poorest communities and thos e


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 99 
 
 
individuals living in areas o utside of the main drainage channel s. This analysis ensured that the 
selection of target intervention sites would provide for maximum coverage of critical services to 
the most vulnerable people.  
25. While the installation of solar PV panels on 34 target buildings under Activity 1.1 is 
primarily an adaptation solution proposed under the project,  its implementation will also 
deliver m itigation co -benefits. As a result, i nstalling solar PV panels will reduce an estimated  
1,923 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent per year  in avoided emissions .  
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                                                                  Scale : High  
26. At the current stage of  development in climate change effort s, we  are experiencing the 
deployment of predominately mitigation measures,  comprising  mainly clean energy solutions 
and energy efficiency measures. Adaptation options for climate -proofing structures against 
climate hazards are still in  the preliminary stages of advancement, with limited experience on 
the ground . There are no calibrated eng ineering solutions for integrated building codes that 
embrace both climate change streams. This situation is apparent  in the broad adoption of 
‘green’ building codes which relate to energy measures and  the preservation of natural 
resources but  do not incor porate customized climate -proofing solutions. At the same time, 
climate -proofing solutions are much more disruptive for the buildings’ structure th an mitigation 
measures. Consequently, in case mitigation measures are not yet introduced, it is advisable to 
refurbish structure s to incorporate  climate -proofing characteristics before bringing in 
renewable energy or  energy efficiency  measures. The energy efficiency  solutions are related to 
the building structure directly  and thus depend heavily  on the building f eatures and use.  
27. This project is one of first in the  region to introduc e building codes related to climate -
proofing measures. The  successful  completion o f this task as well as lessons learn ed from the 
refurbishment of 52 critical public buildings will allo w for an assessment of what energy 
efficiency  measures will be the most efficient with the new structures of selected buildings. It 
will allow existing energy efficiency  building codes  to be adjusted  so they can be incorporated 
alongside  climate -proofing measures. This exercise can become an important market test to 
benchmark the scope of integrated building codes for future use. R enewable energy  
installations, water harvesting solutions as well as energy efficiency  measures will be part of the 
design of the critical buildings along with the climate -proofing elements. Th is information will 
help determine the best combination of mitigation and adaptation measures to be introduced 
into the  building codes.  Full reporting on this matter will be develop ed upon project completion  
and will serve any future similar projects globally .’ 
28. The project will catalyse a paradigm shift in the building sector by establishing a 
standard for climate -resilient interventions , which  can be readily scaled up and replicated  
across the country’s public building portfolio , as well as within the private sector. Furthermore, 
the uptake and sustainability of climate -resilient adaptation solutions will be enhanced through 
capacity -building and training campaigns , which will ensure  the long -term sustainability of 
investments in climate -resilient practices. These long -term  benefits  will eventually result in  the 
private sector having (i) a  funding modality available t o account for and finance incremental 
costs of adaptation ; (ii) reductions in insurance premiums due to  reduced risk  resulting from  
climate -proofed buildings ; and (iii) reductions in the economic losses caused by extreme 
climate events.  
29. The i ntroduction of new resilience building code standards  and other changes to 
regulatory framework s that would allow for  the construction of resilient infrastructure 
nationwide, efficient and effective knowledge transfer through the aforementioned training  
campaigns and improvement s to information -sharing related to disaster  preparedn ess will not 
only improve the uptake of climate- resilient building practices, but will also improve the


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 100 
 
 
preparedness of critical public services, local communities, business owners and other private 
sector stakeholders for the onset of extreme climate even ts. 
30. Lastly, t he combined effect of the project interventions will  help create an enabling 
environment for the future upscaling and replication of climate change adaptation intervention s 
within the public and private sector, locally, nationally and across t he Caribbean region.    
3.3 Sustainable development potential                             Scale:  Mediu m 
31. The proposed project will contribute towards the achievement of 9  of the 17 U nited 
Nations  Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including: SDG 3 – Good health and well -being; 
SDG 4 – Quality education; SDG 5 – Gender equality; SDG 6 – Clean water and sanitation; SDG 7 – 
Affordable and clean energy; SDG 9 – Industry, innovation and infrastructu re; SDG 11 – 
Sustainable cities and communities; and SDG 13 – Climate action.  
32. The project will generate environmental, social, economic and gender co -benefits. 
Significant social, environmental and economic co -benefits include increased employment, 
reduce d risk of injuries during hurricanes and increased energy storage capacity, energy and 
water security, and private sector  involvement  in the new construction value chain , etc .  
33. Project interventions will increase the resilience of priority buildings and cr itical 
services, resulting in improved climate -responsive planning and early action. These factors will 
lead to reduced economic losses from extreme climate events and provide several significant 
economic co -benefits . Climate -proofing critical public institutions will also help to limit the 
disruptions to core health, education and care services following extreme climate events.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                                                 Scale: High  
34. As a small island developing S tate ( SIDS ), Antigua and Barbuda is particularly 
vulnerable to extreme climate events such as hurricanes and tropical storms. In 2017, the 
country was ranked 13th in the G lobal Climate Risk Index and 3rd in terms of losses per unit  of 
gross domestic product ( GDP) . Such  hurricanes have severe impacts on the country, including 
loss of life, economic losses and damage to infrastructure , resulting in huge economic and 
infrastructure damages. I n 2017 , Hurricane Irma caused an estimated U SD 222 million in 
damages and economic losses in Antigua and Barbuda and resulted in approx. 129 fatalities 
across the Caribbean and south- eastern  region  of the United States. The impacts of these 
extreme climate events on the country are further exacerbat ed by the country’s economic 
composition. For example, tourism makes up the largest proportion of the country’s GDP 
(approx. 60 per cent ) and accounts for the highest overall investment at approx. 40 per cent . 
35. During the hurricane events, disruption occurs in emergency services, disaster 
response, electricity and water supply , and telecommunications. This results in critical services 
becoming non -operational, which leads to reductions in economic productivity and mobility as 
well as increases in personal in jury and loss of life. Furthermore, extreme climate events cause 
damage to community buildings that are used as shelters, such as schools, churches, clinics and 
police stations. These barriers will be addressed  through  the construction of new shelters that  
are attached to the clinics, which will serve as better venues for dealing with  post -disaster  
recovery.   
3.5 Country ownership                                                                          Scale: High  
36. The proposed project forms an integral part of Antigua and Barbuda’s GCF Country 
Programme. The current portfolio under the Country Programme has been specifically designed


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 101 
 
 
to take a holistic approach to climate change adaptation and mitigation in Antigua and Barbuda . 
The portfolio will be complemented by other projects under the Country Programme , which will  
address the additional climate hazards associated with hurricanes, including flooding and storm 
surges.  
37. The proposed project aligns with the country’ s adaptation priorities set in the nationally 
determined contributions , meaning that  project interventions will increase the climate 
resilience of priority buildings. The project also forms part of Antigua and Barbuda’s Medium -
Term  Development Strategy , with two out of seven  flagships included in the Strategy  being 
directly relat ed to improved buildings and infrastructure.  
38. The proposed project  was designed following an extensive consultative process with the 
Department of E nvironment (DOE) , which is a n ational designated authority for Antigua and 
Barbuda and is responsible for the overall management of Antigua and Barbuda’s GCF portfolio, as well as all other relevant project stakeholders. These stakeholders included representatives 
from D OE, the Meteoro logical  Office, non-governmental organizations  and local communities. 
Three in -country missions have been conducted during the project development phase. 
Extensive stakeholder consultations were also conducted as part of the vulnerability 
assessment  and the development of project selection criteria and operations and maintenance 
plans.  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                        Scale:  High  
39. The proposed project is requesting US D 32.7 million in grant financ ing from the GCF to 
enhance the climate resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector to extreme climate 
events. This GCF investment will be supported by the Government of Antigua and Barbuda, 
which has committed US D 13.5 mill ion in co -financing . This brings the  co-financing  leverage 
ratio to 1:0.5 .  
40. The country’s small tax and market base as well as its high public debt (100  per cent of 
its GDP in 2015) constrain the G overnment  of Antigua and Barbuda’ s ability to allocate funding 
from the national budget for adaptation. Moreover, limited opportunities exist for the public 
and private sector to access financial resources for addressing climate change impacts, which 
was estimated to cost the country appr ox. USD 20 million per annum. This is nearly fifteen times 
greater than the national budget  of the D OE in 2017, and is likely to increase substantially under 
future climate conditions. External investment is therefore critical to increase the resilience of 
Antigua and Barbuda’s population to climate change.  
41. Grants from GCF will only be used to address the additional impacts of climate change, 
with government co -finan cing  being used to cover all baseline costs , including business -as-usual 
repairs/maintenance to buildings that are necessary to ensure the sustainability of climate -
proofing interventions.  
42. As part of the efficiency and effectiveness analysis, the project looked at several 
scenarios for  the cost -effectiveness evaluation  and outlined the  baseline  scenario  and resilient 
intervention s cenarios . According to the funding proposal, a  baseline package representing the 
conventional response to Category 3 hurricane impacts includes a total capital cost of US D 9.7 
million , an annual operating expenditure of USD 64,800 .  A climate -resilient package 
representing a retrofit of 54 buildings for Category 5 hurricanes, capacity -building interventions 
to lever climate -resilient private sector responses includes a total capital cost of US D 21.8 
million and an annual operating expenditure of U SD 717,910. The net present value (NPV) of the 
baseline or business -as-usual intervention package is US D 13.8 million, and that of the  climate 
resilient retrofit ting activities is USD 36.9 million. The climate -resilient o ption is 2.6 times 
greater than the baseline.


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 102 
 
 
43. The project also describes international best practices and lessons learned identified for 
the project, such as ensuring that designs of buildings under future climate change conditions 
do not include long overha ngs (at risk in high -intensity storms)  and updating national policy 
standards, etc.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards   
44. Environmental and social risk category. The accredited entity (AE) has assessed t he 
environmental and social risks under this project and rated  it as a category B since there are 
limited adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts that are few in number, generally site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addres sed through mitigation measures . The 
Secretariat confirms that this is equivalent to c ategory B as per the GCF Environmental and 
Social Policy. The categori zation is supported by the comprehensive Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment and Management P lan (ESIAMP) developed by the AE, the DOE  of Antigua 
and Barbuda.  
 
45. Safeguards instruments and disclosure.  The project has submitted the necessary 
environmental and social safeguards documents consisting of an integrated ESIAMP , which 
illustrates the potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the different project 
activities and the corresponding management measures to mitigate them. The ESIAMP will be 
disclosed at least 30 days in advance of the GCF Board approval of the project. The safeguard 
report will be available in English as the official language and made available via electronic links 
on both the AE and the GCF website as well as in locations convenient to affected peoples in 
consonance with the requirements of the GCF Information Disclo sure Policy and section 7.1 on 
information disclosure in the GCF Environmental and Social Policy.   
46. The following summarizes the project’s compliance with the  GCF ESS standards and 
requirements:  
(a) ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts.  The 
project has submitted the ESIAMP with sections containing the assessment and 
management plan. The negative and positive impacts of the project were assessed 
following a well -defined methodology drawing on nat ional -level environmental impact 
assessment procedures. The project has put forward an environmental and social 
management plan that identified potential impact areas, required mitigation measures, 
responsibilities of stakeholders, timeframes and indicativ e costs. Construction -related 
impacts include those related to worker and community health and safety concerns, 
while operation -related impacts involve the use of water resources as well as potential 
pollution from solid waste generation and hazardous wast e management;  
(b) ESS 2: Labour and working conditions. The project is associated with construction with 
a number of labourers involved. The project underscores that project activities shall 
respond to the core labour standards per the International Labour Org anization and the 
labour laws of Antigua and Barbuda,  including ensuring that labourers and 
subcontractors will be paid with the correct wages and taking into consideration the impacts of its activities on the working conditions of the labourers. The proje ct will 
ensure that subcontractors comply with all the relevant labour laws applicable to their 
personnel, including subcontractors’ workers and labourers, and that such laws will be 
reflected in tender documents and contract provisions;
 
(c) ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention. The project is expected to upgrade and expand upon several sites, and the project considers that this will likely involve the


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 103 
 
 
generation of construction waste, dust and other particulates. The ESIAMP identified 
and assess ed activities related to the construction and operation of the project that may 
pollute the air, water and land and those that produce project -related greenhouse gas 
emissions, and has recommended avoidance, minimization, mitigation and 
compensatory measur es; 
(d) ESS 4: Community health, safety and security. The project will increase continued access 
to public healthcare services by providing a consistent supply of electricity and water to clinics. The project provides for necessary measures to address the issu es on community 
health, safety and security associated with the construction works and for the development of an emergency preparedness and response plan that would outline how 
affected communities will be assisted in cases of emergencies. An accident prev ention 
officer at the project sites will also be appointed;
 
(e) ESS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. There will be no land acquisition 
under the project, as all interventions are to be installed in situ on existing facilities. 
Moreover, the pr oject will ensure that the livelihoods of communities living in the 
vicinity of the project are not adversely affected and shall be monitored during the implementation phase of the project;
 
(f) ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of liv ing natural 
resources. The project activities are not expected to have a negative impact on 
biodiversity and has recommended a sustainable procurement policy for construction 
works, including ensuring invasive species are not introduced in the importation of 
equipment and other products;  
(g) ESS 7: Indigenous peoples. The project does not disproportionately affect marginalized 
groups and indigenous peoples. Rather, it seeks to empower vulnerable communities by 
improving essential community services (health and education) to beneficiaries. The 
project stresses that it shall provide fair and equitable access to benefits in a manner 
that is inclusive and does not exacerbate inequalities. Full engagement of the local 
communities and their representative institutions should be encouraged throughout the 
implementation of the project; and  
(h) ESS 8: Cultural heritage. While none of the targeted facilities are in cultural sites, some 
of the areas may be of cultural value. However, it is indicated that during building 
retrofi tting, the process will as much as possible respect physical aesthetics of buildings, 
especially historically relevant buildings. The project shall also follow the requirements 
for preserving cultural heritage under the Physical Planning Act.  
47. Institutiona l arrangements and capacity -building needs. The environmental and social 
management plan has clearly defined the roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders that will 
be involved in the implementation of the mitigation measures. M&E oversight and 
respon sibilities are also defined. The ESIAMP also include s the M&E  arrangements to monitor 
the implementation of the e nvironmental management systems and other site -specific 
management plans that may  be developed by the contractors.  
48. Stakeholder engagement. The project has developed a stakeholder engagement plan and  
carried out  extensive community engagement  with the surrounding communities to enable 
them to provide opinions  on the various components of the proposed project and  how the 
project is going to affect them from various perspectives.  
49. Grievance redress mechanism. The AE has an existing entity -level grievance redress 
mechanism,  which shall also be implemented at the project sites to receive concerns regarding 
the environmental and social performance of the project and facilitate  their  resolution. The 
ESIAMP has also provided for workshop s and training on the DOE c omplaints mechanism for 
workers as well as neighbouring communities to ensure access to the grievance redress


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 104 
 
 
mechanism. The DOE also has an assig ned Complaints Officer for receiving and forwarding 
complaints to the relevant units. In addition, a Public Awareness and Community Liaison Officer 
within the Public Awareness and Community Outreach Unit will be responsible for conducting 
consultations wit h communities as well as in informing them o f the mechanism for submitting 
grievances, if any.  
4.2 Gender policy   
50. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan  and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the GCF  Gender Policy.  
51. In the gender assessment,  the AE  demonstrates  the existence of enabling environment 
for promoting gender equality in Antigua and Barbuda. The country’s constitution prohibits 
discrimination on the grounds of sex. While there is no specific ministry for gender, the D OE 
Gender Policy formalizes its  commitment to mainstreaming gender in its work programme and 
project portfolio. Antigua and Barbuda has ratified the Convention on the Eliminatio n of all 
Forms of Discrimination Against Women  and its Optional Protocol.  
52. The gender assessment is carried out  based on a desk review as well as stakeholder 
consultations , which included discussion s with service providers as well as men and women 
community members. Men are still considered head s of household and breadwinners , while the 
role s of both women and men has evolved and changed over the years in some aspects. The 
assessment also illustrates that while men dominate sectors such as construction, agriculture, 
forestry , fishing  and transportation , women are found in service sectors and tourism, education, 
social work, and financial and insurance activities. The assessment also identifies that you ng 
men in the project location may  be more likely to be unemployed than any other groups. Men 
and women engage in  the care of children , although  the contribution of women is slightly 
higher,  which has  an impact on their ability to go back to work post -disa ster if services such as 
day care and schools cannot resume services i mmediately. Other services provided by the 
government are critical for the communities and  women in particular,  as women  are usually the 
primary users of these services. P ost-disaster, when schools are closed for longer periods, a n 
increased  childcare  burden  is placed on parents, especially female -headed households, resulting 
in increased unpaid labo ur for women and decreased chances to carry out  revenue- earning 
activities. Furthermore,  women -headed households face additional challenges post -disaster as 
the care and responsibility for children and the elderly increase. Therefore, women and their 
dependents depend heavily on reliable services  in all of the sectors , particularly those targeted 
by the project. While education is provided  equally  to both women and men, women achieve 
higher educational levels compared to men. While both men and women have access to information, traditional educati on and communication systems may not be gender -responsive. 
The assessment indicates that there are barriers to men’s participation in vario us forums  since 
they are generally less  well  educated  and may not want to participate in information sessions.  
Throug h the assessment, the project recognize d th at certain community members,  particularly 
poorer men and women and their families , face  challenges in obtaining  continued access to free 
government services such as preschools and electricity , the latter being a service that is even 
unaffordable to some middl e-income part s of the population.  
53. The AE has noted the challenges to both women and men, particularly women and men 
within the poorer section of the community. A s per the requirement s in the GCF  Gender Policy,  
it has developed  a gender action plan which provides indicators, targets, budgets and a gender 
expert to support the implementation of the plan. The action plan includes various activities,  
such as a formal training course in the construction sector for women . At the same time,  it will 
develop trainings that ensure male participation given men’s lower levels of educational 
attainment. The action plan also includes activities related to  accessing  financial support  and 
early warning informatio n and develop ing gender -responsive tools and codes. The gender


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 105 
 
 
action plan will be reviewed and refined during the inception phase , ensuring project 
stakeholders have an opportunity to identify issues. The review and refinement will also benefit 
from the ongoing work under readiness , particularly the gender baseline assessments currently 
being conducted under the project “Accelerating a transformational pipeline of Direct Access 
climate adaptation and mitigation projects in Antigua & Barbuda”. The output fr om the 
readiness work will assist in refining relevant targets and indicators in the action plan to make 
sure it is realistic and ambitious.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall proposal assessment (medium risk)  
54. GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD  32.7 million to enhance the resilience of 
Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector to extreme climate events such as Category 4 and 5 
hurricanes. The government of Antigua and Barbuda is providing grant co -financing of USD 13. 5 
million , of which USD 4.9  million is in -kind contribut ion. 
4.3.2.  Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute (medium risk)  
55. The DOE will be the AE for the project.  The AE has a track record of implementing 
resilience building projects from multiple donor agencies.  Projects have ranged between USD 
0.9 million and USD 20 million .  
56. The Ministry of F inance (MOF)  is the executing entity ( EE). The EE has experience in 
executing projects with a budget range of USD 2 million to USD 15 million over the past five years .  The result of capacity assessment conducted by AE was satisfactory . The AE will be 
responsible for the procurement and efficient disbursement of financial resources for the 
implementation of the project, and is relied upon to oversee that the EE effectiv ely uses these 
resources during project implementation.  
4.3.3.  Project -specific risks (medium risk)  
57. Delays in the implementation: the funding proposal has identified risk factors that may 
lead to delays in the implementation of the project. These include extreme weather events such 
as hurricanes, tropical storms, disrupted shipment schedules, and limited workforce for 
construction. To mitigate these risks, the project will construct a warehouse for storage of the 
materials in early stages of the project, limit con struction work during hurricane seasons and 
purchase insurance for construction related risks. The AE will also include clauses in all relevant project agreements allowing time for project extension due to force majeure, and provision s for 
contingency budg ets. 
58. Operations and maintenance: The project will install removable solar photovoltaic 
panels, batteries and water -harvesting solutions in priority buildings. This equipment will be 
used during normal operation as well as post -disaster. These systems will be grid -interactive 
and the necessary regulatory process will be followed with the utility authority. For the 
harvested water, no utility is involved. In addition, it will also construct bunkers and community 
shelters to store emergency supplies for the health, energy and building sectors. Therefore, it is 
critical to maintain these facilities to ensure full operation during emergencies and prevent any 
theft, spoilage and loss. The funding proposal stated that the Government of Antigua and 
Barbuda is commit ted to maintaining climate -proofing solutions, including solar PV panels and 
climate -resilient water harvesting solutions for the full lifespan of these interventions (i.e. 50 
years for interventions contributing to strengthened infrastructural integrity a nd 20 years for 
solar PV panels).


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 106 
 
 
59. Government approval for building code: The draft regulations for the Physical Planning 
Act (2003) that makes provisions for the building code will need to be submitted to and enacted 
by parliament. The funding proposal states that there is no guarantee that the Act will be 
approved due to the financial challenges poor income groups face in meeting the building code 
for their houses. The project will conduct an SIA of the building code regulations to assess the 
ESS and gender risks, consequences and mitigation measures related to the enactment of these 
regulations.  
60. Coordination with other funds: GCF resources will be used to catalyse the creation of 
additional entry points to promote investment into climate -adaptive measures in Antigua and 
Barbuda (Activity 2.2). Specifically, these resources will be used to expand the reach of the SIRF 
Fund to enhance the enabling environment for the public and private sector to access financing 
from the SIRF Fund specifically for adaptation in the building sector, in accordance with the 
guidelines and criteria for the adaptation. To prevent any risk of GCF resources retroactively 
financing SIRF Fund activities, the AE stated that GCF resources from this project will not be 
used to supplement the SIRF Fund . 
61. Economic and financial analysis: The cost -effectiveness analysis provides a comparison 
of intervention costs and associated hurricane impact costs in the four plausible scenarios: 
under normal hurricane with business as usual (BAU) and resil ient intervention scenarios, and 
extreme hurricane with BAU and resilient intervention scenarios. Net Present Value (NPV) calculated for BAU package is US D 13.8 million whereas NPV for climate resilient retrofit is US D 
36.9 million.  An additional USD 23 m illion in resilient interventions net cost savings of USD  337 
million  under hurricane scenarios and USD 9.1 billion under extreme hurricane scenario. This 
shows that resilient interventions offer more cost -effective responses than a BAU response.  
4.3.4.  Complian ce risk (medium risk)  
62. A review of the planned activities d id not reveal any element that would pose a high 
amount of compliance risk for money laundering, terrorist financing or prohibited practices.  
There is a fair amount of procurement involved in the pr oject, but there are assurances that 
adequate controls are in place to guard against fraud and other abuse s of the procurement 
system.   
63. Based on the review and assurances by the AE, the complianc e risk assessment rates 
this as medium.  
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
64. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6.  Recommendation  
65. It is recomme nded that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
 
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  The project aims to enhance the 
resilience of the building sector to 
extreme climate events and will involve construction work. The project has risks of delayed implementation due to Accredited entity/executing 
entity  capability to implement 
this programme  Medium


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 107 
 
 
Project -specific execution  Medium  extreme climate events leading to issues 
in logistics and limited resources in the 
country. The government’s capacity and willingness to approve the draft Building Code and maintain the project facilities will be critical for the success of the 
project implementation.  GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary   
66. The DO E of Antigua and Barbuda will be the AE for this project The AE will be 
responsible for overseeing the implementation, financial management, evaluation, reporting 
and closure of the project.  
67. Antigua and Barbuda’s M OF will be the EE for the project. As the EE, M OF will provide 
oversight and manage entities in the respective government bodies (e.g. ABMS, Ministry of 
Health Wellness and Environment , Ministry of Works and NODS) that will be involved in the 
implementation of project interventions. M OF will be accoun table to the AE for the effective use 
of resources during project implementation. All operating policies and procedures will follow 
the D OE policies and procedures, which includes provisions for financial management and 
procurement .[1] In addition, project funds will be channelled through the MOF treasury. The 
MOF will be responsible for the efficient disbursement of financial resources for the 
implementation of all project activities.  
68. A PMU managed by the M OF will coordinate the implementation of project in terventions 
with the AE, EE and other implementing partners. This unit will be primarily responsible for 
coordinating project activities between the AE, EE and relevant stakeholders. The PMU will 
consist of ( i) the Project Manager ( PM); (ii) a Project Coor dinator; (iii) a Financial Officer (FO); 
(iv) a Procurement Officer (PO); ( v) an ESS  Officer; (vi) a Communications Officer (CO); ( vii) a 
Monitoring and Gender Officer; and ( viii) an Administrative Officer (AO). Both the FO, PO and 
AO will report directly to the PM. Their responsibilities will include ( i) providing administrative, 
logistical and technical financial support to the PMU; and ( ii) compiling reports on the 
disbursement procedures for the project and projected requirements for project funding dur ing 
the implementation phase. The FO in particular will manage the financial transactions for the 
project outputs and activities, which will be implemented in line with the established project 
workplan and national priorities.  
69. The DO E will be responsible for fiduciary aspects and accountable for all financial 
activities. The financial management and procurement within the project will be guided by 
procedures and policies of the DOE, which meet the requirements of multilateral and bilateral 
agreements. As the EE, M OF is a n au thority of the Government of Antigua and Barbuda and as 
such follows its financial and procurement rules and standards.  The DOE will therefore manage 
the funds while the EE implements the activities of the project. International accounting and 
financial reporting standards will be applied to all aspects of the project. The D OE follows 
standard accounting procedures for auditing project expenditure and assumes overall responsibility for the financial manageme nt of the project, ensuring that funds are used 
efficiently to support the funded activities. A qualified, internationally recognized auditing firm, competitively selected by the AE, will audit the project in compliance with International 
Standards on Audi ting and submit all project -related accounts to the GCF on an annual basis.  
70. This is a draft assessment and may need to be revised based on the responses of the AE 
to queries raised on the budget in relation to contingency amounts and other minor 
clarificat ions.


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 108 
 
 
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
71.  As an adaptation project, the intervention expects to benefit 73,216 direct and 94,400 
indirect beneficiaries. The project will deliver direct benefits to 78  per cent  of the population in 
a SIDS, of which women compr ise 38,072 direct and 49,988 indirect beneficiaries as per the 
gender -disaggregated metrics for the GCF core indicator.  
72. Overall, the funding proposal and log ic frame work  sufficiently apply GCF -level (impact 
and outcome) results management framework/perfor mance measurement  framework  
indicators.  The project has included or planned for baselines and is expected to implement data 
collection activities that can inform progress reporting on expected results. At the project 
performance level, measurements for behavioural change and climate specificities have been 
integrated , which are essential to understand, learn and deliver the expected project results.  
73. Regarding section E, the logic framework is assessed as complying with GCF standards 
and has been cleared through Secretariat Review.  
74. While the funding proposal theory of change has been cleared during Secretariat review, 
it would benefit from further details reflecting on the causal pathways at the project level and in relation to the climate  rationale (which ideally are tested in implementation either with project 
performance management indicators or impact data/evidence generated to attribute changes to 
GCF investment).  
75. Under section E.7, the information provided is generic and, primarily per AMA 
obligations. This was cleared during Secretariat review though it is recommended that the AE 
further elaborate during implementation how the budget, as allocated to date for M&E, 
is/remains sufficient to generate the evidence necessary to validate results as reported.  
76. Under section E.7, the Secretariat notes the intention of the AE to conduct an “outcomes -
based” assessment for the interim evaluation and a summative evaluation for the final 
evaluation. While cleared during the Secretariat review at th is stage, in the detailed budget, the 
AE needs to continue to ensure that sufficient budget is allocated to generate the necessary data 
for the validation in evaluations and cover the costs for the evaluations to be sufficiently 
conducted.   
4.6 Legal  assessme nt  
77. The AMA was signed with the  AE on 28 September 2018, and it became effective on 23 
October 2018.  
78. The AE has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. It is recommended that, prior to submission of the f unding proposal to the Board , (a) the  AE obtain 
all its internal approvals ; and (b) GCF  should receive  a certificate or legal opinion from the AE  in 
form and substance satisfactory to GCF  confirming that all final internal approvals by the A E 
have been obtained and that the entity has the authority and capacity to implement the project.  
79. The proposed project will be implemented in Antigua and  Barbuda. GCF has signed a 
bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities with Antigua and Barbuda.  
80. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made  subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Delivery by the A E to the GCF  of a certificate or legal opinion within 120 days of Board 
approval confirming that it has obtained all its internal approvals;


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B.2 6/02/Add.05  
Page 109 
 
 
(b) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval or the date when all 
internal approvals by the AE  are obtained; and  
(c) Completion of leg al due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat . 
4.7 List of proposed conditions  
81. A full design of each priority building targeted under the project will be a pre -requisite 
for the disbursement of GCF resources. These designs will also embrace a thoroug h assessment 
of the drainage needs , renewable energy use, energy efficiency, and water harvesting measures 
for all critical buildings selected for interventions under the project. Such designs will also  
support the preliminary selection of these 14 buildin gs to receive additional drainage 
engineering solutions in the face of climate  change .


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add. 05 
Page 110 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP133 
Proposal name:  Resilience to hurricanes in the building sector in Antigua and 
Barbuda  
Accredited entity:  Department of Environment, Antigua and Barbuda  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential            Scale:  High  
1. The funding propos al is submitted by the direct access entity of a Caribbean small island 
developing State and is an integral part of Antigua and Barbuda’s GCF c ountry programme.  
Activities planned in this proposal  are complementary to other climate change projects  being 
implemented in the region , and particular ly in this country. All similar  projects are  considered 
in section B.1 of the funding proposal , where its additionality is well demonstrated , focusing on 
the specific ities of climate risks tackled by each project.   
2. This is a small- scale adaptation funding proposal with mitigation co -benefits aimed at 
strengthening the country’s adapt ation capacities against  the impacts of extreme climatic events 
on the building sector  and infr astructure . It contributes to the GCF results areas: infrastruc ture 
and built environment ; and most vulnerable people, communities and regions. 
3. Infrastructure and buildings in Antigua and Barbuda  are relatively resistant to C ategory 
3 hurricanes but are highly vulnerable to the Category 4 and 5 hurricanes that have ap pear ed in 
the last decades ; and the infrastructure and buildings  need to be upgraded to withstand the 
impacts of these Category 4 and 5 hurricanes ( which have wind speeds of over 200  km/h ). 
Higher resilience  can be achieved by strengthening the structural integrity of buildings and 
whole  infrastructure  by decentrali zing power and water supplies to reduce the  reliance of 
communities on vulnerable centrali zed systems. Initial climate -proofing interventions will focus  
on critical services,  such as p olice, fire and health  services, as well as on community buildings 
that could act as shelters during a storm. Increasing the resilience of these priority buildings 
will lead to: ( i) critical services remaining operational during and after an extreme event;  and 
(ii) more rapid recovery, including restoring water supply, power and communication services, 
along with health  care and education. This will be done through: mainstream ing climate change 
adaptation in the building sector by making provision for the building code established in the 
Physical Planning Act (2003) and updating the environmental management system (EMS ) plans ; 
install ing climate proofing measures on 54 priority buildings  of the 254 buildings in the 
government sector ; construct ing climate -resilient storm shelters attached to public clinics;  and 
construct ing a climate -resilient bunker to store emergency supplies for the health, energy, 
building and welfare sectors . 
4. Historically, Antigua and Barbuda had only been directly hit by relatively low -intensity 
tropical storms, which  seldom reach ed hurricane status above Category 3 ; only  one historical  
Category 4  has been confirm ed. Consequently, building codes in Antigua and  Barbuda did not 
prescribe the construction methods/technologies required to withstand hurricanes above 
Category 3. Previously, buildings designed to withstand up to a Category 3 were  sufficient, but 
the increasing intensity and frequency of hurricanes hit ting the country have  had severe 
impacts on the built environment and population. In recent years, t he damage caused by


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add. 05 
Page 111 
 
 
Category 5 hurricanes – particularly Hurricanes Luis, Maria and Irma – has highlighted the 
limitations of regulations for the construction of buildings that must now withstand high wind 
speeds  of over 200 km/h  and the high levels of rainfall cause d by these events.   
5. Climate change projections under both the r epresentative concentration pathway (RCP ) 
4.5 and 8.5 scenarios1 indicate that, although the total number of storms is not expected to 
change significantly, there will be an increase in the frequency of high -intensity storms 
(Category 4 and 5 hurricanes) experienced by Antigua and Barbuda .2 The increasing intensity of 
hurricanes is already evident in the country. The return rate of Category 4 hurricanes in the first 
half of the twentieth  century was one in 50 years  compared  with the latter half of the century, 
when the return period for Category 4 hurricanes shortened t o one in 10 years, the only 
Category 5 hurricanes in recorded history to affect the country have occurred very recently, 
namely Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017. The first of these, Hurricane Irma, was a direct hit 
on Barbuda and resulted in the destructi on of approximately 95 per cent  of all infrastructure on 
the island. The combined impact of the 2017 hurricanes amounted to US D 136 million in 
damages and US D 19 million in post hurricane economic losses, approximately, with total 
recovery costs estimated at US D 222 million  without considering the cost s related to loss of 
revenue to the economy up to 12 months after the hurricane.  
6. Damage to critical public infrastructure includ es centrali zed power and water supplies, 
roads, hospitals, clinics, emergency ser vices, telecommunications and schools,  and it leads not 
only to disruptions to economic activity but also to considerable recovery costs after an event. Moreover, it often takes several months for the country to recover from such disruptions, 
lead ing to considerable declines in economic productivity and quality of life. Therefore, the 
resilience interventions include decentrali zed renewable energy and climate -resilient water -
harvesting solutions.  Following a Category 5 hurricane, the power and water s upply in Antigua 
and Barbuda can be disrupted for 3–24 months while damage to communication and transport 
infrastructure disrupts associated services for up to 6 months, with considerable impacts on the 
country’s economy. In addition to the general disrupt ion of economic activities, food and 
medical imports, which are mostly brought in by ship, are disrupted for several weeks after an 
extreme event, impacting the health and well -being  of local communities. These impacts are 
exacerbated by the significant da mage caused by hurricanes to critical public service 
infrastructure, which limits the capacity of emergency services as well as the National Office of 
Disaster Services (NODS) to prepare for and respond to extreme climate events.  
7. The capacity of the count ry to be prepare d for a hurricane is further constrained by 
inadequate early warning systems and the absence of formali zed communication and early 
action protocols. Given the projected increase in the frequency of Category 4 and 5 hurricanes, 
the combined impacts on the economy and well -being  of local communities will become 
increasingly severe in the absence of urgent adaptation interventions.  
8. Several key barriers to the adaptation process are identified in the funding proposal:  
(a) Limited financial capacit y to invest in climate proofing critical public service s and 
community buildings to withstand Category 4 and 5 hurricanes. This includes not being 
able to install decentrali zed renewable backup energy and water systems to maintain 
supply when centrali zed d istribution lines are disrupted by a storm;  
 
1 These RCPs are based on the main forcing agents of climate change, including greenhouse gas ( GHG ) emissions, GHG 
concentrations and land -use change. RCP  4.5 represents the likely best -case scenario with a peak radiative forcing of 
4.5 W/m2 (~650 ppm CO 2eq) at stabili zation after 2100. RCP  8.5 represents a very high GHG emission scenario with 
a peak radiative forcing of 8.5 W/m2 (~1,370 ppm CO 2eq) and no expected stabilisation in emissions. RCP8.5 
indicates a business as usual scenario where the rate of GHG emissions continues to increase with no mitigation 
measures.  
2 The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Fifth assessment report. Available at: 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment- report/ar5/ >. Accessed on: 19 September 2019.


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add. 05 
Page 112 
 
 
(b) The remote location of Antigua and Barbuda makes it difficult to access solar photo -
voltaic panels for replacement  and to restore power after a storm in critical service 
buildings that are equipped with decentrali zed renewable energy systems. There is 
currently a limited stock of renewable energy equipment available in the country and no 
secure location to store additional backup equipment ; 
(c) Damag e of critical information servers/computers at public institutions , including 
hospitals, police stations and other government institutions,  during a major storm , 
resulting in the loss of vital information for public health and security. C urrently there is 
limi ted technical capacity to preserve this information, either through the safeguarding 
of physical infrastructure or the provision of reliable coordinated backup systems ; 
(d) The high cost of adaptation of the building sector to Cat egor ies 4 and 5 limits the abi lity 
to sufficiently mainstream requirements  into the country ’s regulatory frameworks ; 
(e) Local communities and private sector property owners, as well as public sector 
decision -makers and design engineers/architects, have limited knowledge of the 
adaptation options available for the building sector. This increases the risk of over -
engineering of interventions and consequently higher incremental cost s and risks for  
low-income groups  that cannot fulfil the requirements of the code ; 
(f) Limited replenishment of development funds as well as limited consideration of climate 
change adaptation by the banking and insurance sectors due to the lack of evidence -
based information;  
(g) Limited technical capacity within NODS, Development Control Authority  (DCA ) and 
Public Works Dep artment  (PWD ) for long -term monitoring, maintenance and planning 
for adaptation measures in the building sector constrain s the long -term sustainability 
and upscaling potential of climate change adaptation interventions. These capacity 
limitations extend to  the local workforce , which is  ultimately responsible for the 
installation and maintenance of equipment;  and 
(h) Limited technical capacity in the Antigua and Barbuda Meteorological Services ( ABMS ) 
and NODS to adequately disseminate early warnings to support early action, particularly 
with regard to preparing shelters and securing renewable energy equipment ahead of a 
storm.  
9. To remov e these barriers three activities with various measures are planned  in the 
funding proposal : implement ation of c limate -proofing interventions in critical public service 
and community buildings to improve resilience to, and recovery from, extreme climate events ; 
mainstream ing climate change adaptation into the building sec tor and relevant financial 
mechanisms;  and strengthening of c limate information services to facilitate early action . 
10. Strengthening the adaptation capacities of Antigua and Barbuda  against high category 
hurricanes implies: train ing relevant staff from the N ODS, D CA and the PWD as well as the 
private sector on operational procedures for long -term monitoring, maintenance and upscaling 
of climate -resilient , renewable energy and water harvesting technologies in accordance with the 
national building code ; train ing the local workforce on the installation, operation and 
maintenance of climate -proofing measures for the targeted buildings ; strengthen ing climate 
information services to facilitate early action for extreme climate events; and mainstream ing 
climate change adaptation for the building sector into public and private financial, insurance 
and banking sectors.  
11. The technical design s are derived from the most advanced protocols developed by the 
state of Florida  in the United States of America . In addition to these physical interventions, 
backup protocols will be developed and operationali zed to secure vital information within 
critical public institutions, including hospitals, clinics, schools, police and fire st ations. The 
vulnerability- driven selection process was followed for targeted critical public service and


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add. 05 
Page 113 
 
 
community buildings to ensure that climate -proofed critical services provide maximum 
coverage to vulnerable areas with high population density, the poo rest communities,  and those 
individuals living in areas outside the main drainage channels. Project intervention sites were 
also selected by accounting for the location of lower income communities in Antigua and 
Barbuda, where infrastructure is generally less resilient to the extreme winds and heavy 
downpours associated with Category 4 and 5 hurricanes.  
12. According to the funding proposal, the seventh  edition of the Organization of Eastern 
Caribbean States  Building Code is currently under peer review to tail or it to the technical 
specifications and standards of Antigua and Barbuda,  specifically to account for Category 4 and 
5 hurricanes. This updated version of the building code is expected to be formaliz ed by Antigua 
and Barbuda’s Cabinet in 2020 and will be align ed with the scheduling of proposed project 
interventions.  
13. Direct benefic iaries of adaptation activities are planned to reach 73,216 vulnerable 
people and indirect benefits will be g ained  by the  entire population of the country, through  
reducing the adverse impacts of extreme climate events on human life and enabling the 
country’s major economic sectors to resume business as usual more quickly following the  
extreme  events. Direct health benefits are also expected to incur through the improved 
provisio n of clean water, increased operability of clinics during a storm, integration of storm 
shelters into existing clinics and improved storage for vital medication , which  are usually 
damaged by an intense storm.  
14. Mitigation co -benefit s are planned within activity 1 , which consider s the 
implementation of energy efficiency and renewable solutions in the building sector , along with 
the strengthening of adaptive capacities. In particular , 1.4 MW solar energy capacity will be 
installed over the 54 building s prioriti zed for strengthening,  which is about 3 per  cent of the 
nationally determined contribution (NDC)  target . A preliminary calculation shows a nnual 
savings of emission s to be 1,923 tonnes of carbon dioxide . The “Approved Methodology for 
Small -scale Clean  Development Mechanism s I.F.: Renewable electricity generation for captive 
use and mini- grid ” (version 3.0)  was applied by the project.  
15. It is the  opinion of the  independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP)  that the direct 
adaptation impact (72 per  cent of to tal population) of the funding proposal is high, while the 
mitigation co -benefit is moderate.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential          Scale: High  
16. The proposed project will catalyse a paradigm shift in Antigua and Barbuda’s 
preparedness  to the disaster risks reduction process from conventional development to an 
approach that prioriti zes the adoption of innovative climate- resilient solutions and early  action.  
In particular, preparedness is focused on the building and infrastructure sectors.  
17. The target of the funding proposal is to m ainstream climate resilience into national 
building regulations, combined with strengthening the capacity of local authorities, building inspectors, engineers, architects and draughtsmen to adhere to these regulations . 
Mainstream ing climate change into public and private financial sectors will promote the 
upscaling of adaptation interventions across the country’s entire build ing sector. Further 
benefits are expected across the Caribbean, with Antigua and Barbuda serving as an example of climate -adaptive building practices for small island developing States.  
18. This project will ensure  the evidence and information needed to attrac t replenishments 
from local and international sources as well as the mainstreaming of adaptation into the private 
banks.  In particular, the funding proposal  will contribute to strengthening the Sustainable 
Island Resource Framework  (SIRF ) fund capacity for financing adaptation projects.


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add. 05 
Page 114 
 
 
19. Climate -proofing of buildings in Antigua and Barbuda is currently financed by two 
streams, namely via the SIRF f und for small enterprises that do not always qualify for access to 
funds from the mainstream b anking sector , and via private banks for medium and large 
enterprises. Under the SIRF f und’s climate change window, there is currently a Revolving Fund 
Programme for Adaptation , which focuses on providing microfinancing for the incremental cost 
of implemen ting adaptation measures for  small buildings (i.e. vulnerable households, clinics, 
schools, etc.). In its current form, this climate change window is optimiz ed for small 
loans/grants to vulnerable households, with individual applications capped at 5  per ce nt of the 
total funds available at a given time under this window . However, the anticipated adaptation 
needs exceed the available funds , particularly for medium and large enterprises . The loans are 
to be used for the incremental cost of the climate interventions only and cannot be used for 
normal construction cost. It is designed in a way not to compete with the local private financial 
sector.  
20. The paradigm shift potential of the project will be the evidence- based analysis of the 
financial and other barriers  in order to allow the government , along with the banking and 
insurance sectors, including the SIRF fund , to collaborate to reduce the incremental cost of 
meeting the standards of the code.  
21. This proposal contributes  to increase the country’s preparedness t o climate change risks 
through  implementation  of higher standards of building and infrastructure resiliency , 
strengthening financial institutions for financing adaptation needs and reducing adaptation 
costs. These activities are considered by the i ndependent TAP as  activities contributing to  a 
paradigm shift  process . 
1.3 Sustainable development potential         Scale:  High  
22. The funding proposal is dedicated to the sustainable development process of Antigua 
and Barbuda through increasing the resilience of the building sector and infrastructure to 
climate change extremes. The s election of buildings for increasing resilience was based on the 
level of vulnerability of the population and public services.  The proposal  also contributes to 
increasing energy eff iciency in the building sector and share of renewable energy in energy 
consumption.  
23. Measures planned in the proposal increase the safety of the most vulnerable population s 
(children, women, the disable d) to high category hurricanes ; improve  the resilience of the 
public and pr ivate sector s; and reduce economic lo sses.  
24. The funding proposal will contribute to the following Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDG s): 
(a) SDG 11: Sustainable cities and communities; mak e cities and human settlements 
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. Ensure access for all to adequate, safe and 
affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums . By 2030, significantly reduce 
the number of deaths and the number of people affe cted and substantially decrease the 
direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including water -related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in 
vulnerable situations . By 2020, substantially inc rease the number of cities and human 
settlements adopting and implementing integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, 
resource efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to climate change, resilience to disasters, 
and develop and implement, in line with t he Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction 2015 -2030, holistic disaster risk management at all levels ; 
(b) SDG 13 : Climate action ; take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.  
Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate -related hazards and natural 
disasters in all countries.  Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add. 05 
Page 115 
 
 
change -related planning and management in least developed countries and small island 
developing States, including focu sing on women, youth and loc al and marginalized 
communities;  
(c) SDG 3 : Good health and well -being; ensure healthy lives  and promote well -being for all 
at all ages . Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing  countries, 
for early warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks ; 
and 
(d) SDG 9 :Industry, innovation and infrastructure;  build resilient infrastructure , promote 
inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation . Facilitate sustainable 
and resilient infrastructure development in developing countries through enhanced 
financial, technological and technical support to African countries, least developed 
countries, landlocked developing countries and small island develo ping States . 
25. Potential of the funding proposal to contribute to  sustainable development is high.  
1.4 Needs of the recipient           Scale:  High  
26. The p opulation of Antigua and Barbuda is 102,000 (2017) . The country’s economy 
heavily depends on natural resources, low -lying coastal zones and favourable climatic 
conditions to support the tourism sector , which contribut es 80 per  cent to the country’s gross 
domestic product . Seventy per cent of the population dire ctly or indirectly are employed in the 
tourism sector , which generates 85 per  cent of foreign exchange earning s.  
27. The c limate change -related needs of Antigua and Barbuda are  well formulated in the 
country’s  NDC. The conditional adaptation target  of the NDC relevant to the proposed project  
states  that “by 2030, all buildings are improved and prepared for extreme climate events 
including drought, flooding and hurricanes ”. Unconditional targets that the country has 
committed to include  enhancing the enabling legal, policy and institutional environment for a 
low carbon development pathway, as well as updating the b uilding code to address the 
projected  impacts of climate change. This funding proposal also contributes to mitigation 
target s aiming to  “by 2030, achieve an energy matrix with 50 MW of electr icity from renewable 
sources both on and off -grid in the public and private sectors” . 
28. The NDC state s that, in addition to policies and sustainable action plans, national efforts 
will be made to establish a sustainable financial environment through the SIRF  fund established 
under national environmental law. The e xecuting entity (EE) of the fund is the Department of 
Environment, which is the direct access entity submitting this funding proposal.  
29. According to the NDC (submitted in 2015) , for implementation of adaptation targets  the 
country needs US D 20 million and for mitigation targets and USD 220 million annually.  
30. Incorporating  standards for C ategory 4 and 5  hurricanes  into new buildings is easier  
and cheaper  than for existing structures. U pgrading of existing buildings to resist Category 4 
and 5 hurricanes is estimated to cost over US D 6.4 billion3 while  the economy  (GDP)  of Antigua 
and Barbuda is US D 1.6 billion4. It w ill take time to  transition the building sector alone to adjust 
for climate change impacts and  to generate the funds needed. In addition, this adaptation cost 
could  not be fully covered through domestic sources of financing – including both private and 
public sector finance. The funding proposal  states that although Antigua and Barbuda is 
considered a middle -income  country on a per  capita basis, its size and small population mean 
that it lacks the scale required to invest adequately in adaptation. The country also has a high 
 
3 This figure is derived from  initial costings on resilience expenditure from applications to the SIRF Fund.  
4 World Bank Data. 2018. Antigua and Barbuda. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/country/antigua -and-
barbuda .


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add. 05 
Page 116 
 
 
public debt burden that, in 201 8, reached approximately USD 1.4 billion , which is more than  88 
per cent  of the country’s gross domestic product . 
31. Figures provided in th e funding proposal demonstrate increasing intensity trends  of 
hurricane s. The frequency and intensity of these storms is strongly correlated to: ( i) high sea 
surface temperature in the major development region; ( ii) decreasing vertical wind shear in the 
mid -troposphere during depression development; and ( iii) changes in the La Niña phase of the 
El Niño Southern Oscillation. In the lead up to Hurrican e Irma in 2017, the sea surface 
temperature anomaly from baseline climatic conditions was shown to be in the order of 1  °C in 
the region to the south -east of Antigua and Barbuda.   
32. The c ountry’s vulnerability to such extremes  is further exacerbated by limit ed capacity 
within ABMS for early warning and preparatory action in response to an extreme climate event.  
33. The proposed project seek s to move the building codes from a standard to a legal 
requirement that  allows the Government  of Antigua and Barbuda  to incl ude clear financial 
incentives to reduce the barriers hindering full implementation of the code.  
34. The long -term sustainability and upscaling potential of climate change adaptation 
interventions are constrained by limited technical capacity within NODS, DCA and PWD for 
long -term monitoring, maintenance and planning for adaptation measures in the building 
sector. These capacity limitations extend to the local workforce , which  is ultimately responsible 
for the installation and maintenance of equipment . Long-term maintenance of destroyed  
infrastructure and fast rehabilitation after hurricanes , including the temporary removal of solar 
panels , requires adequate lead time on early warnings , which  is one of the barriers considered 
in the funding proposal . Currently  there is  limited technical capacity in the ABMS and NODS to 
adequately disseminate early warnings to support early action, particularly with regard to 
preparing shelters and securing renewable energy equipment ahead of a storm.  
35. The current capitalization of the SIRF f und accounts for US D 8 million within the next 2 
years, resulting in a financial gap of US D 5 million/year  to bring existing buildings up to 
standard for the Category 4–5 hurr icane  building code. This financial gap will be addressed by 
using lessons learned from the proposed project to reduce the cost of adaptation.  
36. Antigua and Barbuda’s Medium -Term Development Strategy (MTDS) outlines the 
strategies and actions to be undertaken from 2016 –2020 to meet the national goal of becoming 
a developed country in 15 –20 years .5 Within the MTDS, seven f lagship priorities are 
emphasi zed, with two of these directly relating to improved buildings and infrastructure. The 
technical and institutional capacity of the local workforce, as well as private sector consumers 
and producers6 will be built through developing and delivering training programmes under 
output 2 of the project. Activities planned for this output  will focus on the application of the 
updated building code as well as on effective techniques for implementing, monitoring and 
maintaining climate change adaptation measures on infrastructure .7 This output aligns closely 
with one of the p riority direction s of the MTDS, which focuses on , inter  alia, the renewal and 
maintenance of critical infrastructure.  
37. The i ndepe ndent TAP considers that the country’s need to upgrade  the building code 
against the high intensity hurricanes , to implement this upgraded code and ensure long -term 
sustainability of the system operation is high.   
1.5 Country ownership           Scale:  High  
 
5 Medium -Term Development Strategy 2016 to 2020. 2015. Government of Antigua and Barbuda.  
6 Private sector consumers include business owners and homeowners, while private sector consumers refer to 
architects, engineers and private contractors. 
7 Such measures include climate -resilient water harvesting and decentrali zed renewable energy .


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add. 05 
Page 117 
 
 
38. The funding proposal is included in the GCF country programme.  
39. The project applicant  and AE is the Department of Environment  (DoE)  of Antigua and 
Barbuda . The DoE  is also  an AE to the Global Environmental Facility.  
40. The EE of the project is the Ministry of Finance  (MoF)  of Antigua and Barbuda. As the EE , 
MoF will  provide oversight and manage entities in the respective government bodies (e.g. 
Ministry of Works , Ministry of Health, Wellness and t he Environment , NODS and ABMS) that 
will be involved in the implementation of the funding proposal and will be responsible for long -
term sustainable maintenance of infrustructure  after the project exit. The MoF will be 
accountable to the AE for project implementation. All operating policies and procedures will 
follow the DoE policies and procedures.  
41. The DoE is executing agency of the SIRF  fund and is involved in coordination of  the 
implementation process of climate change -related activities. The SIRF fund was established in 
2015 as part of the Environmental Planning and Management Act under the country’s Financial 
Administration Act (2006). The fund serves several purposes, including: ( i) streamlining finance  
by reducing du plication across agencies and consolidating their efforts; ( ii) providing a 
consistent source of financing for planning and contingency efforts to reduce vulnerability; ( iii) 
building resilience , particularly within the energy and water sectors; ( iv) achieving long -term 
financial stability as a strategy for reducing the country’s high debt burden; ( v) leveraging and 
supporting non -profit organi zations by providing co -financing for project development and 
implementation; and ( vi) providing support f or vulnerable groups such as farmers, fishers and 
building owners through increased access to finance and insurance products.  The m ain sources 
of capitalization of the fund are international financial institutions, national funding sources 
(fees for touris t visits to protected areas and ecotourism; water levies to pay for protected 
areas, watershed and waterways; and carbon tax to pay for adaptation with focus on droughts, 
hurricane impacts and adaptation insurance) ; and private finance . Component 2 , 
“mains tream ing c limate change adaptation into the building sector and relevant financial 
mechanisms” , significantly contribute s to strengthening the fund’s capacity in evidence -based 
decision -making  and establishment of eligibility criteria for adaptation projects.  
42. The Government of Antigua and Barbuda is currently implementing a project titled 
“Building Climate Resilience through I nnovative Financing Mechanisms for C limate Change 
Adaptation ”, funded by a grant of US D 5 million from the Special Climate Change Fund and with 
co-financing from the Go vernment  of Antigua and Barbuda . Among its four primary focus areas 
are: (i) developing innovative financing mechanisms to fund adaptation interventions through 
the SIRF f und, including for the building sector; and ( ii) strengthening national policies and 
plans to promote adaptation to climate change through , inter alia,  updating the national 
building code. The proposed GCF project will complement the Special Climate Change Fund  
project as well as set the stage for scaling up the project for the private sector . GCF resources 
from this project will not be used to capitali ze this fund, fill funding gaps or retroactively finance 
activities already under development or to implement o ther programmes/initiatives.  
43. The proposed project is strongly aligned with Antigua and Barbuda’s national priorities 
such as:  the n ationally determined contribution , which defines the country’s commitments to 
addressing climate change threats through reducing greenhouse gas  emissions ( article 2) and 
increasing the adaptive capacity of the population of Antigua and Barbuda ( article 4);  Antigua 
and Barbuda’s Readiness Proposal  which  contributes to the climate change adaptation 
objectives outlined in the Paris agreement ; and Antigua and Barbuda’s MTDS . 
44. Considering the needs of the recipient country and level of coordination of ongoing 
activities through different projects at the nationa l level,  the country ownership is high.  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                  Scale:  High


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B.26/ 02/Add. 05 
Page 118 
 
 
45. The proposed project is requesting US D 32.7 million in grant finance from GCF to 
enhance the climate resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector to extreme climate 
events. Th e GCF investment will be supported by the Government of Antigua and Barbuda, 
which has committed approximately US D 13 million in co -financing. GCF financing will be used 
to overcome the barriers to increasing the re silience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector to 
climate change threats. Grants from GCF will only be used to address the additional impacts of 
climate change, with government co -finance being used to cover all baseline costs – including 
business as usual repairs/maintenance that are necessary for  buildings to ensure sustainability 
of climate -proofing interventions.  
46. As a result  of this project implementation , public and private sector stakeholders will be 
trained in climate -resilient adaptation solutions for the building sector, incorporating a 
training -of-trainers approach to ensure that institutional knowledge of these solutions is 
maintained regardless of staff turnover. Technical staff from DCA (e.g. building inspectors) and 
Ministry of Works  (e.g. building maintenance teams) as well as the local workforce will be 
trained on how to effectively implement, operate, maintain and monitor climate- adaptive 
measu res installed in buildings in line with the requirements of the updated national b uilding 
code.  Consumers and producers within the private sector will also be targeted to receive 
training on the application of th e code . 
47. The u pgraded building code  requires an increase of more  than 50  per cent  in the costs of 
implementation  between Category 3 and Category 5 code s, which limit s the ability of most 
citizens as well as the Government  of Antigua and Barbuda  to meet the standards . Therefore, 
involvement of the private sector in different financial schemes is important for the 
efficiency/effectiveness of this project and its future sustainability.  
48. All operations, maintenance and i nsurance activities required under the project will be 
financed by the Government of Antigua and Barbuda  within and beyond the project 
implementation .  
49. GCF project resources will be mainly used to support the Government  of Antigua and 
Barbuda ’s efforts to catalyse the creation of additional evidence -based information on climate 
change and financial schemes to promote investment in climate -adaptive measures in Antigua 
and Barbuda ( activity 2.2).  
50. The i ncreas ed resilience of 54 public buildings planned within this funding proposal and 
the adaptation of some  community buildings as shelters will allow the Government to provide 
critical services while the resilience of other buildings in the country can be enhanced over a 
longer period of time. 
51. It is the opinion of the i ndependent TAP that the efficiency and effectiveness of the 
results should be high.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
52. The independent TAP recomends this funding proposal for approval by the  GCF Board.


---
*Page 119*
---

G
CF/B.2 6/02/Add.05 
Page 119 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical  
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP 133) 
Proposal name:  Resilience to hurricanes in the building sector in Antigua and 
Barbuda 
Accredited entity:  Department of Environment, Antigua and Barbuda  
Country/(ies):  Antigua and Barbuda  
Project/programme size: Small  
Impact potential  
The iTAP’s assessment  for this investment criterion is duly noted.  
Paradigm shift potential  
The iTAP’s assessment for this investment criterion is duly noted.  
Sustainable development potential  
The iTAP’s assessment for this investment criterion is duly noted.  
Needs of the recipient  
The iTAP’s assessment for this investment criterion is duly noted.  
Country ownership  
The iTAP’s assessment for this investment criterion is duly noted.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
The iTAP’s assessment for this investment criterion is duly noted.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
The DOE ATG greatly appreciates the assessment made by the iTAP for this project.


---
*Page 120*
---

1 GOV
ERNMENT OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT  
GEN
DER ASSESSMENT AND GENDER AND SOCIAL 
INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  
DOE CLIMATE CHANGE PROGRAMME 
RES
ILIENCE TO HURRICANES IN THE BUILDING SECTOR IN ANTIGUA AND 
BARBUDA  
The Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Department of Environment, Ministry of Health, 
Wellness and the Environment  
Marc
h 20th, 2020  
Prep
ared for the Green Climate Fund  
Depart
ment of Environment 
PO Box W693, #1 Victoria Park Botanic Gardens, Factory Rd, St. John’s Antigua  
+1 268 462- 4625  |  antiguaenvironmentdivision@gmail.com
www.environmentdivision.info  
Gender documentation  for FP133


---
*Page 121*
---

 2 Table of Contents  
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  ............................................................................................................................ 4 
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ...................................................................................................................... 5 
2. INTRODUCTION  .................................................................................................................................. 6 
2.1. Country backg round and problem setting  ............................................................................... 6 
2.2.6.  Increased intensity of hurricanes  ......................................................................................... 7 
3. Baseline Gender Situation for Antigua and Barbuda  ...................................................................... 10 
4. Comparative Summary of Key Gender Equality Indicators  ............................................................ 12 
5. Project Background  ........................................................................................................................... 13 
5.4. Maps of Priority Critical Public Service and Community Buildings to Receive Climate -
Proofing Interventions  .......................................................................................................................... 16 
5.4.1.  Antigua  ................................................................................................................................. 16 
5.4.2.  Barbuda Island  ..................................................................................................................... 20 
6. GENDER RELATED POLICY AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK  ............................................................. 21 
7. APPROACH AND METHDOLOGY  .................................................................................................... 25 
7.2. Desktop Research  ..................................................................................................................... 25 
7.3. Consultations with Stakeholders and I nformal Interviews  .................................................. 26 
7.4 Gender and the Department of Environment Gender Policy  ................................................ 27 
7.4.5 Disclosure and Public Consultation  ................................................................................... 28 
7.4.6 Gender Diligence .................................................................................................................. 29 
8. GENDER ISSUES RELEVANT TO THE PROPOSED PROJECT  ....................................................... 30 
9. GENDER ACTION P LAN  .................................................................................................................... 42 
10. BIBLIOGRAPHY  ........................................................................................................................... 47 
10.1. GOVERNMENT REPORTS  ........................................................................................................ 47 
10.2. REGIONAL/INTERNATIONAL REPORTS  ................................................................................ 47 
10.3. INTERVIEWS AND CONSULTATIONS  ..................................................................................... 48 
 
Table 1: Damages and losses caused by hurricane irma and maria as well as the recovery needs of the 
country  ........................................................................................................................................................... 9 
Table 2: KEY GENDER EQUALITY INDICATORS FOR ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA (SOURCE: ADAPTED  FROM RAWWIDA BAKSH AND ASSOCIATES, 2014. COUNTRY GENDER 
ASSESSMENT (CGA) ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA REPORT)  ............................................................. 12
 
Table 3: CATEGORY AND GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF CRITICAL FACILITIES  ................. 14 
Table 4: Laws and policies of the government of antigua and barbuda  ....................................................... 21 
Table 5: Gender analysis for project preparation stage (Source: Green Climate Fund Gender 
Analysis/Assessment and Gender and Social Inclusion Ac tion Plan Templates. ) ..................................... 31 
Table 6: GENDER ACTION AND SOCIAL INCLUSION PLAN ............................................................ 44


---
*Page 122*
---

 3  
Figures 1: Vertical wind shear (VWS) and sea surface temperature (SST) domains used for the analysis of 
major development regions (M DRs) for hurricanes that affect Antigua and Barbuda. Lines show the 
historical trajectories of hurricanes.  ............................................................................................................... 8 
Figures 2: EMPLOYMENT BY INDUSTRY AND SEX ........................................................................... 11 
Figures 3: EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES TO BENEFIT FROM GCF BUILD ........................................ 16 
Figures 4: LAW ENFORCEMENT AND CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES TO BENE FIT FROM GCF 
BUILD  ......................................................................................................................................................... 17 
Figures 5: healthcare facilities (northern part of the island) to benefit from gcf build  ................................ 17 
Figures 6: healthcare facilities (southern part of the island) to benefit from gcf build  ................................ 18 
Figures 7: fire stations to benefit from gcf build  ......................................................................................... 18 
Figures 8: GOVERNMENT MINISTRIES AND OTHER PRIORITY GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS IN 
ST JOHN  ..................................................................................................................................................... 19 
Figures 9: GOVERNMENT MINISTRIES AND OTHER PRIORITY BUILDINGS (PART 2)  ............... 19 
Figures 10: BENEFICIARY FACILITIES IN BARBUDA ........................................................................ 20 
Figures 11: METHODOLOGY FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GENDER ASSESSMENT AND 
GENDER ACTION PLAN .......................................................................................................................... 25 
Figures 12: CONSULTATIONS WITH TECHNICAL TEAMS INCLUDING WOMEN  ........................ 28 
Figures 13: METHODOLOGY FOR CONDUCTING A GENDER IMPACT ASSESSMENT (SOURCE: EUROPEAN INSTITUTE FOR GENDER EQUALITY)  .......................................................................... 29
 
Figures 14: SUMMARY OF DOE COMPLIMENTARY CLIMATE CHANGE PROGRAMME  ............ 30


---
*Page 123*
---

 4 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
 
AF   Adaptation Fund  
AF (2)  “An Integrated approach to physical adaptation and community 
resilience in Antigua and Barbuda’s northwest McKinnon’s watershed”  
APUA    Antigua Public Utilities Authority  
CSEC    The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate Examinati on 
DCA    Development Control Authority  
DMU    Data Management Unit at the Department of Environment  
ESIA    Environmental Social Impact Assessment  
ESMP    Environmental Social Management Plan  
GAP   Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan  
GCF    Green Climate F und  
GCF BUILD  “Resilience to Hurricanes, Floods and Droughts in the Building Sector in 
Antigua and Barbuda”  
GISS  Grid -Interactive Solar Systems for Schools and Clinics  
IRENA ADFD  Transformation of the Water and Government Sectors using Renewable 
Energy  
MET  OFFICE   Meteorological Department  
MOF    Ministry of Finance, Corporate Governance and Public Private  
   Partnerships  
MOW    Ministry of Public Works  
NODS    National Office of Disaster Services  
RE   Renewable Energy  
SCCF  “Building climate -resilience throug h innovative financing mechanisms 
for Ecosystem -based Adaptation”  
SEF Sustainable Energy Facility  
SIRF Fund   Sustainable Island Resource Framework Fund  
SPPARE  Sustainable Pathways Protected Areas and Renewable Energy UNEP 
project


---
*Page 124*
---

 5 1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
1.1. In recent years, the Government of Antigua and Barbuda (GoAB) has sought to reduce the 
vulnerability of its public infrastructure, particularly critical buildings to natural hazard 
events with a shift from emergency response and recovery to risk reduction and mitigation; 
this is deemed far less costly than disaster r elief and response.  This follows the 2017 
hurricane season which cost the GoAB  over USD 200 million in  loss and damages . Climate 
predictions indicate that such storms will become more frequent as well as the twin -island 
state will experience prolonged dro ught conditions, temperature and sea level rise.  
 
1.2. As an A ccredited Direct Access Entity to the Green Climate Fund (GCF), the Department of 
Environment (DOE) is seeking grant financing to implement climate change adaptation 
within critical public buildings and community buildings   to allow for resilience to hurricanes, 
droughts and flooding ; to increase  the technical capacity of the  public and private sector in 
order to sustain the interventions as well as improve accessibility , and visibility and response 
of community members and the private sector to warnings of threats of disaster . Within the 
context of the DOE project portfolio, this project is expected to benefit a significant portion of 
the population, particularly low inc ome to impoverished families who rely on public services 
as well as rural communities , particularly after an extreme weather event.  
 
1.3. The ESIA and ESMP conducted under this project assesse d environmental and general social 
impacts for this project while mit igating against risks. This Gender Assessment and Action 
Plan seek to assess the perceived or real differential vulnerability of men and women that are 
expected to be further exacerbated by the impacts of climate change.   This study also seeks 
to identify  the gender related risks that can impact on the project and make recommendations 
to mitigate the same.     
 
1.4.  In general, there are no known institutional and legal bias against men or women in Antigua 
and Barbuda. Even though this is the case and due to the lack of gender disaggregated data , 
however , many of the internationally known biases against women are many times included 
in project design.  In the case of this project which specifically address infrastructure, the assessment has identified the following:  
 
• Courses in construction were made available a few years ago to women.  The first 
graduates are expect ed over the next few years; the project will establish an 
apprentice program me for these women newly coming into the field . 
• Training in construction is predominantly delivered to men.  The project notes the 
difference in learning between men and women and girls and boys and seeks to 
provide gender sensitive training . 
• Most of government building s do not have access for persons with special needs . 
While the project acknowledges this the budget is not adequate to make significant 
changes.   
• The project ben efits men and women equally , however , it mostly benefits persons 
who are very low income more so than on the basis of gender .


---
*Page 125*
---

 6 2. INTRODUCTION  
2.1. Country background and problem setting  
2.2.1.  Antigua and Barbuda forms part of the Leeward Islands in the Caribbean located 
between the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean. The country gained independence 
from British rule in 1981 and now forms part of the British Commonwealth of Nations1. 
The total population is ~93,500, the majority of which reside on Antig ua. The capital 
city of St John’s in Antigua is home to 22,000 people alone, while only 1,600 permanent 
residents live on Barbuda2. More than 60% of the entire population of the country lives 
within the coastal zone3. 
 
2.2.2.  The country has a tropical marine climate with average daily temperatures between 
24°C and 29°C, and an average annual rainfall of 600 –1,250 mm4. As little as 20% of this 
rainfall occurs during the dry season between January and April, with almost 50% of the 
annual rainfall occurring during s torms in the hurricane season between August and 
February. Relative to other islands in the region, Antigua and Barbuda has a greater level of humidity and heavier dew deposits during the night that contribute to water 
supplies in the drier regions
5. Howev er, the low annual rainfall and high seasonal 
variability in precipitation has resulted in Antigua and Barbuda becoming a water -scarce country.  
 
2.2.3.  Tourism is the most prominent economic activity in the country and is responsible for: i) 
80% of the GDP; ii)  85% of all foreign exchange; and iii)  employment for 70% of the 
population.
6 The tourism industry draws almost one  million visitors each year for the 
country7;8. Other prominent economic sectors are agriculture and industry, which 
contributed 2% and 18% res pectively to the national GDP in 20169. Each of these sectors 
are extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and after a hurricane most 
persons lose their jobs.  The majority of persons working in this sector are women.  
 2.2.4.  SIDS are generally not major contributors to climate change through greenhouse gas 
emissions, but because of their geographic positioning they are amongst the countries 
least able to adapt – and most vulnerable – to climate change impacts, particularly fro m 
 
1 Nationally Determined Contribution  (NDC). 2015. Government of Antigua and Barbuda.  
2 Based on 2011 Census Data.  
3 United Nations Statistics Division. 2017. UN Data: Antigua and Barbuda. Available at: 
http://data.un.org/CountryProfile.aspx?crName=antigua%20and%20barbuda  [accessed 13. 03.2017].  
4 Earth Institute: Columbia University. 30 July 2014. Climate change and eastern Caribbean rainfall. Available at:   
http://climatesoci ety.ei.columbia.edu/2014/07/30/climate -change -and- eastern -caribbean- rainfall   [accessed 13.03.2017].  
5 Ellison AM & Farnsworth EJ. 1996. Anthropogenic disturbance of Caribbean mangrove ecosystems: past impacts, present 
trends, and future predictions.  Biotr opica  549– 565.  
6 The Daily Observer. 7 January 2015. “No end in sight for A&B’s water crisis”. Available at: www.antiguaobserver.com/no -
end- in-sight -to-abs-water -crisis/  [accessed 13.03.2017].  
7 I.e. to both islands.  
8 The Daily Observer. 17 April 2016. “Antigua has the highest mont hly water deficit in OECS”. Available at: 
http://antiguaobserver.com/antigua -has-highest -monthly -water -deficit -in-oecs/  [accessed 13.03.2017].  
9 Global Finance. 1 3 March 2017. “Antigua and Barbuda GDP and Economic Data”. Available at: 
https://www.gfmag.com/global -data/country -data/antigua -and- barbuda -gdp- country -report  [accessed 13.03.2017].


---
*Page 126*
---

 7 rising sea levels10;11. The population of Antigua and Barbuda is becoming increasingly 
vulnerable to extreme climate events, including tropical storms, hurricanes, extended 
dry periods, floods and rising air temperatures. Climate change is increasing the 
intensity of these events and subsequently the intensity of impacts experienced across 
the country12.  
2.2.5.  As a result of observed and predicted trends of climate change and associated variability, Antigua and Barbuda is expected to experience inter  alia rising sea levels, 
increased intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes, more frequent and intense droughts and floods, rising air temperatures, and a  decrease in annual rainfall
13. These 
climate change effects are outlined below, with more detail to be provided in the 
Funding Proposal and Feasibility Study . 
 
2.2.6.  Increased intensity of hurricanes  
2.2.6.1.  Hurricanes and tropical storms are the main climatic hazards affecting Antigua and 
Barbuda. Since 1995, the country has experienced 15 hurricanes and 14 tropical storms. 
Most  of these storms range from Category 1 to 3 in magnitude with the notable 
exceptions of Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017, which are the only Category 5 
hurricanes that have affected country in recorded history.14 The frequency and intensity 
of these storms is strongly correlated to: i) high sea surface temperature (SST) in the 
major development region (MDR); ii) decreasing vertical wind shear (VWS) in the mid -
troposphere during depression development; and iii) changes in the La Niña phase of the El Ni ño Southern Oscillation (ENSO).  
 
2.2.6.2.  Climate change projections under both the RCP4.5 and 8.5 scenarios
15 indicate that, 
although the total number of storms is not expected to change significantly, there will be an increase in the frequency of high -intensity st orms (Category 4 and 5 hurricanes) 
experienced by Antigua and Barbuda. Furthermore, a 20% slow -down in storm 
translation speed over land for Atlantic storms has been observed. These speeds are likely to continue decreasing under future conditions of climat e change, resulting in 
heavier rainfall events and increased flood risk.  
 
10 Caribbean Climate Change Project. 2011. Global climate change overview. Caribbean Youth Environment 
Network (CYEN). Available at: http://www .cyen.org/climatechange/documents/cc_and_the_caribbean.html  [accessed 
13.03.2017].  
11 The reasons for this vulnerability include inter alia : i) limited natural resources that are often already under stress from 
unsustainable human activities; ii) large concentrations of people in the coastal zone; iii) recurrent extreme weather events 
such as flooding, hurricanes and storm surges; and iv) dependence on limited freshwater resources that are often sensitive 
to sea -level changes. In addition, adaptation to climate change is difficult in SIDS because of: i)  limited land surface area 
leaving little room for movement in the face of sea -level rise; ii)  inadequate infrastructure –  across most sectors –  that is 
vulnerable to climate change; and iii)  isolation from  major markets which limits trade and thus revenue generation, limiting 
the availability of public resources to support climate change adaptation.  
12 In addition to increasing hurricane intensity, seismic activity across both islands is increasing, with ~7, 000 tremors 
recorded annually. Data on these figures will be provided by the National Office of Disaster Services (NODS) at a later stage.  
13 James 2001 Antigua and Barbuda Country Paper.  
14 Details on the return periods of hurricanes and tropical storms within a range of 15 to 105 nautical miles are presented in S ection 2 of 
Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
15 These representative concentration pathways (RCPs) are based on the main forcing agents of climate change, including GHG emis sions, 
GHG concentrations and land -use change. RCP4.5 represents the likely best -case scenario with a peak radiative forcing of 4. 5 W/m2 (~650 
ppm CO2 eq) at stabilization after 2100. RCP8.5 represents a very high GHG emission scenario with a peak radiative forcing of  8.5 W/m2 
(~1,370 ppm CO2 eq) and no expected stabilization in emissions. RCP8.5 indicates a business as usual scenari o where the rate of GHG 
emissions continues to increase with no mitigation measures.


---
*Page 127*
---

 8 FIGURES 1: VERTICAL WIND SHEAR (VWS)  AND SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE (SST)  
DOMAINS USED FOR THE ANALYSIS OF MAJOR DEVELOPMENT REGIONS (MDR S) FOR 
HURRICANES THAT AFFECT ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA . LINES SHOW THE HISTORICAL 
TRAJECTORIES OF HURRICANES . 
 
 
2.2.6.3.  Given that Category 4 and 5 hurricanes are expected to occur more frequently under 
future climate conditions, the combined impacts of intense rainfall and strong winds wil l 
become increasingly severe in the absence of urgent adaptation interventions. This will have severe impacts on the lives and livelihoods of local communities as well as the 
economy as a whole
16. Following a Category 5 hurricane, power and water supply can be 
disrupted for up to 24 months, while damage to communication and transport 
infrastructure disrupts associated services for up to 6 months. Furthermore, rough seas 
and inflated insurance premiums after a storm disrupts the import of vital food , medical 
and building supplies for several weeks after an extreme climate event. The ability of the 
country to respond to such events is constrained by the vulnerability of critical public 
services, including healthcare, police, fire and rescue services a s well as government 
coordination and response agencies. Disruption to these services caused by damages to 
critical infrastructure reduces the efficiency and effectiveness of emergency response 
and delays recovery.  
 
2.2.6.4.  The impact of such events on the economy  is severe. For example, Hurricanes Luis and 
Marylin (1995) resulted in a ~30% decline in the country’s GDP, while Hurricanes Irma 
and Maria (2017) resulted in US$136 million in damages and US$19 million in economic 
 
16 A detailed cost -benefit analysis is presented in Annex 3 and summarised in Section D.6 of the Funding Proposal. This analysis describes 
what the projected costs of extre me climate events will be in Antigua and Barbuda with and without project interventions under baseline 
and projected climate change scenarios.


---
*Page 128*
---

 9 losses across major sectors in the count ry17. To fully recover from the damages and 
economic losses caused by the 2017 hurricanes, an estimated US$222 million in support 
was required, including US$5 million for environmental recovery and US$11.5 million 
for disaster risk management. Table 1  below  provides a sector -specific breakdown of 
these damages and losses as well as the estimated recovery needs .  
 
 
TABLE 1: DAMAGES AND LOSSES CAUSED BY HURRICANE IRMA AND MARIA AS WELL AS THE 
RECOVERY NEEDS OF THE COUNTRY  
Sector  Damage  
(million US$)  Losses  
(million US$)  Total  
 (million US$)  Recovery needs  
(million US$)  
Infrastructure  20.5  0.61  21 38.3  
Social  54.2  2.7 57 93.3  
Production  59.5  8.7 68.2  70.3  
Governance  0.87  0.75  1.5 2.2 
Culture  1.15  0.76  1.9 1.4 
Total  136  18.9  155 222 
 
2.2.6.5.  Antigua and Barbuda has building codes for C ategory 3 hurricanes.  The country  
experienced  one Cat 5 in 2017.   The greatest impacts , however , are:  
• Destruction to buildings i.e. homes, business, churches, clinics and schools;  
• Persons losing their homes and businesses are still having to make payments to the 
banks and creditors even though they cannot;  
• Over 50% of persons do not have health insurance;  
• Over 60% of children attend government schools;  
• Where funds are available, materials have to be imported to island.  Homeowners 
may have to wait for months to get the materials they need;  
• Risks to homeowners’ security when the e lectricity grid is down . Disruptions to the 
electricity grid can last for  months.  H urricane Irma , a Category 5  storm , the 
electricity in Barbuda was disrupted  for over 9 months.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
17 Government of Antigua and Barbuda. Antigua and Barbuda Recovery Needs Assessment. Available at: 
https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/Antigua%20and%20Barbuda%20executive%20summary_print_text%282%29.pdf


---
*Page 129*
---

 10 3. Baseline Gender Situation 
for Antigua and Barbuda  
 
3.1. In general , gender  plays an important role in 
determining the adaptive capacities of 
individuals to climate change.   Different hazards , 
however , affect men and women differently. 
Gender considerations can take on board the specific individual impacts based on hazard s, the 
ability of the individual to withstand and recover 
from hazard s and time taken to do so compared 
to others, and the policy and other interventions that can be undertaken by the s tate in general 
and specifically by projects to build resilience and reduce lo ng term vulnerability.   
 
3.2. Gender policy development and 
implementation in Antigua and Barbuda is led by 
the Directorate of Gender Affairs  in the Ministry 
of Social Transformation, Human Resource 
Development, Youth and Gender Affairs. The 
Department of the Environment’s (DOE) gender 
approach is focused specifically on issues related 
to the impact of climate change and environmental policy on gender and the specific policy 
and project design that can be used to respond to these gender differences.  This appro ach is 
believed to improve project quality, reduce risk and increase changes of support from the most beneficiaries.   
 
3.3. The proposed GCF Build  project is designed to increase the adaptability of mainly poorer 
men and women and their families to have contin ued access to free government services.  
These services include health, education, security and key social services to groups of persons 
with very limited ability to adapt.  The project seeks to achieve this via building resilience in 
the infrastructure su ch as clinics, schools, police and other buildings that provide the space 
to deliver these services.  The project will seek to focus mainly on the impact of hurricane s on 
building infrastructure that facilitate the deliver y of these services to me n, women  and their 
families .   
 
3.4. To achieve this goal, the gender analysis seeks to understand the situation of women, men, 
boys and girls from communities in Antigua and Barbu da 
 Case Study:  Post-hurricane delivery of 
“dignity kits” to women and girls of 
childbearing age  
 After  Hurricane Irma struck Antigua & 
Barbuda in Septem ber 2017, the population of 
Barbuda was evacuated to Antigua and the Directorate of Gender Affairs and the UN distribu ted “dignity kits”, contain ing basic 
health and hygiene products such as soap, sanitary napkins and underwear – critical items for women and girls that can be easily overlooked in a disaster response. There were 650 pregnant women at the time of the hurric ane.


---
*Page 130*
---

 11 FIGURES 2: EMPLOYMENT  BY INDUSTRY  AND  SEX


---
*Page 131*
---

 12 4. Comparative Summary of Key Gender Equality Indicators  
 
TABLE 2: KEY  GENDER  EQUALITY  INDICATORS  FOR  ANTIGUA  AND  BARBUDA  (SOURCE:  ADAPTED  FROM  RAWWIDA  BAKSH  
AND  ASSOCIATES,  2014.  COUNTRY  GENDER  ASSESSMENT  (CGA)  ANTIGUA  AND  BARBUDA  REPORT)  Country  
Total pop.  
Population 0 -
14 years old  
Population 15 - 
24 years old  
Population  
64 years and  
over  
Life 
Expectancy  
at Birth 
 
%/Number of 
male or 
female-headed  
households  
Maternal  
Mortality  
Rate 
 
Infant Mortality 
Rate 
Labour Force 
Participation  
Unemployment 
Rate 
Enrolment  
in Primary 
Schools  
 
Enrolment  
in Secondary  
Schools  
Enrolment in 
Tertiary 
Education  
 
No. of males/ 
females in 
Parliament  
Gender -based 
Violence (GBV)  
Antigua 
& 
Barbuda  M-
40,007  
(48%)  
F-43,271  
(52%)  
T-83,278  
(100%)  
(GOAB  
Census,  
2011)  M-11,333  
(51%)  
F-10,979  
(49%)  
T-22,312 or  
24% of 
total 
pop. 
(CIA, 
2013)  M-7,465  
(49.5%)  
F-7,622  
(50.5%)  
T-15,087 or  
16.7% of 
total 
population 
(CIA, 
2013)  M-2,771  
(43%)  
F-3,659  
(57%)  
T-6,430 
or 
7.1% of total 
population 
(CIA, 
2013)  M-73.9 
years  
F-78.1 years  
T-75.9 
years  M-56.5%  
(2001)  
F-43.5% (2001)  
(GOAB  
Census, 2001)  0.81 
(CARICOM
, 2010)  10.9 
(Health Informati
on 
Division, 
Ministry 
of Health 
Antigua 
and 
Barbuda)  M-
18,602 
(47%)  
F-21,341 
(53%)  
T-
39,943 
(Kairi, 
CPA 
2005/20
06) T-12% 
(estimate) 
GOAB, 
2012 M-100%  
F-88.1%  
T-94.0%  
(GOAB, Ministry of  
Education, 2009 -2010)  M-78.9%  
F-82.1%  
T-80.5%  
(CEPAL, 2011)  M-
689 
(34.8
%) 
F-
1291 (65.2
%) 
T-
1980 
(100
%) 
(OEC
S, 
2010 -
2011)  H.O.R/ 
Lower 
House  
M-16 
(89.9%)  
F-2 
(11.1%)  
T-18 
(100%)  
 Senate/Up
per 
House  
M-10 
(58.8%)  
F-7 
(41.2%)  
T-17 
(100%) 
(IPU 
2014)  T-216 
victims 
(DOG
A, 
2011)


---
*Page 132*
---

 13 5. Project Background 
 
5.1. To increase the resilience of the population in Antigua and Barbuda to extreme climate events, 
the proposed project will implement climate -resilient technologies and interventions in public 
and community buildings  (hereafter referred to as ‘public buildings’) and will strengthen 
institutional, technical and financial capacity  within the GoAB to enable climate- resilient 
building development in the long term. These climate- proofing interventions will be 
implemented in buildings providing critical services – including disaster services, healthcare, 
fire services and police – as w ell as those buildings providing public and community goods – 
including inter  alia community centres and schools. A combination of international, regional 
and island -specific best practices will be used to climate -proof public buildings to ensure 
critical service delivery during and following an extreme climate event, ultimately improving 
disaster risk management under changing climatic conditions. This will be accomplished 
through inter  alia:  
 
(i) supporting the mainstreaming of adaptation for the building se ctor into relevant national 
policies and standards;  
 
(ii) building institutional and technical capacity to identify, implement, maintain and upscale climate -proofing interventions; and  
 
(iii) climate -proofing existing public buildings to ensure that critical services remain 
operational during an extreme climate event, with  reduced damages to buildings resulting 
in reduced maintenance costs in the long term.  
 The proposed project will increase the resilience of the building sector and strengthen disaster risk 
reduction  (DRR) methods to climate change impacts.  
 
5.2. This project also seeks to use some of its lessons learned to inform the enhancement of the 
Sustainable Island Resource Framework  (SIRF) Fund . The SIR F Fund is a financing mechanism 
established under the Environmental Protection and Management Act  (EPMA).
18  
 
5.3. The project defines a building as a “critical public service” if it me ets two (2) of the following 
criteria:  
a. The building provides essential services to the population of Antigua and Barbuda pre- and post - extreme climate event, including:  
o Protective  
o Emergency services  
o Medical services  
o Post -disaster assessment and response  
o Critical government office  
b. The location of the building maximizes the number of beneficiaries (e.g. in an urban 
or settlement area);  
c. The location of the building provides essential services to geographically or socially vulnerable populations
 
18 Environmental Protection and Management Act  (EPMA). No 11 of 2019. Government of Antigua and Barbuda.


---
*Page 133*
---

 14  
TABLE 3: CATEGORY  AND  GEOGRAPHIC  DISTRIBUTION  OF CRITICAL  FACILITIES  
TYPE OF BUILDINGS  DESCRIPTION  
Building provides 
essential services 
to the population  Impacts of 
hurricane, 
drought, 
flooding, heat, 
energy Location of the 
building prov ides 
essential services 
to geographically 
or socially 
vulnerable 
populations.  
All Saints Clinic    Medical  X X 
All Saints Fire 
Station  Security  X  
All Saint’s Police 
Station  security  X  
Analytical Services (2)  security  X  
Antigua State College 
(2) Educational  X  
Bendals Health Clinic 
(2) Medical  X X 
Clareview Psychiatric 
Hospital (4)  Medical   X 
High Court of Justice 
(part of Ministry of 
Legal and Justice 
Affairs Court)  Security   X 
Defence Force (2)  Security   X 
Department of 
Environment (2)  Operational  X  
Fiennes Building (2)   Social   X 
Good Shepherd 
Children’s Home    Social   X 
MET Office (airport 
terminal)   Early warning 
systems  X  
Ministry of Finance   Operational  X  
National Archives   Data Security  X  
National Office of 
Disaster Services 
(NODS)   Disaster Response   X 
Parham Health Clinic  Medical   X 
Police Headquarters  Security  X X 
Potters Health Clinic  Medical  X X 
Her Majesty’s Prison  Social   X 
St. John’s Fire Station  Emergency Security  X X 
Swetes Health Clinic 
(Can’t Find on  map)  Medical   X


---
*Page 134*
---

 15 Liberta Police Station  Security  X X 
Liberta Primary 
School  Educational  X X 
Urlings Primary 
School  Educational   X 
Jennings Primary 
School  Educational  X X 
Bolans Primary 
School  Educational   X 
Bendals Primary 
School  Educationally   X 
Pigotts Clinic  Medical   X 
Princess Margaret 
Secondary School  Educational  X X 
Cedar Grove Clinic  Medical  X X 
Old Road Clinic (1)  Medical   X 
Freetown Primary 
School (1)  Educational   X 
Emergency Medical 
Service (1)  Medical  X X 
Gray’s Farm Clinic (1)  Medical  X X 
Gray’s Farm Police 
Station (1)  Security  X X 
Willikies Primary 
School (1)  Educational   X 
Red Cross (1)  Emergency/NGO  X X 
Cedar Grove Primary 
(1) Educational   X 
Clare Hall Secondary 
School (1)  educational  X X 
Bethesda Clinic (1)   Medical   X 
Cobbs Cross Primary 
School (1)  Education   X 
Barbuda fire Station 
(1) Emergency/Security  X X 
Barbuda Council and 
Treasury (1)   Critical operations  X X


---
*Page 135*
---

 16 5.4. Maps of P riority Critical Public Service and C ommunity Buildings 
to Receive Climate -Proofing Interventions  
 
5.4.1.  Antigua  
 
FIGURES 3: EDUCATIONAL  FACILITIES  TO BENEFIT  FROM  GCF  BUILD


---
*Page 136*
---

 17 FIGURES 4: LAW  ENFORCEMENT  AND  CORRECTIONAL  FACILITIES  TO BENEFIT  FROM  
GCF  BUILD 
 
 
FIGURES 5: HEALTHCARE FACILITIES (NORTHERN PART OF THE ISLAND ) TO BENEFIT FROM GCF 
BUILD


---
*Page 137*
---

 18 FIGURES 6: HEALTHCARE FACILITIES (SOUTHERN PART OF THE ISLAND ) TO BENEFIT FROM GCF 
BUILD  
 
  
 
 
FIGURES 7: FIRE STATIONS TO BENEFIT FROM GCF BUILD


---
*Page 138*
---

 19 FIGURES 8: GOVERNMENT  MINISTRIES  AND  OTHER  PRIORITY  GOVERNMENT  
BUILDINGS  IN ST JOHN  
 
 
 
FIGURES 9: GOVERNMENT  MINISTRIES  AND  OTHER  PRIORITY  BUILDINGS  (PART  2)


---
*Page 139*
---

 20 5.4.2.  Barbuda Island  
 
FIGURES 10: BENEFICIARY  FACILITIES  IN BARBUDA


---
*Page 140*
---

 21 6. GENDER RELATED POLICY AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK  
 
6.1. The following laws, policies and international conventions encapsulated in the table below are 
applicable to the DOE’s commitment to gender equality and transformation and this project in 
particular.  
 
TABLE 4: LAWS AND POLICIES OF THE G OVERNMENT OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA  
LEGISLATION  DESCRIPTION AND RELEVANCE TO THE PROJECT  
NATIONAL LEGISLATION  
Constitution of Antigua and 
Barbuda, 1981  The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution prohibits discrimination on the 
grounds of sex, which refers specifically to the biological differences that 
determines an individual as male or female. Article 14 (3) states, “In this 
section, the expression "discrimin atory" means affording different 
treatment to different persons attributable wholly or mainly to their 
respective descriptions by race, place of origin, political opinions or 
affiliations, colour, creed, or sex whereby persons of one such description 
are s ubjected to disabilities or restrictions to which persons of another 
such description are not made subject or are accorded privileges or 
advantages that are not accorded to persons of another such description”.   
Physical Planning Act (2003)  This Act set s the standards for construction in Antigua and Barbuda.  The 
current Building Code regulates the construction of  buildi ngs to 
withstand a  Category  3 – 4 hurricanes .  
Environmental Protection and 
Management Act (2019)  The EPMA serves as the principal guiding policy for the Department of 
the Environment. It establishes and consolidates the i mplementation of 
the Multilateral Environmental Agreements in one legal regime and 
provides the financial framework for implementati on. It governs 
sustainable environmental protection and management to establish effective allocation of administrative responsibilities for environment 
management, coordination of environmental management, and the 
incorporation of international treaty obligations with respect to the 
environment into national and law related matters.  
Childcare and Protection Act, 
2004  
  
 The CPA establishes a Child Protection Agency in Antigua and Barbuda 
and provides safety, care and protection for all children. It also provides 
standards for child -care facilities including reporting abuse or neglect of 
children and requirements of children’s homes.   It also ensures that child 
labour is not allowed . 
Disabilities and Equal 
Opportunities Bill, 2017  An Act to make provision for the protection of the rights of persons with 
disabilities and for connected matters.  
The objectives of this Act are as follows —  
(a) to improve the general standard of living for persons with disabilities  
(b) to provide a clear and c omprehensive national mandate to facilitate 
the elimination of existing cases of discrimination against persons with 
disabilities, and to put safeguards in place to prohibit further 
discrimination against such persons;  
(c) to promote on a national level, the principle that a person with a 
disability is entitled to the same fundamental rights as a person who does 
not have a disability; and


---
*Page 141*
---

 22 (d) to ensure full and effective participation in all aspects of society for a 
person with a disability on an equal basi s with a person who does not 
have a disability.  
The project must therefore ensure that the buildings in question has the 
necessary access.  
Disaster Management Act, 2002  This Act provides for the effective organization of the preparedness, 
management, mitigation of, response to and recovery from emergencies 
and disasters natural and man -made in Antigua and Barbuda.  
Antigua and Barbuda Labour 
Code  The Act stipulates that no employer shall discriminate with respect to 
any person's hire, tenure, wages, hours, or any other condition of work, 
by reason of race, colour, creed, sex, age or political beliefs . 
NATIONAL POLICIES  
Antigua and Barbuda 
Interconnection Policy, 2015  Antigua and Barbuda Interconnection Policy was update d in 2015 
provides for Net Billing for systems between 0 –  5 kW for resident and 
commercial facilities. For systems between 5 –  50 kW, the Policy 
mandates a Feed -in Tariff (buy -all, sell-all) at the avoi ded cost of fuel 
(XCD 0.45).  
National Poverty Strategy 2011 -
2015  The National Poverty Strategy 2011 - 2015 has as one of its strategies, 
“Building Resilience through Environmental Sustainability –  by making 
disaster risk reduction a feature of the planning  process in the light of the 
high environmental risks that the country faces from hurricanes, 
earthquakes, and now sea rise, as a result of global warming.”  
National Youth Policy, 2007  
 The National Youth Policy identifies factors that are critical to you th 
empowerment and identifies eight key focus areas; including 
strengthening social environments, education and training, employment 
and sustainable livelihoods, health, participation and empowerment, care 
and protection, crime, violence and rehabilitation  and gender equality 
and gender relations.  
INTERNAL POLICIES  
Department of Environment 
Gender Policy  The Department of Environment Gender Policy formalizes the DOE’s 
commitment to mainstreaming gender into its work programme  and 
project portfolio.  Gender is defined as “the social attributes and 
opportunities associated with being male and female and the 
relationships between women and men and girls and boys, as well as the relations between women and those between men. These attributes, 
opportunities an d relationships are socially constructed and are learned 
through socialization processes. They are context/ time - specific and 
changeable. Gender is part of the broader socio -cultural context and 
intersects with other important criteria for socio- cultural analysis 
including class, race, poverty level, ethnic group and age.  
As such, the DOE’s Gender policy sets out the principles on which the 
approach to environmental social safeguards and gender review and 
management by the DOE is based and the and require ments that are 
applicable to each project.  
Department of Environment 
Environmental Social Safeguard 
Policy  The DOE operates within three modalities, namely legislative, 
institutional, and departmental operational. Within the context of these modalities, the Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy formalizes 
the DOE’s commitment to promote environmental and s ocially 
sustainable projects. As such, its Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy (“ESS Policy”) sets out the principles on which the approach to 
environmental and social safeguard review and management by the DOE 
is based and the environmental and soc ial safeguard requirements that 
are carefully applied to each project.  
MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS, TREATIES AND CONVENTIONS


---
*Page 142*
---

 23 Sustainable Development Goals  In September 2015, the General Assembly adopted the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development that includes 17 Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs). The project will contribute to the implementation of the 
following SDGs:  
GOAL 3: Good Health and Well- being  
SDG 4 — Quality education;  
SDG 5 — Gender equality;  
SDG 6 — Clean water and sanitation;  
SDG 7 — Affordable and clean energy;  
SDG 9 — Industry, innovation and infrastructure;  
GOAL 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities  
GOAL 13: Climate Action  
Convention on the Rights of the 
Child  A United Nations Treaty outlining the rights of children in the following 
areas: civil, political, economic, social, cultural, health. Adopted by RES/44/25 at the 44
th Session of the United Nations General Assembly in 
1989  
United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 1992  
  The UNFCCC, which entered into force in 1994, provides a framework for 
intergovernmental efforts addressing climate change and its effects. Member States of the UN meet and share data on greenhouse gas 
emissions, national policies and best practices, with the goal of 
develo ping and implementing strategies for tackling emissions and 
providing financial and technical assistance for developing countries. The 
UNFCCC aims for gender balance in bodies established pursuant to the 
Convention and the Kyoto Protocol, to improve women’ s participation 
and inform more effective climate change policy that addresses the needs 
of women and men equally. The UNFCCC called for the national 
adaptation plan (NAP) process to be gender -sensitive and calls on the 
Green Climate Fund (GCF) to promote environmental, social, economic, 
and development co -benefits and take a gender -sensitive approach.  
Each country formulates its Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) 
to the UNFCCC.  By 2030, one of Antigua and Barbuda’s climate action target includes p reparing buildings for extreme climate events, including 
drought, flooding and hurricanes, which is aligned to targets for this 
project.  
Convention on the Elimination of 
all Forms of Discrimination 
Against Women (CEDAW)  CEDAW is the principal instrument u tilized by the UN to protect the 
rights of women and eliminate all forms of discrimination against them. Adopted by the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) in 1979, 
CEDAW was ratified by the Government of Antigua and Barbuda in 1989 and its Optional Protocol signed in 1996. This convention mandates states to ensure that women equally represented their governments and 
international organizations; have equal rights to bank loans, mortgages 
and other forms of financial credit; (i) participate in and benefit from 
rural development; (ii) participate in development planning at all levels; 
(iii) obtain training, education, and extension services; (iv) have access to 
agricultural credit and loans, marketing facilities and appropriate technology; and (v) are treat ed equally in land, agrarian reform, and land 
resettlement schemes.  
Beijing Declaration and Platform 
for Action from the Fourth World Conference on Women  This landmark declaration and Platform for Action  (PoA ) called for 
actively involving women in enviro nmental decision making at all levels, 
integrating gender concerns and perspectives in policies and programs 
for sustainable development, and strengthening or establishing 
mechanisms at the national, regional and international levels to assess 
the impact o f development and environmental policies on women.


---
*Page 143*
---

 24 Commission on the Status of 
Women (CSW)  The 52nd session of the Commission on the Status of Women (2008) 
identified gender perspectives on climate change as its key emerging issue.  
The CSW, which is conve ned annually at United Nations Headquarters in 
New York, urged Member States to integrate gender into the design, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation and reporting of national 
environmental policies; as well as to strengthen mechanisms and provide 
adequate resources to ensure women’s full and equal participation in 
decision making at all levels on environmental issues, with particular 
emphasis on strategies related to climate change and the lives of women 
and girls.  
UN Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)  The Convention is intended as a human rights instrument with an 
explicit, social development dimension. It adopts a broad categorization of persons with disabilities and reaffirms that all persons with all types of 
disabilities must enjoy all human rights and fundamental freedoms. It 
clarifies and qualifies how all categories of rights apply to persons with 
disabilities and identifies areas where adaptations have to be made for 
persons with disabilities to effectively exercise their rights and areas 
where their rights have been violated, and where protection of rights 
must be reinforced.  
United Nations Conference on 
Sustainable Development (Rio+20) outcome document  Rio+20 affirms that green economy policies in the context of  sustainable 
development and poverty eradication should enhance the welfare of women, mobilize their full potential and ensure the equal contribution of both women and men. “The Future We Want” was adopted in Rio de 
Janeiro in June 2012. It resolves to unl ock the potential of women as 
drivers of sustainable development, including through the repeal of 
discriminatory laws and the removal of formal barriers. It also commits 
to actively promote the collection, analysis and use of gender sensitive 
indicators an d sex -disaggregated data.  
UNFCCC Gender Action Plan  The UNFCCC Gender Action Plan aims to increase the participation of 
women in all UNFCCC processes. It also seeks to increase awareness of 
and support for the development and effective implementation of 
gender -responsive climate policy at the regional, national and local levels.  
The purpose of this gender assessment is to provide the context of 
gender in Antigua and Barbuda.


---
*Page 144*
---

 25 7. APPROACH AND METHDOLOGY  
 
7.1. This Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan was developed by consultants within the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Department of Environment. (See Section 1.2.2 on 
Implementation Arrangements within the ESIA and ESMP for details on the Project 
Management Unit and human resourcing arrangements). T he elaboration of these steps are  
outlined in Figure 12 .  
FIGURES 11: METHODOLOGY  FOR  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF THE  GENDER  ASSESSMENT  
AND  GENDER  ACTION  PLAN  
 
 
7.2. Desktop Research  
  
7.2.1.  Desk re search for this project involved the consultation of a number of sources including a 
legislative and policy review (as seen in Section 3) as well as the consultation of a number 
of professional studies and documents. As the various laws, policies and inter national 
regimes which have guided the preparation of this project were outlined in Section 3, this Step 7. Submit to the GCF for review and No Objection
Disclosure  on the DOE website   Step 6: Internal Review in the AE
Legal, policy and budget reveiwsStep 5. Validate via the DOE, Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) and other stakeholders
DOE, TAC, PMC and focus groupsStep 4. Draft Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan
PMU ConsultantsStep 3. Stakeholder consultation conducted to gather concerns and potential risks
PMU Consultants, beneficiaries, implementing sector representatives from critical facilities and NGOs/CSOs for 
men and women within  the project footprint areaStep 2. Initial desktop review and baseline data collection
PMU Consultants Step 1. Terms of Reference are developed for the ESIA and ESMP 
Department of Environment


---
*Page 145*
---

 26 section on desk research will present the key technical documents used to support the 
elaboration of this project.  
 
7.2.2.  This project is one of the initiatives under the Climate Change Programme. Baseline data and 
documentation that are relevant to this Gender Assessment and Gender Acton Plan  include:  
• United Nations Electricity Supply Partnership report titled, Solar PV facility screening 
study for public and edu cational facilities on Antigua and Barbuda, prepared for CDB 
and shared with the Bank on 30 January 2018  
• Environmental Impact Review – Wind Turbines at Crabb es, 2014 under the GEF -
funded Special Pathways Protected Areas and Renewable Energy (SPPARE) project  
• Antigua and Barbuda Renewables Readiness Assessment, 2016  
• Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the Adaptation Fund project, including the Revolving 
Loan facility for home s and small businesses (includes installation of Renewable 
Energy), 2016  
• Environmental, Social and Gender Impact Assessment and Management Plan for the 
Climate Change Programme Deploying Renewable Energy for Schools and Clinics via 
the Sustainable Financin g Mechanism for Environmental Management – SIRF Fund  
• Green Climate Fund (GCF) ESIA and ESMP for the Enhancing Direct Access project, 
including solar RE plus batteries installation for home and business owners, 2017  
• Environmental Management Systems pilot fo r two facilities in Antigua and Barbuda, 
including installation of backup renewable energy, 2018  
• Technical and Financial Feasibility and Impact Assessments for the Abu Dhabi Fund for Development (ADFD) with IRENA, 2015  
• 2018 CDM Audit Tool Report -  Antigua and Barbuda  
• Barbuda Building Damage Assessment Preliminary Findings – United Nations 
Development Programme 2017  
• Hurricane Irma – Preliminary Damage Assessment f or Antigua and Barbuda’s 
Fisheries Sector 2017  
• Hurricane Irma Recovery Needs Assessment: A Report by the Government of  
• Energy sustainability in Antigua and Barbuda: Peer Analysis and Recommendations on a Solar Buy -In Tariff and a Social Rate for APUA, 2015  
 
7.3. Consultations with Stakeholders and Informal  Interviews  
 7.3.1.  Public consultations for this project were achieved through two methods. Firstly, there were 
stakeholder meetings where an open and frank exchange was encouraged and secondly, 
through stakeholder interviews. ESS and Gender stakeholder consult ations with 
representatives of the beneficiary facilities were held from 14 – 18 August 2017. In total, 35 
participants were in attendance. In addition, consultations were held on 8 -9 January 2018 
with NGO s as well as representatives from the schools and c linics to consult on the DOE’s 
draft Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy and draft Gender Policy.  Interviews were 
conducted with community representatives as well as representatives from the government 
agencies through one -on-one interactions.  
  
7.3.2.  During the period 6 – 16 August 2019, consultations were held with project teams and 
executing partners including the Ministry of Works, the Met Office and NODS, through the C4 
Eco Solutions . A total of 30 interviews were conducted in Barbuda during the peri od 12 – 16 
August 2019 with  government officials , including the Barbuda Council, n urses and s ecurity


---
*Page 146*
---

 27 forces. Further, seventeen (17) interviews were conducted with regular household members 
as well as seven  (7) interviews with business owners in Barbuda. Consultations continued in 
2020 with representatives from the Ministry of Works, Ministry of Education, Data 
Management Unit as well as feedback from the Ministry of Finance and the Directorate of 
Gender Affairs  on the Gender Action Plan . 
 
6.3.2.  Some important milestones in the consultation process  include : final consultations will be 
held on the final draft of the FP going to the Board  and d isclosure of ESIA and GAP on the DOE 
website . 
 
7.4 Gender and the Department of Environment Gender Policy19 
 
7.4.1 A Gender analysis/assessment  refers to methods used to understand relationships 
between men and women, their access to resources, their activities, and the constraints they 
face relative to each other. A comprehensive gender analysis/assessment entails the 
examinat ion of the different roles, rights, needs, and opportunities of women and men, boys and 
girls in a given project/program me context.  It is a tool that helps to promote gender – relevant 
entry points, policies and identify opportunities for enhancing gender equality in a particular 
project/program me. In the case of climate change projects/program mes, a well- done gender 
analysis/assessment helps to identify multiple causes of vulnerability, including gender 
inequality. It also helps to identify and build on th e diverse knowledge and capacities within 
communities/households that can be used to make them more resilient to climate related shocks and risks.
20 
 
7.4.2 In 2018, the DOE  adopted its Gender Policy. Th e policy elaborates on the DOE’s approach to 
meeting gender c onsiderations and mainstreaming based on the guidelines and principles 
of key multilateral partners, namely the Green Climate Fund, the Adaptation Fund, and the 
Global Environment Facility, through which the DOE accesses financing. The Gender Policy 
outlin es the commitment of the department  to: 
• Promote a gender -transformative management culture;  
• Determine and assess social and gender risks and impacts of projects, including through 
consultations with stakeholders and vulnerable communities, including women and men;  
• Contribute to gender equality and achieve greater and more sustainable environment al and 
climate change, results, outcomes and impacts;  
• Create gender safeguards and mechanisms to mitigate risks and negative social and gender impacts associated with projects;  
• Ensure that DOE staff, partners and stakeholders receive training and capacit y-building to 
enable them to mainstream gender into their work;  
• Cooperate with partners to build capacity in gender risk mitigation and facilitate 
implementation of gender and social safeguards, as well as monitoring and evaluation;  
• Ensure pro -active imp lementation of the Directorate of Gender Affairs’ internal policy against 
sexual harassment; and  
 
19 Department of Environment Gender Policy 2018  
20 Green Climate Fund Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan Template, available via 
http://www.greenclimate.fund/ documents/20182/574712/Form_09_ -
_Gender_Assessment_and_Action_Plan_Template.pdf/3f4b8173 -fbb2 -4bc7- 9bff-92f82dadd5c0


---
*Page 147*
---

 28 • Make efforts to achieve gender balance in recruitment and procurement.21  
 
7.4.3 Through this commitment, the DOE  seeks to ensure that the project : 
• Maximize s gender, environmental and socio -economic benefits to society as a whole and to 
vulnerable communities 
• Minimize s negative environmental, gender and socio -economic impacts;  
• Include s a gender policy and gender imp act assessment; and  
• Compl ies with gender, social and environmental standards.  
7.4.4 The DOE will not knowingly finance projects that:  
• Harm individuals or undermine human rights and gender protections  
• Can potentially cause significant negative gender, socio -economic, or environmental impacts  
• Fail to meet the environmental and social safeguard requirements of the DOE  
7.4.5 Disclosure and Public Consultation 
 
7.4.5.1  The DOE also requires that relevant information on a p roject or sub -project ’s 
environmental, social or gender risks are made accessible and understandable to 
stakeholders  likely to be affected by related activities . These stakeholders are provided 
with opportunities to input and offer risk mitigation measures that can be integrated 
within the design and im plementation of the project  or sub -project . This is particularly 
important in projects that may involve land acquisition, economic displacement or 
involuntary resettlement . 
FIGURES 12: CONSULTATIONS  WITH  TECHNICAL  TEAMS  INCLUDING  WOMEN  
 
7.4.5.2  The DOE makes projects related to gender as well as environmental and social 
safeguard information public and is committed to publishing on its website projects and 
summaries, including those that require Gender and Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessments, via its information database. Stakeholder engagement plans are disclosed 
 
21 Department of Environment Gender Policy 2018


---
*Page 148*
---

 29 early in project development and summary reports of consultations are circulated and 
stored electronically . 
 
Women or men who may be affected by a development o f a donor funded project can 
communicate their concerns about any gender, environmental, social, or economic 
performance of the development through the DOE’s Complaints Mechanism . Project 
consultations should be conducted according to the DOE’s Stakeholder and Community 
Consultation Strategy.  
7.4.6 Gender Diligence  
 
7.4.6.1  The DOE will conduct gender diligence through Gender Impact Assessment (GIA) at the 
overall portfolio level as well as the individual project level for higher risk projects (see 
Risk Management Policy and Manual of the DOE). Stakeholder consultations will present 
possible gender and social impacts to local communities and interested persons, in the presence of the DOE and other relevant g overnment agencies. Concerns of stakeholders 
are captured and submitted as part of the final report/ statement on the GIA . 
Development projects are required to appropriately address such concerns prior to 
formal approval and implementation. Annex 1 and the figure below illustrates the 
process for screening development projects and conducting portfolio -level as well as 
projec t level gender impact assessment.  
 
Source: Department of Environment Gender Policy (page 8 ) 
FIGURES 13: METHODOLOGY  FOR  CONDUCTING  A GENDER  IMPACT  
ASSESSMENT  (SOURCE:  EUROPEAN  INSTITUTE  FOR  GENDER  EQUALITY)


---
*Page 149*
---

 30 8. GENDER ISSUES RELEVANT TO THE PROPOSED PROJECT  
 
The project is being implemented in collaboration with other projects in the DOE’s portfolio.  A brief 
Summary is provided in Fig 6.  
FIGURES 14: SUMMARY  OF DOE  COMPLIMENTARY  CLIMATE  CHANGE  PROGRAMME  
 •An activity within this programme is the granting of 
2% concessional loans to low -income households and 
first- responders. By providing a financing mechanism 
for persons who ordinarily would not have access to 
funds would allow them to climate proof their homes. 
This assists in reducing traffic to the shelters, thereby 
leaving shelters to other vulnerable groups including 
disabled persons, destitute, etc.Revolving Fund programme 
for Homes
•These projects aim to provide RE  technology and battery 
back -up to selected schools, clinics; and churches this is 
expected to reduce energy consumption costs for selected facilities  as well as ensure access to energy for these institutions when the grid is down during and after weather events. Grants for public and private  
schools, community 
buildings and churches 
•Planning for a fossil fuel phase out so that the government can save on fuel imports and use this for building reslience in all sectorsEnergy Transition 
Programme


---
*Page 150*
---

 31  
TABLE 5: GENDER ANALYSIS FOR PROJECT PREPARATION STAGE (SOURCE : GREEN CLIMATE FUND GENDER ANALYSIS /ASSESSMENT 
AND GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN TEMPLATES . 22) 
 Row 
Number  Questions  Data/Information Collected  References  
What is the 
Context?  
Context of 
Antigua and Barbuda  One Demographic and 
socioeconomic data, disaggregated by sex and income  - See TABLE 6  Socio -demographic groups in Antigua and Barbuda that are  
vulnerable to poverty and unemployment include: youth, adolescent 
mothers, working class men, the homeless, the disabled, older men and 
women. • Rawwida Baksh and 
Associates, 2014. 
Country Gender 
Assessment (CGA) 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Report)  
• (Health Information 
Division, Ministry of 
Health Antigua and Barbuda)  
Two  % of households that 
are headed by 
women/men  - Approximately 44% are female headed households  
- The differential declaration of head of household status by women and men 
may be attributed to the country’s patriarchal social organization.  
Internationally, men have been and continue to be considered heads of the 
home.  This is also the case to some extent in Antigua and Barbuda.  This 
is premised on conservative interpretations of religious texts found 
commonly in Christian societies.  
- Women headed families carry the greater % of time for care is greater in 
these instances, but they generally have significant family related safety net.   • Government of 
Antigua and Barbuda, 2014. 
Antigua and Barbuda 
2011 Population and 
Housing Census 
(Table 5.11: 
Population by 
Relationship to 
Head of Household 
by Sex)  
• Rawwida Baksh and 
Associates, 2014. 
Country Gender Assessment (CGA) 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Report)  
 
22 Green Climate Fund Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan Template, available via http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/201 82/574712/Form_09_ -
_Gender_Assessment_and_Action_Plan_Template.pdf/3f4b8173 -fbb2 -4bc7 -9bff- 92f82dadd5c0


---
*Page 151*
---

 32  
Three What are the main 
sources of income 
for households in the vulnerable areas (disaggregated by sex)?  - The largest occupational category continues to be the service and sales 
sector followed by clerical support work. Elementary occupations are the 
largest followed by professional and technical and associate professionals. 
- Men typically dominate the following sectors: construction, agriculture, 
forestry and fishing, transportation. 
- Women typically dominate the following sectors: services 
(accommodation, tourism), education, social work, financial and insurance 
activities  
- Young men are more likely to be unemployed than any other group  • Rawwida Baksh and 
Associates, 2014. Country Gender 
Assessment (CGA) 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Report)  
• Government of 
Antigua and 
Barbuda, 2018. Antigua and Barbuda 
2015 Labour Force 
Survey Force  
Four  What are the 
uses/needs of women 
and men when it comes to c ritical 
services in Antigua and Barbuda i.e. health, education, disaster response, emergency and security ? - Women usually have primary users of these services.  Therefore, women 
and their dependents depend heavily on reliable services in all of these 
sectors. 
- These government services are free to all citizens.  In the case of health , 
those who can afford it also have access to the services provided by the 
private health sector.  Only 50% pe rsons have additional health insurance.   
After a storm and these services are not available 50% of persons will not 
have an alternative access.   
- In the education sector , there are also private schools which provide 
education to over 40% of children of  primary school age. Men and Women 
are equally impacted if the government education system cannot take the 
children due to damage to the infrastructure.   Recent studies show that both 
men and women are responsible for home care if the schools are closed.  
Women, however , represent the majority, but the role of men is significant.    
- After a hurricane , the country normally issues a state of emergency to lower 
the risk of looting and other crimes.  Women depend heavily on this service 
although men and women can be equally impacted.   
- The security services are mostly performed by men although there are many 
women in this field .  This increase d need of these services reduces the time 
that men in families can provide their role in home care.  This will,  
therefore , have to be undertaken by the other parent (female) or extended 
family.  The project , therefore , provides additional opportunity for men and 
their families to remain in the police and fire station facilities .  • Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August  2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
• Government of 
Antigua and 
Barbuda, 2014. 
Antigua and Barbuda 
2011 Population and 
Housing Census 
(Table 6.2: 
Population by 
Health Insurance 
Status by Five -Year 
Age Groups by Sex)  
• Government of 
Antigua and 
Barbuda, 2014. 
Antigua and Barbuda


---
*Page 152*
---

 33 - Men and women equally need the services of earl y warning systems.   2011 Population and 
Housing Census 
(Table 6.2: 
Population by 
Health Insurance 
Status by Five -Year 
Age Groups by Sex) 
• Government of 
Antigua and Barbuda, 2015. 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Education Statistical 
Digest: Statistics on 
Education in Antigua 
and Barbuda 2012 – 
2015 (Table B2: Number of 
Primary, Secondary 
and Post -Secondary 
Institutions as at 
2014- 15) 
Five How do the current 
climate risks affect 
men and women?  - It depends on their role and occupations. Women who work in the 
tourism/services sector  will be out of work if a hurricane damages this 
sector and will rely on the government services . 
- Women hea ded househo lds will have their problems compounded with 
additional duties for child and elderly care;  
- Drought can cause the services to close if there is not adequate water to the 
facilities thus limiting access to schools and clinics.   
- The climate is getting hotter  which can cause sev ere health impacts such as 
heat strokes on men and women.   The buildings to be upgraded have 
predominantly female  workers that provide services from the facilities to be 
updated and are affected by additional heat.   
- Individuals are susceptible to vector -borne diseases  • Kairi Consultants 
Ltd in Association with the National 
Assessment Team of 
Antigua and Barbuda, 2007. 
Living Conditions in 
Antigua and 
Barbuda: Poverty in 
a Services Economy 
in Transition  
Six Are there any legal 
barriers to women in 
the project -relevant 
sectors ? - No legal barriers have been identified at this stage  • (Laws, policies and 
ratified international 
conventions in


---
*Page 153*
---

 34 Section 3: Policy and 
Legal Framework)  
Seven  Describe any 
community beliefs 
about the speci fic 
roles of women and men.  - Heavy labo ur task s assigned to men  
- Food preparation, child- care and domestic duties are assigned to women  
- Men are the head of the household and are the bread winners. They are 
involved in construction, energy, heavy duty labour etc. The roles of women 
and men have evolved. Women are now leaders, farmers, fishers, vendors 
etc. and caretakers  of their families . 
- Women are more likely to avail themselves of health care services than men  • Rawwida Baksh and 
Associates, 2014. 
Country Gender 
Assessment (CGA) 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Report)  
• Consultation with 
beneficiaries of facilities (14 – 18 
August 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
Services and 
Infrastructure: 
Access and 
Benefits:  Eight  Who owns the land 
and other project 
assets?  - The Government of Antigua and Barbuda   
Nine  Describe household 
energy access and 
sources.  - It is an essential service provided through a utility company with a 
monopoly in Antigua and Barbuda  • Antigua and Barbuda 
The Public Utilities 
Act 
Ten How much do 
households spend on 
services under this project?  - 50%  of the population purchase additional health and educational services; 
overall 48% of children attend public primary school and 54% public 
secondary school education. Majority of children attend private daycare and 
preschools. A large proportion of childr en are in private preschools. There 
are three government supported preschools that operate in vulnerable 
communities, but this represent a very small number of children.  In general, 
most preschoolers are in private schools.   
- As security  measures,  many ho mes use lighting and dogs as their main 
source of protection.  Since the electricity prices are very high , many low 
income and even middle income homes owners frequently forgo lighting. Security provided by the Government is therefore very important.  Afte r a 
hurricane , the electricity will not be available and security from the police • Government of 
Antigua and 
Barbuda, 2015. 
Antigua and Barbuda Education Statistical 
Digest: Statistics on 
Education in Antigua and Barbuda 2012 – 
2015 (Table B2: Number of 
Primary, Secondary 
and Post -Secondary


---
*Page 154*
---

 35 is important. The RE systems are important for these buildings to continue 
to support communication and security support .  Institutions as at 
2014- 15) 
Eleven  Do men and women 
have bank accounts, 
and can they access 
finance to scale up 
this project to their 
homes?  - Men and women, especially low -income households, save money through 
an informal savings club ( box hand)  and have accounts at credit unions  
where there are less rigid eligibility criteria as oppose to other traditional 
banks. The credit union also provides low interest loans compared to other 
banking institutions. O n average women save more than men.  • Department of 
Environment, 2017. Environm ental and 
Social Management System (EMS) and 
project risk 
management 
arrangements: “An 
integrated approach 
to physical 
adaptation and 
community 
resilience in Antigua 
and Barbuda ’s 
northwest 
McKinnon’s 
watershed” 
(Summary of 
Environmental, 
Social and Gender  
Impacts)  
Twelve Do men and women 
benefit from 
construction sector, health and educations services (or other project -
relevant services)?  - Women are underrepresented in the construction sector, which composes of 
96% of male work ers compared to women.   • Government of 
Antigua and 
Barbuda, 2018. 
Antigua and Barbuda 
2015 Labour Force 
Survey Force (Chart 
6.4.2: Employment 
by industry and 
sex) 
Thirteen  How do men and 
women access 
information? Do - Men learn by visual teaching tools  
- Women can learn equally from visual and written methods  
- Both men and women have access to information,  but traditional education 
and communication systems may not  be gender responsive   • Department of 
Environment, 2017. 
Environmental and 
Social Management


---
*Page 155*
---

 36 they have access to 
different 
technologies?  - A high proportion of Antiguans and Barbudans hav e a cell phone but older 
persons still use radio and TV as their main source of getting information;  
- Internet is available but low-income  persons may not have these available 
to them.  Plan (ESMP) and 
Gender and Social 
Inclusion Action 
Plan (GAP) for the 
Enhancing Direct 
Access pilot in the 
Eastern Caribbean  
Fourteen  What are the levels 
of training / 
education?  - Women are generally more highly educated than men and spend more time 
in schools . 
   • Rawwida Baksh and 
Associates, 2014. 
Country Gender 
Assessment (CGA) 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Report)  
• Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
 
Who does 
what?  
Roles and 
responsibilities  Fifteen  How are men and 
women connected to 
markets / how do they participate in the economy?  - As producers,  both men and women sell and market their products . it 
Women are often at the market and roadsides selling their products . • Department of 
Environment, 2017. 
Environmental and 
Social Management 
Plan (ESMP) and 
Gender and Social 
Inclusi on Action 
Plan (GAP) for the 
Enhancing Direct 
Access pilot in the 
Eastern Caribbean  
• Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18


---
*Page 156*
---

 37 August 2017, 8 -9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
Sixteen  What would be the 
implications of the 
proposed intervention, given primary tasks and responsibilities by gender?  - Families innovate and juggle work and activities to get things done  • Department of 
Environment, 2017. 
Environmental and 
Social Management 
Plan (ESMP) and 
Gender and Social 
Inclusion Action 
Plan (GAP) for the 
Enhancing Direct 
Access pilot in the 
Eastern Caribbean  
• Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
Seventeen  Who is responsible 
for child/elderly care 
and household tasks?  - All family members, men and women take on this responsibility  • Department of 
Environment, 2017. 
Environmental and 
Social Management 
Plan (ESMP) and 
Gender and Social 
Inclusion Action 
Plan (GAP) for the 
Enhancing Direct 
Access pilot in the 
Eastern Caribbean


---
*Page 157*
---

 38 • Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
Eighteen  (a) What would be 
the best times to 
hold trainings for women and men on 
the new 
systems/technologies or skills to be delivered through the project?  
(b) how do men learn compared to women;  
(c)  how do women 
learn compared to men;  - For community members, after normal working hours, and on Sundays after 
church  
- The time of day is taken into consideration w hen planning to host 
consultations . The most appropriate time is around 5PM and lasts no later 
than 7PM. The consultations are regularly held in well -lit and central areas 
to ensure women/men feel safe traveling to and from the consultations. 
 • Department of 
Environment, 2017. 
Environmental and 
Social Management 
Plan (ESMP) and Gender and Social 
Inclusion Action 
Plan (GAP) for the 
Enhancing Direct 
Access pilot in the 
Eastern Caribbean  
• Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
Who decides?  
Participation in 
decision -
making 
Nineteen  Who are the 
community leaders? Are there any women leaders?  - Antigua and Barbuda do not have community leader structures as other 
countries.  Community leaders are normally church and political leaders.   
Women leaders are normally wives of the church pastors , nurses and 
teachers assigned to work in particular areas.    
- Women are the main voters in Antigua and Barbuda and have great power with the political directorate.  They normally can exercise power 
individually by direct negotiations and rarely rely on a t raditional 
community leadership structure to get what they want.  
  • Consultation with 
beneficiaries of facilities (14 – 18 August 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, March 2020)


---
*Page 158*
---

 39 Twenty  Are there women’s 
organizations that 
are active in the targeted area targeted project can partner with?  - Within the context of the project , the main body that support s both men and 
women are the labour unions , which negotiate for salary as well as good 
working conditions.  T hese are very powerful bodies.   Other groups are 
being consulted but  there is rarely an all- female  or all male group.  • Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
Twenty 
One Do women and men 
participate (equally) 
in associations, management 
relevant to the 
project sector, and any other producer/user groups? Which 
ones?  - Women and men do not generally participate equally in community 
meetings . 
- Participation in  meetings is based on i  they know each other well  • Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August  2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
Twenty 
Two  Who manages / 
makes decisions in 
the household, notably around how money and time are spent?  - Women generally manage the budget although men participate in a 
significant way . • Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
Twenty 
Three Will both women 
and men be able to 
equally participate in using and learning about the new interventions in the proposed project as 
well as the training?  - Yes, both men and woman will ha ve equal access to participate  
- There are barriers to men’s participation since they are generally les s 
educated and may not want to participate.  The project will have to design 
the training and the transition of the workforce to ensure male participation .   
This has been identified as a significant project risk . • Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)


---
*Page 159*
---

 40 Who 
benefits?  
Impacts  Twenty 
Four  Will the services 
from the project 
interventions be freely available to men and women? Are there any risks/restrictions on movement (security or cultural)? Are there any discriminations/risks to certain community members in terms of accessing 
the project benefits?  - Meetings held late at night are a risk; there must be adequate lighting for 
women and men to attend meetings  
- The services will be freely available to both men and women. As stated 
above, it is mandated by law that NGOs, c ivil society organizations, 
governm ents, private sector whether women/men must be involved in 
decision making as it relates to environmental projects. It is mandated by 
Law and is also stated within the Department of Environment 
environmental and social safeguards that the Department of Env ironment is 
mandated to ensure that all environmental projects being executed must 
conform and adhere to ESS and reduce the impacts of risks. Thus, we do 
not foresee any significant risks/restrictions as it relates to gender 
involvement.  • Department of 
Envi ronment, 2018. 
Environmental 
Social Safeguard 
Policy  
• Department of 
Environment, 2018. 
Gender Policy  
Twenty 
Five How will men and 
women benefit from 
the project interventions?  - Women in particular will benefit from the interventions at the household 
level as well as the working environment;  
- Men could benefit more from the construction sector jobs and the training 
programs to transition the workers to Cat 5 standards;  
- Both men and women will have access to funding to participate in the 
training programs;  • Consultation with 
beneficiaries of facilities (14 – 18 
August, 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 –  
16 August 2019, March 2020)  
Twenty 
Six 3. What will be the 
impact of the project 
interventions on women’s workload and income?  - There is not expected to be any workload change for men or women.  The 
project was designed over 6- year period to limit the additional surge in 
work.  • Funding Proposal : 
Resilience to 
hurricanes in the 
building sector in 
Antigua and Barbuda 
2019  
Twenty 
Seven  4. Are there specific 
project impacts or 
benefits for women?  - Women can now benefit from a formal training course in the constructions 
sector.  Although it is avail able to some extent and was accessible to 
women, the project will be promoting this approach to generate some 
interest in women;  • Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August, 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6 -16


---
*Page 160*
---

 41 - Additional hurricane shelters in communities.  These shelters will be 
smaller and less crowded allowing persons who are vulnerable to be more 
comfortable and secure in the clinics rather than the larger school.   
- Men will benefit mainly from knowing that vulnerable members of their 
families will have place to go that will take care of their needs;  August 2019, 12 – 
16 August 2019, 
March 2020)  
Twenty 
Eight  5. Will the project 
help create a better 
balance between women’s productive and household tasks (e.g. childcare, 
domestic work)?  - Yes. The project is designed to target buildings with geographic 
distribution.  In the event of a hurricane , the clinics and schoo ls will not 
close thus allowing women to use the services closer to their own homes 
and not having to travel any distances.     
- More time will be spent at home after a hurricane and drought (water is not 
available for washing cooking etc. ).  This project w ill seek to address this.   • Funding Proposal: 
Resilience to 
hurricanes in the 
building sector in Antigua and Barbuda 
2019  
Twenty 
Nine  6. Will the project 
contribute to 
strengthening women’s participation in decision- making? 
How?  - Women in Antigua and Barbuda generally participate in decision making 
process.  This culture will be maintained as the project proceeds.   
- Women participate in the Project Management Committee, Technical 
Advisory Committee, Technical Evaluation Committee , Project 
Management Unit, community consultations and ad hoc consultation 
events.  • Consultation with 
beneficiaries of 
facilities (14 – 18 
August 2017, 8- 9 
January 2018, 6- 16 
August 2019, 12 – 16 
August 2019, March 
2020)


---
*Page 161*
---

 42 9. GENDER ACTION P LAN  
 
Project Tit le: Resilience to Hurricanes in 
the Building Sector in Antigua and 
Barbuda  
A project/program -specific Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan (GAP) is a tool used to 
ensure gender mainstreaming is clearly visible in project/program design and 
implementation23. This GAP  will serve as a key guiding tool throughout the delivery of the 
project , GCF BUILD .  
The Gender Action Plan presented below identifies key project activities and indicative 
outputs through which gender specific strategies, actions and outcomes will be progressed 
and monitored. The Plan will be reviewed and refined during the inception phas e, which 
will also ensure that all project stakeholders have the opportunity to identify issues and are 
aware of responsibilities for delivering and monitoring the Gender Action Plan.  
Implementation arrangements of the project include an ESS and G ender E xpert as part of 
the Technical Evaluation Committee that will provide technical advice in the decision-
making process of the project’s sub -activities.  
The targets for the GAP are provisional as GCF Build is a component of a larger project 
pipeline. The need for targets that are consistent with the overarching project pipeline 
targets  will be informed by gender baseline assessments (GBA) currently being conducted 
under the project “ Accelerating a transformational pipeline of Direct Access climate 
adaptation and mitigation projects in Antigua & Barbuda ” (GCF Readiness 4 ) and through 
support from  the NDC Partnership’s Climate Enhancement Action Package ( CAEP ) initiative . 
The outcomes of the GBA will inform the selection of specific targets for indicators listed in the table below , so as to ensure that Antigua and Barbuda is  adopting ambitious and 
transformative gender responsive strategies.   
The aforementioned GCF R eadiness 4 GBA aims to assess the current situation as it relates 
to the impact of climate change on gender disaggregated spending patterns ( i.e. how males 
and females and their associated households are impacted differently by  climate related 
events ). Fur thermore, it will give insight into the adaptive capacities of respondents by 
providing information on their spending preferences, the extent of risk management approaches, vulnerabilities and climate related finances — capacity to spend pre- and post -
disas ter and by extension their capacity to build resilience (reduce exposure and recover y).   
 The outcomes of this study will inform gender responsive climate strategies for Antigua and 
Barbuda by providing clearer understanding of the post- disaster finance needs of males and 
females across varying social classes. It will also give insight into the precautions/ risk 
management strategies adopted by gender pre- disaster, whether that be insurance, 
investments in protective supplies , such as shutters etc. It is envisioned that this information,  
in addition to identifying targets, would guide the development of sustainable financing 
strategies for the private sector by providing baselines which can be used to create climate-
related financial instruments tailored to  social factors , but also able to meet the needs of 
citizens.  The assessment will help in identifying the most vulnerable groups and identifying 
action areas for capacity building to enhance overall adaptive capacity of citizens.  It will provide a better  understanding of the distribution of vulnerability across gender but also 
across social classes and identifying economic sectors/jobs most at risk.   
 Complimenting this assessment is the NDC gender baseline assessment,  which is currently 
in development. T he NDC GBA will provide more in -depth gender disaggregated data and fill 
remaining gender -related data gaps by collecting spending patterns data specifically 
 
23 GCF Gender Analysis/Asse ssment and Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan Templates 
http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/574712/Form_09_ -_Gender_Assessment_and_Action_Plan_Template.pdf/3f4b8173 -fbb2 -
4bc7 -9bff- 92f82dadd5c0


---
*Page 162*
---

 43 regarding the uptake of technologies and how financing strategies can be developed to 
optimise eff orts for both resilience and low -carbon development. The NDC GBA will focus on  
the willingness to uptake technologies, practises and training related to capacity building for 
climate change impacts, with particular emphasis on the energy, transport and bac k-up 
energy sectors. The NDC gender assessment will capture information needed to shape 
programme development and inform projects such as the Just Transition of the workforce by generating data on citizen’s understanding on climate change, their willingnes s to pay and 
willingness to engage.   
 
These two baseline assessments complement each other as the GCF Readiness 4 assessment 
will create baselines for spending and understanding levels of preparedness amongst 
citizens as well as identifying those most vulnerable. While the NDC Partnership assessment 
will help to identify the ways in which citizen’s adaptive capacities can be enhanced.  The 
assessments will analyse the current financial situation as it relates to climate impacts, the associated appetite for climate related strategies and programmes and identify sectors most 
at risk and critical to the success of these strategies —resultantly, informing targets for the components of the GAP outlined in table 8 below.  
 Methodology  
The NDC GBA is currently in development, however, the GCF R eadiness 4 GBA was designed 
using the GCF gender analysis template and the data needs of the department’s climate 
change project pipeline.  
 
The GCF R eadiness 4 GBA was deployed on three levels with the aim of obtaining 1,100 
responses:   
1. A national survey targeted to reach 500 persons on mainland Antigua  
2. Community survey targeting 500 residents in both rural and urban communities that 
have been identified areas as most vulnerable to sea level rise, storm related  surges 
and flooding. These communities were McKinnon’s , Yorks, Cashew Hill, U rlings, 
Willikies and Bethesda.   
3. A survey targeting 100 residents  in Barbuda  
The GCF Readiness 4 Survey instrument was developed using Kobo Toolbox software , which 
will also be used for data collection.  The surveys are being administered by trained 
enumerators using the Kobo Toolbox software to facilitate ease of data collection and analysis. The surveys are conducted via 30 -45-minute telephone calls and adopt mixed 
sampling methodologies:   
• Simple random sampling is being used  with the telephone director as the sampling frame.  
This was done to accommodate social distancing guidelines imposed by the government due to COVID 19  
• However, stratified sampling was also adopt ed to ensure equal representation by  parish, 
age and gender. As a quality check, the  gender  proportionality of respondents was 
checked using the K obo for every 50 surveys  that were completed, so as  to avoid skewing 
data. To account for isolation of key respondents, snowball sampling was also adopted to acquire contact information and referrals to other respondents. The sampling unit was head of household / individual(s) responsible for household fina nces.
 
 
The assessments will also make use of secondary data generated by  national statistics  and 
reports as well as other studies conducted by the DOE and other national agencies.


---
*Page 163*
---

 44  
TABLE 6: GENDER  ACTION  AND  SOCIAL  INCLUSION  PLAN  
ACTIVITIES   INDICATORS AND TARGETS  BUDGET  TIMELINE  RESPONSIBILITIES  
Impact Statement: Increase  climate -resilient sustainable development by improving the resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector to 
extreme climate events — particularly Category 4 and 5 hurricanes  (for the benefit of a population consisting of 49,088 women and ~45,312 men)  
Outcome Statement:  Enhancing the climate resilience of Antigua and Barbuda’s building sector will s trengthen its adaptive capacity , reduce 
exposure to climate risks ; strengthen institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and developmen t; and increase  
generation and use of climate information in decision -making  
Output  1. Climate -proofing interventions implemented in critical public service and community buildings to improve resilience to, and 
recovery from, extreme climate events  
Design and implement  an apprentice ship  
program to support the participation of persons 
between the ages of 16 –  24 years in the 
project’s construction activities  30% of women  who complete the 
program have increased  access to 
construction jobs  
Equal opportunities are provided  for 
men and women  to participate in the 
new procedures training  $200,000  
Sub-activity 2.4.3 
(B50)  Year 
1(Q1) — 
Year 6 
(Q24)   
ESS and Gender 
Expert  
Develop gender responsive knowledge and 
communication products that include the 
promotion of women in construction  50% of men and women have  
increased knowledge and access to 
appropriate tools to address climate 
change impacts in construction of 
critical infrastructure  (regardless of 
their literacy levels ) $25,000  
Communication 
Officer (PM8)  Year 1 (Q1)  
ESS and Gender Expert  
Conduct detailed consultation s on the design of 
gender responsive shelters with RE back up energy systems  20% of recommendations by key 
stakeholders  (men , women and 
disabled groups ) are reflected in the 
improved design of shelters  
 
10% of participants at the consultations are persons with special 
needs  $15,000  
Sub-activity 
1.1.1. (A1)  Year 1 
(Q3) —Year 
2 (Q6)   
ESS and Gender Expert  
Integrate access and the needs of individuals, 
families , the elderly  and persons with special 
needs  into health and safety protocols of  
shelters  Enhanced access to services  and 
quality of health and safety protocols 
benefitting  50% of individuals, 
families and persons with special $30,000  
Sub-activity 
1.2.4. (A29) 
(A30)  Year 1 
(Q3) — Year 
6 (Q24)  
 Ministry of Works


---
*Page 164*
---

 45  
24 To be updated based on results of GCF Readiness  4 Baseline Gender Assessment  
25 To be updated based on results of GCF Readiness 4 Baseline Gender Assessment  
26 Assessed  through an evaluation tool developed for the programme  needs  who stay at shelters during a 
storm  
 
At least 40% of persons report 
satisfaction with the health and safety 
services provided at the shelters 
(disaggregate by set)  
Output 2. Climate change adaptation mainstreamed into the building sector and relevant financial mechanisms  
Prepar e a Strategic Impact Assessment (SIA) of 
the regulations related to the Building Code  Cost of constructing at Cat  5 increase 
by 30% due to the updated Building 
Code24 
% of w omen and men  with increased 
spending as an impact  of the code 25 $10,000  
Sub-activity 
2.1.1.  (B4)  Year 1 
(Q1) — Year 
1 (Q4)  ESS and Gender 
Expert  
Construction  Sector 
Expert  
Economist  
Develop lessons learnt to communica te that the 
SIRF Fund is  assist ing persons who cannot 
access financing for the additional cost related 
to the code  50% of applicants who access 
financing  through the SIRF Fund 
annually are women  
 $22,500  
Sub-activity 
2.2.4. (B29)  Year 3 
(Q9) — Year 
6 (Q24)  Local consultant  
Design gender responsive communication tools 
to target men and women differently in both the public and private sector on the updated 
building code, the benefits of taking up climate -
adaptive solutions within the building sector as 
well as the availability  of certified climate 
change courses   50% of persons  in the private sector 
that benefit from information to allow scaling up  are women  
30% of persons trained in new 
standards for water harvesting and RE 
systems  are women  $27,000  
Sub-activity 
2.3.4. (B38)  By Year 1  
(Q3) ESS and Gender 
Expert  
Design and conduct gender -sensitive 
certification training programmes on  how to 
support the installation, operation and 
maintenance of the climate change adaptation 
solutions  50% of men and women in the 
workforce are retrained  
 
50% of students trained  are women  
All courses developed  are gender 
sensitive  
70% of p articipants  demonstrate an  
understanding of new adaptation 
solutions26 $22,500  
Sub-activity 
2.3.3. (B35)  By Year 2  
(Q5) ESS and Gender 
Expert  
Output 3. Climate information services strengthened to facilitate early action within the building sector to respond to extreme climate 
events


---
*Page 165*
---

 46  
    Develop information and communication 
products   based on stakeholder workshops  that 
aim to reduce losses and damage and risks for 
the benefit of males, females, and vulnerable 
communities  All information and communication 
products are gender responsive and 
tailored to meet the differential needs 
of males, females, and vulnerable 
communities  
  50% of recommendations by key 
stakeholders are integrated into the 
design of communication products  
  $37,500  
Sub Activity 3.2.1 
(C17)  By Year 2  
(Q5) Communications 
Officer  
Output 4: Fully functional gender balanced staff that can respond to the gender requirements of the project as well as the beneficiaries  
Promote gender balance as well as sustainable 
procurement  in AE’s p rocurement policies 
(with consideration given in the selection of 
goods and services  to persons with disabilities 
and persons of varying ages )  Equal representation of men and 
women on project management team  
 N/A  From Q1 
Year 1  
thereafter  Accredited 
Entity/Executing 
Entity  
Ensure office space  is gender responsive  
 At least two special needs person s are  
working in the PMU by project end  
 
Special provisions are made to 
facilitate persons under  the age of 24, 
and over the age of 60 to work on the 
project team  AE fees  Year 1  Accredited 
Entity/Executing 
Entity  
Provide g ender training for all project staff  
  Equal representation of men and 
women at gender awareness training 
sessions  
At least three reports include sex -
disaggregated data per year    AE fees  Year 1  Accredited 
Entity/Executing Entity


---
*Page 166*
---

 47 10. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
10.1.  GOVERNMENT REPORTS  
 
• Antigua and Barbuda 2015 Labour Force Survey Report, Antigua and Barbuda 2015 Labour 
Force Survey Report § (2015).  
• Antigua and Barbuda. Ministry of Finance and Corporate Governance, 2019 Antigua and 
Barbuda Recurrent and Development Estimates . St. John’s, 2019.  
• Antigua and Barbuda National Mental Health Policy 2013  
• 2011 Census of Population and Housing. Report. St.  John’s , Antigua : Statistics Division 
(Ministry of Finance and Economy, 2014.  
• Department of Environment (2015). Antigua and Barbuda Third  National Communication . 
St. John's: Department of Environment.  
• Mainstreaming Gender in  Green Climate Fund Projects: A Practical Manual to Support the 
Integration of Gender Equality in  Climate Change Interventions and Climate Finance . 2019. 
EBook . Incheon: Green Climate Fund. 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/194568/Guidelines_ -
_GCF_Toolkit_Mainstreaming_Gender.pdf/860d1d03 -877d -4c64 -9a49 -c0160c794ca7.  
• James P. 2001. Antigua and Barbuda Country Paper on National Climate Change Issues. 
Component 4: Formulation of a Policy Framework for Integrated (Adaptation) Planning and 
Management, Caribbean Planning for Adaptation to Climate Change.  
• “Hurricane Irma Recovery Needs Assessment.”  Hurricane Irma Recovery Needs Assessment . 
St. John's, Antigua  and Barbuda: Government of Antigua and Barbuda, 2017.  
• Project Management Unit (Department of Environment) (2018). Environmental, Social and 
Gender Impact Assessment: Deploying Renewable Energy for Schools and Clinics via the Sustainable Financing Mechanis m for Environmental Management . St. John's: Department of 
Environment.
 
10.2.  REGIONAL/INTERNATIONAL REPORTS  
 
• Kairi Consultants Ltd in Association with the National Assessment Team of Antigua and 
Barbuda. "Living Conditions in Antigua and Barbuda: Poverty in a Se rvices Economy in 
Transition ." Country Poverty Assessment Reports  1 (August 2007)  
• Ms. Tamara Huggins, Rawwida Baksh and Associates.  Country Gender Assessment Antigua 
and Barbuda. Report. Caribbean Development Bank. Vol. 1. St. Michael, Barbados: Caribbean 
Development Bank, 2014.  
• United Nations Development Programme (2012). Human Development and the Shift to 
Better Citizen Security . Caribbean Human Development Report 2012. [online] New York: 
United Nations Development Programme. Available at: 
https://www.und p.org/content/dam/undp/library/corporate/HDR/Latin%20America%2
0and%20Caribbean%20HDR/C_bean_HDR_Jan25_2012_3MB.pdf [Accessed 7 Oct. 2019].  
• United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN -HABITAT) (2019). Antigua and 
Barbuda: All Saints Urban Profile . Nairob i: United Nations Human Settlements Programme 
(UN -HABITAT).  
United States Department of State, 2016 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices -  
Antigua and Barbuda, 3 March 2017 available at: 
https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/236870.pdf  [accessed 24 November 
2017]


---
*Page 167*
---

48 10.3.  INTERVIEWS AND CONSULTATIONS  
•Project Management Unit (Department of Environment), 2017. Consultation with
beneficiaries of facilitie s
•P
roject Management Unit (Department of Environment), 2018. Consultation with
schools and c linics
•P
roject Management  Unit (Department of Environment), 2018. Consultation  with
NGOs/CSOs and beneficiaries as identified (See critical facilities under Table 3), 2018
•Project Management Unit (Department of Environment), 2019. Consultation withproject teams and executing partners including the Ministry of Work s, the Met Office
and NODS
•Jacobs, C. and Versailles, C. (2019). Interview with the members of the Police Unit and the
Fire Department  in Barbuda .
•Nedd, P. (2019). Interview with Member of the Barbuda Council .
•Charles, A. Jones, Cuffy, J. (2019)  Interview with nurses in Barbuda
•Project Management Unit (Department of Environment) 2019. Interviews withhousehold members and private business owners in Barbuda
•P
roject Management Unit (Department of Environment) 2020 . Consultation with
beneficiaries of facilities 2020
___________________