=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/ContentTypeId: 0x01010000979F12F22C9E4F9273E32F354CEDB7
/CreationDate: D:20200214155240+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 20 for Word
/Keywords: 
/ModDate: D:20200217144825+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe PDF Library 20.6.66
/Subject: 
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting o f the Board 
10 – 12 March 2020 
Geneva, Switzerland
Provisional agenda item 17  GCF/B. 25/02/Add.0 3 
18 February 2020  
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum III 
Funding proposal package f or FP 126 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “Increased climate resilience of rural households and
communities through the rehabilitation of production landscapes in selectedlocalities of the Republic of Cuba (IRES) ”;
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat ’s assessment;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;
f)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel'sassessment; and
g)Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.25/02 /Add.03 
Page b 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 72 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  75 
Secretariat’s assessment  78 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   92 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  105  
Gender documentation  108


---
*Page 3*
---

E 
  I 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 1 OF 64 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Increased climate resilience of rural households and 
communities through the rehabilitation of production 
landscapes in selected localities of the Republic of Cuba  
(IRES)  
Country:  Cuba 
Accredited Entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations   
Date of first submission:  [2017/09/08]  
Date of current submission  [2019/11/07 ]  
Version number  V.001


---
*Page 4*
---

 
  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE I  
 
 
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT SUMMARY  
 Section B  PROJECT INFORMATION  
 Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS
 
 
Section H ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill o ut information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[Dates ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE II 
 
 2  
 
ACRONYMS  
 
AMA EXecutive Environmental Agency  
AMA  Accreditation Master Agreement  
CCS  Credit and Service Cooperatives  
CEE  Co-executing Entity  
CIMINAGT  Center for Research on Animal Improvement  
CITMA  Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment  
CTNPF  Close -to-Nature Planted Forest  
CP People’s Council s  
EE Executing Entity  
ESC Commodities and Trade Division  
FAA Funded Activities Agreement  
FONADEF  National Forestry Development Fund  
GEF  Global Environment Facility  
GoC  Government of Cuba  
IAGRIC  Institute of Agricultural Engineering  
INIFAT  Institute for Fundamental Research on Tropical Agriculture  
INISAV  Institute of Plant Health  
INRH  National Institute for Hydraulic Resources  
ISTA  Agrarian Tenure Institute  
LRF Landscape Resilience Fund  
M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  
MINAG  Ministry of Agriculture  
MINCEX  Ministry of Foreign Trade  
MPMU Municipal Project Management Unit  
MPCC  Municipal Project Coordinating Committee  
MTE  Mid-Term Evaluation  
NAP National Adaptation Plan  
NAMA  Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions  
NDA  National Designated Authority  
NDC  Nationally Determined Contribution  
NPSC National Project Steering Committee  
NPMU National Project Management Unit  
NOAA  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (US)  
O&M  Operations and Maintenance  
OSFMU  Operational Support and Financial Management Unit  
PCC Project Coordination Committee  
PPMU Provincial Project Management Unit  
SCF Soil Conservation Fund  
SPI Standard Precipitation Index  
TSC Technical and Scientific Committee  
UBP C Base Units of Cooperative Production  
UEB  Base Enterprise Unit  
UEBIST  Base Enterprise Units for Integrated Technical Services


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 1 OF 64 
 1 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP ) Not applicable Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)   
 
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☒ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:   
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:     
☒ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
32% 
 
 
35% 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
33% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  2,675,727 million tCO2 -eq 
in 20 years  A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact    
Direct beneficiaries  51,713 
23,788 women1 
0.45% of total population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  119,914,000  USD  
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  38,206,790.80  USD  
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding   
☒ Grant  Enter number   
☐ Loan   Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based   
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  7 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval   A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, etc.) ? 
Please see section B.1.  
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Co-executing Agencies : Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG) ; Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 2 OF 64 
 2 A.21. Executive summary   
1.   According to the Vulnerability and Climate Change Adaptation Index in the Latin America and Caribbean region, Cuba is 
classified as a “high risk” country2. Observations show that the country's climate has been changing, and studies carried out 
under the Second National Communication to the UNFCCC  (2015)3 indicate the occurrence of: i)  increases in temperature; 
ii) increasingly erratic seasonal rains; iii) greater frequency of long and severe droughts; iv) increased frequency and severity 
of cyclonic activity; and v) moderate and strong coastal flood ing4. 
2. The changes in rainfall patterns and its overall reduction , as well as expected increases in evaporation  due to increased 
temperatures , have a significant impact on droughts. Future climate change impacts  will affect agricultural production, 
particularly of s taple crops, negatively impacting the livelihoods of farm households and the general availability of agricultural 
and food products, ultimately putting food security at risk. Projected climate scenarios show that for 65% of 29 crops studie d, 
the potential yields will suffer a reduction of 12% (beans  and rice), 16% for manioc and as much as 48% for potatoes ( see 
Annex 2, Table 4 ).5,6 Seventy -eight  municipalities, representing an area of 50,907 km2 and about 46% of the national territory, 
are the most affected in terms of intens ity of  agricultural drought during more than 50 days a year7. Among these are 
Corralillo, Quemado de Güines and Santo Domingo in Las Villas province; Los Arabos in Matanzas province (Central Region); 
and Amancio Rodríguez, Colombia and Jobabo in Las Tunas province (Eastern Region). These are the target municipalities  for 
this project.  
3. With the analysis of trends towards increasing vulnerability to climate change based on historic records and climate models, 
the Government of Cuba has concluded that the entire archipelago is at risk8. In 2017, the Council of Ministers approved 
“Tarea Vida”, the Cuban State Plan to address climate change. The Plan proposes five Strategic Actions with  eleven 
immediate Tasks , chosen based on a multidisciplinary analysis of vulnerability and other factors, with highest priority given 
to 73 of Cuba’s 168 municipalities (63 in coastal areas and 10 inland). If the 73 highest priority, seven have been selected as 
target areas for this project.  
4. Of the five Strategic Actions  defined in the “ Tarea Vida”, two directly address the agricultural sector:  
A) adaptation of agricultural activities, particularly those with the greatest impact on the country's food security, to 
changes in land use as a consequence of drought and other climate change impacts.  
B) diversif ication of  crops, imp rove ment in  soil conditions, introduc tion and develop ment of varieties resistant to new 
temperature scenarios.  
5. This Project is fully aligned with the Government`s strategic actions defined to address the adverse effects of climate change 
in the agricultural sector and its objective is to increase the climate resilience of agricultural production and ensure food security through improved ecosystem services from landscape management using agroforestry, silvopastoral  systems, 
reforestation and assisted natural forest regeneration in seven highly vulnerable municipalities to  the impacts of  climate 
change. Through this project, c ritical ecosystem services will become more CC -resilient, especially regulation of the 
hydrological cycle, through landscape rehabilitation and management that enhances agro -ecosystem productivity and 
sustainability by improving water infiltration rates and reducing or preventing run- off and soil erosion. At the same time, 
significant mitigation benefits (e.g. from increased carbon in soils and biomass) will result from the integration of trees and 
bushes in agroforestry and silvopastoral  systems , as well as through reforestation with close -to-nature planted forests and 
assisted natural regeneration.  Furthermore, improved ecosystem services and productive agricultural systems will help to 
increase  communities’ resilience to climate change , improving their food and water security.  
6. This project constitutes the second phase of a three -phase  program to enhance climate resilience of Cuba’s agr icultural sector  
countrywide. A first phase of research, testing and analysis of potential resilience -enhancing land use systems identified 
agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry modules that are both productive and sustainable  has been concluded. The second 
phase consists of th is proposed GCF project , which will  implement these proven  modules on a mesoscale to build  on the  
knowledge of these modules ’ performance in the field and at scale, enhance  institutional capacities for extension and 
adaptation of the modules, and establish and operationalize a financial mechanism to support farme rs in applying resilience -
enhancing technologies and practices to their agro -ecosystems.  A third phase will, in future, take the lessons learned from 
this project and extend this knowledge through more robust institutional capacities to farmers nationwide , who will be 
supported by the financial mechanism established under th is proposed GCF project.  
 
1 An average of 46% women has been taken into consideration for the Project Intervention Area, according to Annex 8 - Gender assessment and project -
level action plan.  
2 Corporación Andina de Fomento, 2014. Índice de vulnerabilidad y adaptación al cambio clim ático en la región de América Latina y el Caribe  
3 Second National Communication to the UNFCCC. 2015. Havana: Republic of Cuba  https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/cubnc2.pdf  
4 Further information on observed climate changes in Cuba are provided in Appendix 4 of this document:  Somoza J., De la Colina A.: Estudio de Linea 
Base de Adaptación y Vulnerabilidad para el Proyecto IRES FAO. La Habana, Cuba, 2018. (Appendix 4)   
5 Rivero R ., et al (2010) in SNC Cuba (2015). In Somoza J. , De la Colina A., 2018  
6 Municipal Statistical Data. Centella Artola et al (2006). In Somoza J. , De la Colina A., 2018  
7 Centella A, B. Lapinel, O. Solano, R. Vázquez, C. Fonseca, V. Cutié, R. Baéz, S. González, J. Sille, P. Rosario y L. Duarte ( 2006). La sequía meteorológica y 
agrícola en la República de Cuba y la República Dominicana. Tomo I, 172 pp,  
8 Second National Communication to the UNFCCC. 2015. Havana: Republic of Cuba  https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/cubnc2.pdf


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  PAGE 3 OF 64 
 3 7. The Project is  structured in three mutually reinforcing and interdependent Output s: Output 1 will utilize investment in 
resilience -enhancing technologies to rehabilitate production landscapes through agroforestry, silvopastoral  systems , 
reforestation and assisted natural regeneration modules tested and evaluated in the completed earlier  Phase 1  of the project . 
Rehabilita tion of these landscapes will involve removal of marabu, a n aggressive,  non-native invasive shrub as an essential 
first step. Through Out put 2, technical assistance, capacity building and know -how will be extended  to ensure that farmers 
know how to replace traditional carbon intensive practices with new resilience -enhancing production practices necessary for 
effective implementation of the land scape rehabilitation modules under Out put 1. Output 3 will support the transformation 
of the political , institutional  and legal framework  required to shift the prevailing paradigm of production maximization to the 
new paradigm of economically viable climat e-resilient and sustainable production systems; this will include analyses of and 
reforms to current financial mechanisms and economic incentive structures. GCF funds will be used to purchase essential 
machinery, equipment, and inputs (e.g. seedlings), tra in institutional staff and farmers in climate -resilient agricultural 
practices and systems, and assist government to analyze and enable the appropriate reforms to relevant political, 
institutional, legal and financial frameworks; government co -financing wi ll cover the costs of technical and logistical support 
to establish  the land management modules, to train farmers, and to provide assistance to farmers for business planning and 
access to credit and markets.  
8. The project will directly benefit approximately 51, 713 people , of which 23,788  women throughout the seven target 
municipalities; an additional 240, 117 inhabitants of the target areas will benefit indirectly from increased food security from 
enhanced and more stable production, improved  hydrological regulation, and increased opportunities for employment in 
agricultural tasks and value addition.


---
*Page 9*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 64  
 
 4  
9 Corporación Andina de Fomento, 2014. Índice de vulnerabilidad y adaptación al cambio climático en la región de América Lat ina y el Caribe  
10 Second National Communication to the UNFCCC. 2015. Havana: Republic of Cuba  https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/cubnc2.pdf  
11 Further information on observed climate changes in Cuba are provided in Appendix 4 of this document:  Somoza J., De la Colina  A.: Estudio de Linea 
Base de Adaptación y Vulnerabilidad para el Proyecto IRES FAO. La Habana, Cuba, 2018. (Appendix  4)   
12 Planos Gutiérrez, E.O., Rivero Vega, R., Guevara Velazco, V., 2012. Impacto del Cambio Climático y Medidas de Adaptación en C uba. La Habana: Cuba 
/ Climate Change Impact and Adaptation Measures in Cuba. Havana: Cuba.  
13 Lapinel, B., Rivero, R.E., Cutié, V., Rivero, R.R., Varela, N., 1993. Sistema  Nacional de Vigilancia de la Sequía: Análisis del Periodo  1931 -1990 (Informe 
Técnico). Instituto de Meteorología, La Habana, CUBA.  
 
 PROJECT INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate rationale and con text  
9. Cuba is a Small Island Developing State (SIDS), consisting of the island of Cuba, the Isle of Youth and more than 1,600 islan ds, 
islets and cays, which altogether cover  a surface area of 110,922 km2. The country is divided into Western, Central and 
Easte rn regions, as shown in Figure 1 of the Feasibility Study (FS), comprised of 116 provinces and 168 municipalities.  
 
10. According to the Vulnerability and Climate Change Adaptation Index in the Latin America and Caribbean R egion, Cuba is 
classified as a “high risk” country  in terms of its vulnerability to the effects of climate change9. Observations indicate  that 
the country's climate has been changing, and studies carried out under the Second National Communication to the UNFCCC  
(2015)10 describe  the occurrence of: i) increases in temperature; ii) increasingly erratic seasonal rains; iii) greater frequency 
of long and severe droughts; iv) increased frequency and severity of cyclonic activity; and v)  moderate and strong coastal 
floods11:  
 
11. Temperature rise : The surface air temperature has increased by 0.9°C since the middle of last century, conditioned by the 
increase of the average minimum temperature by 1.9°C, thereby producing a decrease in the daytime temperature oscillation 
(see Figure 3 in the FS). Th e rise in temperatures in the Central Region is even higher than the national average, at an 
incremental rate of 1.6% per year during the last 35 years.   
 
12. Changes in precipitation patterns : There has been  a slight increase in positive precipitation anomalies since the late 1970s 
with an increase in rainfall during the rainy s eason (from November to April)12. 
 
13. Although  the time series of annual precipitation observations  for Cuba during 1961 -2007 does not sho w a statistically 
significant trend, there has been a slight but steady increase in positive anomalies since the end of the 1970s and especiall y 
since the 1990s . In general, the slight increase in annual values is fundamentally conditioned by the variati ons that occurred 
during the dry season.  
 
14. Table 1 (Appendix  2.4 of the FS) also shows that in the dry season  (corresponding to November -April), negative average 
values predominate in the period 1961 -1979 . The tendency in the following decades is towards positive values with a 
reduction of the range of variation of the magnitude means and an increase in extreme positive anomalies. Consequently, 
there is a change in the mean values and in the variance in the period between 1980 and 2007, in comp arison to the period 
1961- 1979, which in the case of the Central Region is - 0.81 in the period 1961 - 1979, to 0.05 in the period 1961- 2007. In the 
Eastern Region, we can also see a tendency of increased average values of positive anomalies, particularly in the period 1980-2007 ( -0.44 to - 0.15), also with a reduction in the variation of the mean values.  
 
15. Regarding the rainy season, the distribution of precipitation anomalies reveals a change in average values during recent 
decades, but contrary to the tren d described for the non- rainy period, in this case there is a tendency for  negative anomalies.  
In the rainy months,  despite the predominance of negative anomalies in recent years, there has been a slight upward trend, 
which has been observed since the mid -1970s to the present, particularly with the increase in the magnitude of positive 
anomalies in the central region ( see Appendix 2 .4 of the FS, Table 1).  This behavior implies reduction of the range of variation 
of the average values of rainfall, particularly in the Eastern Region. Most notable in this rainy period is the sharp decrease in the average values and variati on in the  Eastern Region. The reduction of accumulated rainfall in the Eastern Region is largely 
due to the more frequent occurrence of meteorological drought processes in recent years in that region.  
Extreme events  
16. Droughts:   There has been an increase in drought events in the period 1961 -1990 when compared  to 1931- 196013 .  In the 
1990s, a notably  intense drought occurred in the Caribbean Basin, Central America, Mexico and the Southeast ern United


---
*Page 10*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 64  
 
 5  
14 Somoza J., De la Colina A.: Estudio de Linea Base de Adaptación y Vulnerabilidad para el Proyecto IRES FAO. La Habana, Cuba, 2018. (Appendix 4)  
15 As severe tropical storms are included tornadoes, hailstorms, waterspouts and linear winds above 90 km / h. Th e cyclonic season goes from June 1 to 
November 30, in which the September -October bimester is the most affected and October the most dangerous month, in which most of the intense 
hurricanes have been reported.  
16 It includes, Injured, Affected and Homeless estimates.  
17 EM-DAT: The Emergency Events Database -  Universite catholique de Louvain (UCL) -  CRED, D. Guha -Sapir - www.emdat.be, Brussels, Belgium  
18 EM-DAT: The Emergency Events Database -  Universite catholique de Louvain (UCL) -  CRED, D. Guha -Sapir - http://www.emdat.be/ , Brussels, Belgium  
19 It includes, Injured, Affected and Homeless estimates.  
20 Liu, 2011; Taylor R. et al., 2013.  
21 EM-DAT: The Emergency Events Database -  Universite catholique de Louvain (UCL) -  CRED , D. Guha -Sapir - www.emdat.be, Brussels, Belgium  
22 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/cuba/climate -data -projections?variable=p r 
23 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/cuba/climate -data -projections?variable=pr  
 States (from April to July 1998 ), generated under the influence of the 1997 -1998  ENSO . The event affected the entire Cuban 
archipelago and in particular the municipalities of the Eastern Region. Starting in 2000, there have been more frequent and 
severe drought periods, especially in the Eastern Region and in some municipalities in the Central Region, which ha ve 
extended to almost the entire country in the years 2003 -2005. In 2004- 2005 a severe drought (catalogu ed as the most critical 
event for Cuba in the last 100 years) threatened the livelihoods of more than two  million people (17% of the entire 
population) by causing agricultural losses  and livestock death, and facilitating the invasion and spread of  alien sp ecies such 
as Dicostrachys cin erea (marabú  or sicklebush )14. 
  
17. Hurricanes:  Tropical cyclones, severe local storms and hurricanes are the meteorological phenomena that are associated 
with the greatest risk of disasters15. The frequency of such events in Cuba varies from zero to four annually. On average, 
Cuba is affected by one tropical cyclone per year and one hurricane every two years. The occurrence of these events is more 
frequent in the Western -Central Region of the country. Between 2005 and 2017, Cuba was affected by 11 hurricanes. Two 
tropical cyclones occurred in 2005, af fecting16 2,600,000 people (approximately 22% of the total population) causing damage 
equivalent to USD 2,100,000. The impact of storms occurring from 2007 to 2017 affected 1,090,053 people and caused USD 
6,672,00017 in damages.  From 1980 to 2000, Cuba was a ffected by 10 tropical cyclones and over the period of 2001 to 2018, 
the occurrence of such phenomena doubled (19 tropical cyclones affected Cuba from 2001 -2018)18. Two tropical cyclones 
occurred in 2005, affecting19 2,600,000 people (approximately 22% of the total population) causing damage equivalent to 
USD 2,100,000. In recent years, the province of Las Tunas (Eastern Region) has been affected by four tropical storms (See Annex 2, Table 2, p.14). They bring massive  amounts of rainfall which, given soil compaction and the presence of hardpans, 
are unable to penetrate the soil to recharge groundwater, since dramatic increases in precipitation intensity may exceed soil  
infiltration capacities
20. 
  
18. Floods : Cuba suffers from moderate and strong coastal flood ing caused by sea water intrusion or intense rains . In the period 
from 1996 to 2016, 12 flood events occurred affecting 134,957 people21. 
 
Climate projections  
 Temperature  
19. An increase in temperature as expected in national climatic scenarios signifies that temperature values in 2050 would 
represent mean temperatures of 29oC in the Central Region and 30oC in the Eastern Region; while the average maximum 
temperature values would be 35 and 36oC respectively. Trends in temperature variables are expected to increase (Appendix  
2 of the Feasibility Study (FS), Figures 3, 5- a, 5-b), consistent with national trends. CMIP5 projections indicate that by 2050 
the mean annual temperature will rise by 1.6°C, the total annual hot days of temperature above 35°C will rise by 20.8 days 
(RCP 8.5, High Emission)22 
 
 Precipitation  
20. National rainfall scenarios foresee drastic reductions for 2050- 2100, between 15 and 63% of the current averages. As such, 
according to this scenario, accumulated annual rainfall would  hover between 975 -481 millimeters in the Central Region and 
750- 370 millimeters in the Eastern Region, lea ding to a situation of water crisis with repercussions on crop yields and human 
health.  CMIP5 project ions indicate that the mean annual precipitation will fall by - 48.7mm (RCP 8.5, High Emission)23 
 
21. Of even  greater  concern are the anticipated changes in precipitation intensity. Anomalies in precipitation patterns have 
increased significantly (see  FS Figure 7-b) for the Eastern Region (Station Las Tunas). A rise in mean annual precipitation is


---
*Page 11*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 64  
 
 6  
24 Rivero R et al (2010) in SNC Cuba (2015). In Somoza J. De la Colina A., 2018  
25 Municipal Statistical Data. Centella Artola et al (2006). In Somoza J. De la Colina A., 2018  
26 Centella A, B. Lapinel, O. Solano, R. Vázquez, C. Fonseca, V. Cutié, R. Baéz, S. González, J. Sille, P. Rosario y L. Duarte ( 2006). La sequía meteorológica y 
agrícola en la República de Cuba y la República Dominicana. Tomo I, 172 pp,  
27 Centella A, B. Lapi nel, O. Solano, R. Vázquez, C. Fonseca, V. Cutié, R. Baéz, S. González, J. Sille, P. Rosario y L. Duarte (2006). La sequía me teorológica y 
agrícola en la República de Cuba y la República Dominicana. Tomo I, 172 pp,  caused by cyclones and hurricanes, whose intensity  has increase d significantly: during the last decade, 11 hurricanes have 
struck Cuba.  
Agricultural drought  
22. Future climate change patterns will, therefore, affect agricultural production, particularly of staple crops, negatively 
impacting the livelihoods of farm households and the general availability of agricultural products, ultimately putting food 
security at  risk. Projected net primary agricultural productivity and biomass potential density will decline; estimated yield 
reductions under projected climate scenarios show that for 65% of 29 crops studied, potential yields will suffer reductions  
from 12% (beans, rice ), 16% ( manioc) to as much as 48% (potatoes) ( FS, Table 524,25,  Estimated yields reductions for selected 
agricultural crops for the years 2030, 2050 and 2100 under climate change scenarios ). 
 
23. Changes in the patterns of rainfall and its reduction , as well as expected increases in evaporation, have a significant impact 
on soil moisture and agricultural droughts. Data extracted from the map in Figure 1 , below, show that 78 municipalities, 
representing an area of 50,907 km2 and about 46% of the national territory, are affected most by this phenomenon in terms 
of intense values of agricultural drought during more than 50 days a year26 . (FS, Table 3) . Among these are Corralillo, 
Quemado de Güines and Santo Domingo in Las Villa s province; Los Arabos in Matanzas province (Central Region); and 
Amancio Rodríguez, Colombia and Jobabo in Las Tunas province (Eastern Region).  
Figure 1: Cuban municipalities affected by agricultural droughts  
 
Source: Adapt ed from information on agricultural droughts in Centella A. et al. (2006)27 
 
24. In both the Central and Eastern regions, the drought processes have favored the expansion of invasive plants better adapted 
to the scarcity of water and the aridity of the soils. The se areas are also characterized by the exodus of the population and 
abandonment of rural areas.  
Flooding  
25. The increased  occurrence over  the last three decades of moderate and strong coastal flood ing is closely related to the passage 
of cyclones of different categories and the entry of cold fronts ; consequently , the areas facing the greatest dangers are


---
*Page 12*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 64  
 
 7 located in low -lying areas, areas with flat relief, areas near rivers or channels or with poor drai nage and, locations where 
surface runoff can exceed  the water infiltration capacity of the soil. The north coast of the Central Region, in particular the 
municipalities of Corralillo and Quemado de Guiñes, and the south coast of the Jobabo, Amancio and Col ombia municipalities 
are among the territories  affected periodically by flooding, which has worsened with meteorological events whose impacts 
have increased in these territories in the last 30 years (see FS, Figure 11 ). 
26. Based on the  trend analysis of increas ed vulnerability to climate change based on historical  records and climate models, the 
Government of Cuba has concluded that the entire archipelago is at increasing risk. As a consequence, in 2017, the Council 
of Ministers approved “ Tarea Vida”, the  Cuban State Plan to address climate change. The Plan proposes five Strategic Actions 
and eleven more immediate Tasks based on a multidisciplinary analysis of vulnerability and other factors, with highest 
priority given to 73 of Cuba’s 168 municipalities ( 63 in coastal areas and 10 inland). Of the five Strategic Actions, two directly 
address the agricultural sector:  
A) Adap tation of  agricultural activities, particularly those with the greatest impact on the country's food security, to changes 
in land use as a consequence of drought and other climate change impacts . 
B) Diversif ication of  crops, improve ment in  soil conditions, introduction  and develop ment of varieties resistant to new 
temperature scenarios.  
The eleven  immediate Tasks  identified in Tarea Vida  include the following five , linked to /of relevance to the proposed porject : 
• identification and implemen tation of activities to adapt to climate change and reduce vulnerability particularly for priority 
areas with threats to population and food security and recovery of mangroves and other protective ecosystems (#1);  
• ensuring the availability and efficient u se of water in adapting to drought, from the application of technologies for 
conservation (including metering for efficiency) and the satisfaction of local demands to improve and maintain  hydraulic 
infrastructure (#4);  
• reforestation for maximum protection of soils and water in quantity and quality, including mangrove recovery, prioritizing 
reservoirs, channels and hydro -regulatory boundaries of watersheds and basins (#5) ; 
• implementing and monitoring sectoral climate change adaptation and mitigation measures  in programs, plans and projects 
related to food security, renewable energy, energy efficiency, regional and urban planning, fisheries, agricultural activitie s, 
and integrated management of forests (#8) ; 
• raising awareness  of risk and increasing knowledge a nd participation of the entire population in addressing and adapting to 
climate change (#10) . 
 
27. This strategy is consonant with Cuban national policies, programs and legislation encompassing climate adaptation and 
mitigation priorities, particularly Cuba’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) . Chiefly NDC priority 3:  Incorporating the 
adaptation dimension into programs, plans and projects related to food production, integrated water management, land 
management, forestry, fisheries, to urism and health is particularly linked to the proposed project . 
 
28. Although it considers the entire country to be at risk from climate impacts, and has prioritized 73 municipalities as highest  
priority, the GoC  has identified two specific areas of the country for immediate action encompassing four municipalities in 
Las Tu nas province (Jobabo, Amancio, Colombia) in the Eastern Region and three in Villa Clara/Matanzas  provinces (Los 
Arabos, Quemado de Guines, Coralillo, Santo Domingo) (Figure 2 ) in the Central Region . These are the two  target areas for 
this project.  
 
29. The selected municipalities of  Corralillo, Quemado de Güines and Santo Domingo in Las Villas  province and Los Arabos in 
Matanzas province (Central Region); and Amancio Rodríguez, Colombia and Jobabo in Las Tunas province (Eastern Region)  
are a mong the municipalities most affected by agricultural drought in Cuba .  Also, the municipalities of Corra lillo and 
Quemado de Guiñes  in the Central Region , and the south coast of the Jobabo, Amancio and Colombia municipalities in the 
Eastern Region are among the territories most affected by periodic flooding worsened by climate -driven meteorological  
events wh ose impacts have increased in these territories in the last 30 years (see Appendix 2 of the FS, Figure 1 1).


---
*Page 13*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 64  
 
 8  
28 The Consejos Populares (People’s Councils) cover specific neighborhoods or territories within a municipality ; they  represent the 
population in this area and act, at the same time as a link to  municipal, provincial and national instiutions and bodies.  
29 The A2 scenario family is based on a high population growth scenario of 15 billion by 2100 . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Emissions Scenario. https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/sre s-en.pdf   
 
Figure 2 – Project areas  
 
30. More than one third of soils in  the two project target areas are rated as having medium to high vulnerability to temperature 
rise, precipitation anomalies and drought ( Appendix 4 , Table 18 and Figure 20). Eleven per cent (57,235 ha) of soils in the 
target areas are at very high risk of desertification and degradation, including 11,414 ha that are cur rently under pasture. 
Only a tenth of the area in the two target regions is forested, three times less than the overall national forest cover of 31.2%. 
An estimated 90% of the 14,505 ha of currently idle land is infested with marabú ( Appendi x 2, Figure 27). In stakeholder 
consultations and discussions with the local population it was found that  28 of the project areas’ 55 “consejos populares” 
(CPs)28 considered themseleves to be ‘vulnerable ’ or ‘very vulnerable ’ to the impacts of climate change ( Appendix  2.4, Table s 
37- 50).  
 
31. Water supply from 21 surface watersheds as well as 30 groundwater aquifers will be affected significantly by climate change  
impacts  on rainfall variability and seal level rise in the target  areas: the National Institute for Water Resources (INRH) predicts 
a reduction of 17% in 2050 and up to 52% by 2100, from 835 to 695 and 398 million m3 respectivel y (Scenario A2, IPCC)29. 
Villa Clara/Matanzas  will be the most affected since the water baseline there is already relatively low: only 66 and 90 hm3 
respectively ( Appendix 4, Table 27). Meanwhile, the reservoirs in Las Tunas  monitored by INRH over  the past 34 years had 
volumetric  levels below 50% of nominal volume in 26 years  (See A ppendix  2.4, p.10 and p. 81). The study carried out in the 
eastern area of the PIA for a period of 34 years showed that only in 8 of the 34 years  (70s -2000s) , the average volumes have 
behaved close to the nominal volumes, the other years have been below 50% of filling, evidencing that the precipitation 
parameters for which these dams have been designed have had changes in their behavior.   
 
32. The Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) for Las Tunas  (Appendix  2.2 of the FS , Figure 8 -a) shows that the accumulated 
water balance during the dry season reflects more frequent and more extreme droughts. In contrast, during the rainy season, 
water balance deficits have increased steadily, putting crops under significant wa ter stress. Severe recurring droughts (years 
2004, 2008, 2009) and a diminishing water balance have been observed in Cuba´s Eastern Region ( which includes  Las Tunas )


---
*Page 14*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 64  
 
 9  
30 Somoza J., De la Colina A.: Estudio de Linea Base de Adaptación y Vulnerabilidad para el Proyecto IRES FAO. La Habana, Cuba, 2018.  
31 See FS paragraph 224  during the last decades. The region is becoming more arid, with significant reduction s in relative humidity ( Appendix  2 of the 
FS, Figure 8-b). This, in synergy with farmers’ current  coping strategies, has led to a steady reduction of the area covered 
with agricultural crops and pastures, making them more susceptible  to invasion by marabú ( Dich rostachys cynerea).  
Climate Change Impact  Villa Clara/Matanzas  Las Tunas  
Temperature rise (A ppendix  4 of 
the FS ) Incre ase of 1.6% per year during the 
last 35 years with  the average 
minimum temperature increasing by 
at least 0.9 ⁰C  The average minimum 
temperature has increased by at 
least 0.8 ⁰C since the 1970s  
Rainfall  change (A ppendix  4) Drought affects 41% of the target 
area.  Drought affects 37% of the target 
area. Four hurricanes in Las Tunas 
in last 10 yrs.  
Area of CC-enabled invasive 
species: Marabú, ( Dichrostachys 
cynerea; Appendix  6) in Province  75,398 ha  
 215,387 ha  
 
 
33. As climate becomes dryer , soil degradation accelerates and farmers are forced to abandon their land ( Appendix 4  of the FS , 
Tables 24, 46 and 48 ). Subsequently, a n aggressive, non -native  invasive species, marabu, is able to establish itself and 
thoroughly colonize and dominate vegetative regrowth on the abandoned lands. Large areas of the project target 
municipalities ( Appendix  2 of the FS, Figure  27) are now infested with  marabu , and expansion to other areas continues to 
occur . Currently, 75,398 ha in Villa Clara/Matanzas  (Central Region) and 215,387 ha in Las Tunas  (Eastern Region) are covered 
with dense, impenetrable thickets of these thorny bushes. There is a direct, positive correlation between increasing climate 
change and the increase in infestation  in these areas .30,31 
 
Complementarity with other relevant land -use and climate financing initiatives   
34. The project builds on previous and existing projects related to climate change adaptation and sustainable food production, 
including the following (for further detail, please see Annex 18 of the Funding Proposal: Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation repo rt for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot Project ):  
- Coastal Adaptation to Climate Change in Cuba through Ecosystem Based Adaptation (UNDP/GCF in preparation): This 
Project integrates 3 lines of action for effective climate adaptation of coastal areas: i) strengthening existing ecosystem 
structure (Ecosystem Based Adaptation-  EBA), ii) building capacity at community and local government levels for EBA 
management and iii) mainstreaming adaptation to climate change (CC) within territorial in stitutions responsible for 
coastal management
5. This project will enable GoC’s implementation of the principal elements of the recently approved 
National Programme for Adaptation to Climate Change (Tarea Vida). It will do so by responding to the CC -related  threats 
affecting Cuban coastal communities that have prioritized as the most vulnerable population to CC, mainly sea level rise 
and increase intensity of hurricanes. The project will directly benefit 490,773 people and indirectly 1,285,322 people in 20 coastal municipalities by increasing the resiliency of coastal landscapes and communities to CC. It will facilitate a shift 
in coastal adaptation from a traditional hard risk management and reactive strategies to a preventive approach based 
on maximising th e natural infrastructure of Cuban coastal zones and their management.  
- Enhancing the Prevention, Control and Management of Invasive Alien Species in Vulnerable Ecosystems  (UNDP/GEF) : 
This project resulted in a set of good practices, monitoring protocols an d methodologies for managing IAS in Cuba. In 
the GCF project, the good practices to stop the spread and propagation of IAS are being considered as an input. Additionally, the monitoring protocols for managing and eradicating Marabú will be utilized during GCF’s project 
implementation, and have been a basis for project design. Finally, the methodologies to apply IAS management plans 
have been utilized for the developing of the eight modules, and will continue to be used during project implementation. 
 
- Support for the strengthening of the socio -productive innovation system of the livestock sector in Cuba. 
Demonstration actions in Las Tunas (FAO): This project is aimed at supporting the reorganization of the dairy chain into 
sustainable production and efficient marketing, from the creation of economic incentives and efficient distribution and 
consumption to fulfilling the basic needs of the most vul nerable population. The sustainable production of milk and beef 
is aimed by introducing a techno -economic -productive and efficient model in the selected demonstration areas, with


---
*Page 15*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 64  
 
 10 emphasis on the strengthening of capacities with a gender perspective and bri nging the technical and research 
knowledge to the countryside. This Project has served as the  basis for the development of sustainable livestock 
management in the modules SILSOM and SILEC of the  proposed  GCF Project, and especially for the case of Las Tuna s 
region, w ith its characteristics of dr ought and salinity.  
- Introduction of New Farming Methods for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biodiversity, including Plant and 
Animal Genetic Resources, in Production Landscapes in Selected Areas of Cuba (GEF ): This project will support a 
landscape production strategy agreed by stakeholders, previously identified and mapped, with a particular attention to 
gender and youth, applying the Save and Grow approach (FAO). The role of stakeholders in the conservation and use of 
agrobiodiversity will be analyzed and classified per value chain (agrobiodiversity food products). It will also promote the 
adoption of sustainable agricultural intensification practices (Save and Grow) at farm level. It  will also promote capaci ty 
development for rural communities, cooperatives and protected areas managers on management, incentives and best 
practices/technologies, with a gender focus. This will include alternatives such agro -forestry and silvo -pastoral systems, 
conservation agriculture, and sustainable forest management. The cooperatives (mainly related to the conservation and 
use of priority species) will be strengthened by creating experimental pilot areas and technical services provided for the 
sustainable management of agricul tural production. The Project is expected to provide an important contribution to 
capacity building for planning, budgeting and enforcing the management of productive landscapes and further scaling -
up from lessons learned in the project intervention areas.  The synergies with GCF project will be multiple, as both will 
be working in sustainable agricultural intensification practices in parallel, giving space for exchange of information and 
lessons learned.  
- Environmental basis for local food production (BASAL ) (EU): The project builds up on past and on- going experiences 
with a view to systematize the lessons learned and expand the effective agro ecological, low- input and sustainable 
practices, through the reconciliation of three poles, namely the applied and m odel -based science, the extension 
networks and the farmers. The project objective is to reach the adequate decision -making level and the widest number 
of food producers, on the basis of the experiences acquired to the modernization of local agriculture. This project has 
set the environmental basis for local food production. This environmental basis (more specifically: adaptation measures 
for confronting climate change that consider the specific needs of women and men and the differentiated impacts of 
climat e change in both groups, with an emphasis on local food production; the use of more resistant species for the 
purposes of CC; measures for the saving, use and capture of water; of soil improvement and conservation; good 
agroforestry practices and silvopast oral system), as well as the resilience and adaptation measures proposed have been 
incorporated  by the GCF project, for the planning of the Modules. The experience gained during the BASAL project on 
training for local farmers through the Farmer Field Schoo ls will be incorporated  by IRES, to be applied in the Farmer Field 
Schools (FFS) that will be implemented in the seven municipalities.  
- Project to Strengthen Agro -environmental Policies in Latin American and Caribbean Countries through Dialogue and 
Exchange of National Experiences (FAO): This project produced a set of tools aimed at promoting dialogue and 
knowledge exchange among the actor s involved in the formulation and implementation of policies and strategies for 
rural development and natural resource management. The objective being to move towards an agro- environmental 
policy that goes hand in hand with e conomic and development policie s, through actions of remediation, mitigation and 
adaptation, as indispensable alternatives for the sustainable development of the country. The project developed a 
consultative process involving around 30 governmental and civil society institutions in gene ral, and about 375 people 
among Cuban specialists, researchers, farmers, students, innovators, extension Agents and decision- makers from 13 
provinces. Some of the actors that were consulted in this project were also part of the formulation and design of th e 
proposed  GCF FP (especially the Direction of Science, Technology and the Environment; the National Company for Flora 
and Fauna Protection; and some Research Institutes, such as the Research Institute of Tropical Agriculture “Alejandro 
de Humboldt” (INIFA T)). Additionally, the set of tools and indicators that were produced with this agro -environmental 
policy project will also be utilized as a basis to build the indicators for the Landscape Resilience Fund.  
- Enhancing Cuba's institutional and technical capac ities in the agriculture, forestry and other land -use sector for 
enhanced transparency under the Paris Agreement. (GCP/CUB/020/CBT) (GEF) : The main objective of the project is to 
improve monitoring and planning systems for the agricultural sector’s activit ies to adapt to the impacts of climate change 
and address the factors that affect the sector’s anthropogenic GHG emissions in order to promote sustainable 
development in Cuba. It is an enabling project, that aims to enhance institutional and technical capa cities in the country 
to report mitigation and adaptation actions in compliance with the Enhanced Transparency Framework (ETF), and to 
integrate knowledge and data and into policy and decision -making. All of these Outcomes will take place in the


---
*Page 16*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 64  
 
 11 agricultur e, forestry and other land -use sector. The objectives of this project align directly with the Activity 8 of the 
National Plan Tarea Vida, and also with the output 3 of GCF IRES Cuba Project. More specifically, the methodologies and 
results of the GEF project will be applied to strengthen the institutional capacities to operate and monitor the Landscape 
Resilience Fund created by the IRES Cuba project. Synergies from both projects are increased by the fact that both have 
been designed, and will have active p articipation of the same national institutions, such as the Ministry of Science, 
Technology and Environment (CITMA) and the Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG).  
B.2. Theory of change  
35. The project’s Theory of Change  starts with recognition of Cuba’s increasing vulnerability to CC due to its geographic location 
in a hurricane -prone region, increasing hurricane strength, increasing variability in rainfall (periodicity, timing and intensity), 
leading to flooding, land d egradation from soil erosion and drought and dry decads  (10-day dry periods within the historic 
pattern of rainy seasons), as well as sea -level rise leading to salinization of coastal groundwater and soils and increasing 
damage to coastal infrastructure an d vegetation. While vulnerability varies somewhat across the island as a result of 
heterogeneous topography, vegetative cover, meteorological patterns, etc., the entire country is correctly considered 
vulnerable or highly vulnerable to climate change, part icularly rural areas and  populations (please see section B.1 Climate 
Rationale and Context, above).  
 
36. Agroecosystems , as currently configured,  degrade rapidly, losing productivity and sustainability due to maladaptive land 
preparation, cultivation and irrigation techniques for monocultures leading to exposed soils, rapid runoff, infestation by invasive species –  particularly marabu -  soil erosion and sediment transport to coastal areas, salinization and increased risk 
of flooding and loss of life and propert y. This business -as-usual scenario increases producer vulnerability to extreme weather 
events and climate variability and reduces the capacity of the country to maintain its food security.  
 
37. Effective climate change  adaptation in this context requires clima te-resilient production systems that can withstand or 
mitigate stresses and shocks from rainfall variability and precipitation extremes  i.e. either too much (e.g. dramatic torrential 
downpours from hurricanes and tropical storms) or too little (periodic dr oughts , or lengthy dry periods  in the growing 
season ). The overarching framework for effective adaptation then is one of climate- resilient production systems aimed at 
maintaining/enhancing hydrological regulation as a primary ecosystem service in the production landscape. As such, the 
priority  management objectives for resilient agroecological landscapes in Cuba are to reduce rainfall impact on soil, slow 
water flow across it, and enhance infiltration into and through the soil profile, all the while maintai ning or enhancing 
production for food security, well -being and livelihoods. Reduced impact and velocity of flow decrease erosion, while 
improved water infiltration into the soil increases groundwater –  vital for irrigation during drought and, in coastal ar eas, a 
factor against saltwater intrusion.   
 
38. As a consequence, m anagement to enhance the climate -resilience of agroecosystems focuses on establishing and managing 
the vegetative cover appropriate to a strategy of both optimizing ecosystem function and meeting sustainable production 
and food security needs, while minimizing GHG emissions. As such, in C uba, climate -resilient production systems for different 
areas of the production landscape will combine trees and/or shrubs with crops and livestock. These  agroforestry and 
silvopastoral systems diversify production, thereby reducing risk to farmers and livestock producers from climate extremes.  
The vulnerability of production landscapes to climate change  is reduced w ith widespread adoption and implementation of 
climate -adapte d, resilience -enhancing agroforestry and silvopastoral  systems.   
 
39. To decrease vulnerability and enhance resilience of farmers to climate- driven impacts such as drought and rainfall variability  
(including torrential downpours) , Cuba aims  to strengthen ecos ystem function aimed primarily at water regulation to 
maintain and enhance agricultural production. This includes reforestation of key areas less suitable for agriculture to creat e 
close -to-nature planted forests (CNPFs) and assisted natural regeneration o f degraded forests and logged -over areas.  It is 
important to note that this strategy of integrating trees and bushes into the production landscape, through the proposed 
agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems, also results in generation of signifi cant mitigation benefits over and above 
the current baseline values of current maladaptive production systems and degraded and abandoned areas subject to invasion by marabu.  
 
40. The Cuban government has adopted a three -phase strategic approach to enhancing the resilience of agricultural landscapes 
to increasing climate change  while generating mitigation benefits: a first phase of research and piloting of resilience -
enhancing agricultural production systems ; a second of mesoscale replication based on lessons le arned and knowledge from 
phase one; and a third of upscaling countrywide based on lessons, capacities, financial mechanisms and enabling policies 
resulting from phase two implementation.


---
*Page 17*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 64  
 
 12  
32 A “module” is a specific agroforestry, si lvopastoral or forestry system that enhances resilience by optimizing water regulation in the 
production landscape while enhancing agroecosystem productivity and sustainability; a “module” comprises  the structure of the 
system (trees, bushes, row crops, et c.), the species involved (e.g. mango, maize, beans, etc.), the inputs and land preparation needs 
(e.g. marabu clearance, sub -soiling, no -tillage, etc.), crop production methods ( transplan ting, pruning, etc.) and other elements.  
  
41. In a now -concluded first phase, the Ministry of Agriculture supported research into optimal agroforestry systems for the 
wetter and drier areas of Cuba and identified and tested a number of options, leading to the six agroforestry, silvopastoral  
and forest ry “modules”32 proposed here (see Appendix 6 for detailed descriptions ). These modules will be replicated at 
mesoscale in the two representative regions selected for this project located in Las Tunas and Villa Clara/Matanzas  provinces  
(Eastern and Central R egions, respectively) . By implementing these modules at the selected project sites in this, the second 
phase, the project will reduce the climate vulnerability of  approximately 7,728 lower  income producers, enhance climate 
resilience of approximately 35,734 hectares of production  landscapes, increase producers’ and institutional capacities to 
manage climate risk, and generate further detailed knowledge of the performance of these agroforestry systems at scale. 
This will include the corresponding institution al and producer capacit ies required  for a future third phase of out -scaling 
countrywide. This strategy builds on Cuban national policies, programs and legislation encompassing climate adaptation and 
mitigation priorities (including Cuba´s NDCs)  ensuring co herence between  the project proposed here and national objectives.  
 
42. However, there are significant barriers to effectively implementing this strategy for climate adaptation and mitigation. In 
general, institutional staff and producers do possess insufficient awareness and  knowledge of the climate risk reduction 
benefits of  integrated agricultural and landscape management , and they lack the technical skills to manage climate risk by 
applying resilience -enhancing agricultural practices and systems. Existing financial mechanisms available to farmers and 
producers’ organization s do not consider farmers’ adaptation needs nor do they support resilience -enhancing initiatives to 
manage landscape resources for improved ecosystem services. Youth and women are disadvantaged when it comes to 
accessing financial, technical and other  reso urces and training to enable them to address impacts of climate change  on-farm . 
At the same time, Cuban agricultural and forest management institutions have limited access to international finance and 
are therefore unable to ac cess and use  the agricultural , information and communication technologies that would allow them 
to effectively support farmers and producers’ organizations to implement resilient production systems and restore and 
enhance ecosystem services, including carbon sequestration.  
 
43. This seco nd-phase  project will overcome these barriers by focusing on three Fund level Impacts : A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions –  by targeting farmers and producers’ 
associations in areas ex periencing significant drought or other climate -driven impacts; A4.0 improved resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem services –  particularly, improved hydrological regulation as a result of widespread 
implementation of agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry  systems; M4.0 reduced emissions from land use, reforestation, 
reduced deforestation and through sustainable forest management and conservation and enhancement of forest carbon 
stocks – through the use of trees and shrubs in agriculture and li vestock production systems, establishment of close- to-
nature forests and assisted natural regeneration of forest plots.  
 
44. These impacts will be the result of the corresponding Fund level Outcomes : M9.0 improved management of land or forest 
areas contributin g to emissions reductions –  corresponding to i ncreased CC -resilient production landscapes through 
investment in innovative agroforestry and forestry systems, as well as in  close- to-nature planted forests; A7.0 strengthened 
adaptive capacity and reduced ex posure to climate risks –  from training producers and institutional staff and equipping them 
to manage climate risk; and A5.0 strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and 
development – through analysis, discussion a nd potential reform of current policies, and regulatory and planning instruments 
including establishment and operationalization of an explicit funding mechanism –  the Landscape Resilience Fund -  to provide 
resources and incentives to producers to adopt and maintain resilience -enhancing practices and systems.  
 
45. To achieve increased CC -resilient production landscapes through investment in innovative agroforestry and forestry systems, 
it will be necessary to strengthen ecosystem services of landscapes that have been infested with marabu ( Dichrostachys 
cinerea), a non -native invasive woody bush species that dominates other plant species and damages or displaces crops and 
livestock  (Appendix 2 of the FS) . The spread of marabu is driven by decreasing and more errat ic rainfall resulting from CC and 
enabled by maladaptive farmer practice; as marabu invades agricultural and pasture land, farmers struggle to cope with it without the tools and equipment this requires. This project will support farmers and producers’ asso ciations to eradicate 
marabu from agricultural landscapes and replace it with climate resilience -enhancing agroforestry, silvopastoral  or forestry 
systems selected from the six tested options. These will be established and implemented by producers receivin g technical


---
*Page 18*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 64  
 
 13  
33 See Farmer Field Schools description under Activity 2.2 . support and instruction from specialized trainers of the Ministry of Agriculture to be trained by this project. Producers’ 
adaptive capacities will be strengthened through Farmer Field Schools33, farmer -to-farmer exchanges, and specialized 
train ing.  The efficiency and effectiveness of institutional and regulatory systems to assist farmers to build the resilience of 
their agroecosystems will be enhanced through awareness and technical training in regard to ecosystem services and 
agroforestry syst ems, farm enterprise planning and value chain development to generate the revenue farmers require to 
continually invest in resilience -enhancing practices and equipment, and improved monitoring and evaluation instruments 
and technologies. Finally, after com bining the Forestry Development Fund and Soil Conservation Fund, the project will 
support the development and operationalization of a Landscape Resilience Fund, to be financed from GoC fiscal resources on an annual basis, which will provide a mechanism for  financial support in a third phase for countrywide out -scaling of 
lessons learned. The project proposed here upscales a proven approach based on research and piloting of agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry modules in- country; the knowledge, skills, capacities and financial mechanism resulting from this 
second phase will provide the foundation for future countrywide  upscaling.  
 
46. The Project aim s at shift ing the paradigm of agricultural policy and programs from production maximization to 
implementation of CC -resilient production systems that enhance ecosystem services of production landscapes through 
agroforestry systems, silvopastoral systems, reforestation and assisted natural regeneration for improved water security and 
regulation and carbon storage . As presented in the Project Theory of Change, if  policies and regulatory framework s are 
enhanced,  investment opportunities  are created . This - together  with capacity building of farmers and technical support for 
the implementation of i nnovative agroforestry and silvopastoral systems, reforestation with close -to-nature planted forests 
(CTNPFs) and assisted natural forest regeneration – will result in a  strenghtened institutional and regulatory system that 
support s climate -responsive planning and development , improved management of land and  forest areas contributing to 
emissions reductions  and improved ecosystem services , and strengthened adaptive capaci ty and reduced exposure to 
climate risks . 
 
The following diagram illustrates this Theory of Change:  
 
 
*  Impacts and outcomes corresponding to GCF Performance measurement framework .


---
*Page 19*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 64  
 
 14  
34 See Appendi ces 2.1, 2.4 and 2.5 of  the Feasibility Study.  
35 Women and men have equal access to information and opportunities to participate in and benefit from the project, there are no educational gaps 
between women and men that prevent access to understanding and access to project information Most of the beneficiaries belong  to cooperatives that 
have an internal government system that obliges them to discuss and report on project issues in member assemblies, decisions are taken collectively, 
and participation follows voluntary principles. This process has already occurred in its initial stage, and should be ratifie d during the implementation of 
the project.  The project will seek to develop a gender -sensi tive communication strategy or a broad, robust and inclusive information and dissemination 
system that in a special way helps to make visible the successful experiences of men and women in the territories and to redu ce some information gap 
that can be i dentified during implementation . 
 Equal participation of women and men in the project is aspired to. The specific tasks will be determined by the will, aptitudes and aspiration of each 
person.  The project plans to create jobs that traditionally result from w omen's preference such as seedling management and grafting in nurseries of 
forest and fruit species, activities in mini -industries, management of collected milk and quality assessment, as well as in laboratories that will be 
strengthened to ensure essentia l services to support agricultural and livestock production, among others.  It is possible that jobs may also arise for women  
who are traditionally male, and that they feel interest and empowerment to assume them or vice versa.  
Some elements that can be va lued as roles to be played by women in the project can be linked to the recovery of the reproduction of vegetable fibers, 
and the women who live in the settlements can count on sufficient raw material to develop the handicraft, be able to market i t and thus improve their 
quality of life. There would also be potential in improving the capacity and working conditions in a CREE (Entomophagous and Entomopathogenic 
Reproduction Center), in linking them to the breeding of rams, chickens and rabbits, condiment pla nts, as well as medicinal plants to be distributed to 
pharmacies in forest areas or in small mini- industries to favor their use in the processing and conservation of different productions such as tomato, 
cucumber and some fruits such as guava and mango tha t develop well in these municipalities.  
 (Please see further information on the Gender Analysis and Action Plan in Annex 8).  
  
B.3. Project description  
47. The Project’s objective is to increase the climate resilience of agricultural production and ensure food security through 
improved ecosystem services from agroforestry, s ilvopastoral systems, reforestation and assisted natural forest regeneration 
in seven municipalities vulnerable to climate change. Critical ecosystem services will become more CC -resilient, especially 
regulation of water  flows into and through the production landscape , through landscape rehabilitation and management 
that enhance s agro -ecosy stem productivity and sustainability by improving water infiltration rates and reduc ing or 
prevent ing run-off and soil erosion . At the same time,  significant mitigation benefits  will result from the integration of trees 
and bushes into agroforestry and s ilvopastoral systems as well as through reforestation using  close -to-nature planted forests 
and assisted natural regeneration. In proposing the project target regions, the governme nt of Cuba undertook 
a selection process to identify those areas that have been  most vulnerable to climate change impacts but 
also possessed  of the greatest potential for impact and the potential to generate lessons useful to a 
subsequent phase of systemat ic upscaling nationwide. This initial geographic selection was refined in 
selecting project beneficiaries34:  
Type  Criteria  Result  
Selection of 
municipalities  in 
the target 
regions  - Municipalities most affected by the impacts of climate change 
based on the increase in average local temperatures and the 
interconnections with extreme hydro -meteorological events, in 
particular hurricanes . This includes prevalence of marabu in crop 
areas.  
- Municipalities with lower average economic income linked to 
impacts of climate change on income -generating activities, e.g. 
agriculture.  
- Municipalities suffering from outmigration due to impacts of 
climate change on livelihoods, including demographic aging  
- Prevalence of non -state agricultural production forms in Pr oject 
intervention Area (PIA) municipalities e.g. cooperatives, 
independent producers’ associations35 
- Comparative advantages from proximity of PIA to principal 
tourism regions and facilities  (market access potential for 
products used by the sector’s hotels and restaurants ) 
These criteria are summarized in  Sections 1.3 and 1.4 of  the Feasibility Study 
with data, maps and indicators . The following 
municipalities were 
selected:  
Las Tunas Province  
Municipalities : Amancio, 
Colombia y Jobabo.  
Villa Clara Province:  
Municipalities:  
Quemados de Güines, 
Corralillo y Santo 
Domingo  
Matanzas Province:   
Municipality:  Los Arabos


---
*Page 20*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 64  
 
 15  
36 The number of household members being considered is 3,2 and the number of farmers is 15,968.  The table below lists modules implemented in each municipality.  Modules were selected for each municipality based on 
agronomic, edaphological, climatic and other factors. Please see Annex 2.6 of the Feasibility Study for further details.  
. 
Table: Modules per municipality (hectares)   
 
Area  Villa Clara - Los Arabos  Sub tota l 
(ha) Area Las Tunas  Sub total  (ha) Total  (ha) 
Los 
Arabos  Santo 
Domingo  Corralillo  Quemado de 
Güines  Jobabo  Colombia  Amancio 
Rodríguez  
C 94 0 79 0 173 1053  61 467 1581  1754  
M
G 724 360 650 510 2244  651 200 0 851 3095  
M
F 510 2000  4757  0 7267  0 0 900 900 8167  
F 227 750 515 0 1492  522 59 456 1037  2529  
S
C 490 150 2465  214 3319  5198  1982  0 7180  10499  
S
L 537 2214  4603  210 7564  0 0 2127  2127  9691  
T 2582  5474  13069  934 22058  7424  2302  3950  13676  35734  
Modules : C: CEDPLA :  Agroforestry system with Cedrela odorata (cedar) intercaled with other forest species and agricultural crops with live perimeter fences ; 
  MG: MAREG:  Establishment of forests through natural regeneration assisted in marabou affected areas ; 
  MF: MARFOM:  Establishment and management of polifunctional forest plantations in zones invaded by marabou;  
  F: FRU AGR:  Agroforestry system with fruit trees, agricultural crops and living fences ; 
  SC: SILLEC :  Silvopastoril system with arbustive leguminous;  
  SL: SILSOM :  Silvopasture with shadow trees and protein Banks;  
  T: Total AREA in hectares  
 
48. The project will direct ly benefit approximately 51,098 smallholders  throughout the seven target municipalities  corresponding 
to the number of households benefiting from the project activities36; an additional 240,117 inhabitants of the target areas 
will benefit indirectly from increased food security from enhanced and more stable production, better hydrological 
regulation , and increased opportunities for employment in agricultural tasks and value addition. Indirect ben eficiaries 
correspond to the total population of the seven municipalities targeted by the project.  Approximately 20% of lands in which 
the Project will be implemented belong to private owners and 80% are lands owned by the Government granted to 
cooperatives under N ational Decree n° 358,  which guarantees the right to freely use the lands for a 20 -year period, 
extendable for another 20 years.  Cooperatives  are voluntary as sociation s of small farmers who have the property or usufruct 
of their respective lands and other means of production. It is a form of agrarian cooperation through which the technical, 
financial and material assistance that the State provides to increase t he production of small farmers and facilitate their 
commercialization is processed and made viable. It has its own legal personality and they respond to their actions with their  
assets.   
49. Project beneficiaries include:  Note that in addition to the 51,098 direct smallholder beneficiaries, a number of other 
stakeholders will also benefit directly from capacity development (primarily training) carried out by the Project.  These are , 
along with the 51,098 direct smallholder beneficiaries (15,968 househo lds):  
a. 51,098 people ( farmers  and their families) (activities 1.1 and 1.2, 2. 2) 
b. 74 machinery operators (activity 1.1)  
c. 68 machinery operators (activity 1.2)  
d. 443 extension serv ice technicians , agricultural technicians , and cooperative leaders/administrators  (activity 2.1)  
e. 30 leaders of local producers’ organizations  (activity 3.3)


---
*Page 21*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 64  
 
 16  
37 As per defined in the funding proposal  
38 Credit and Service Cooperatives, Base Units of Cooperative Production, and Base Enterprise Units  
39 Under this definition are considered: a) Governments representatives from national, provincial and municipality levels, b) extension 
service technicians and agricultural technicians, c) Base Enterprise Units for Integrated Technical Services d) other represe ntatives of 
specialized research institutions.    
 
 
50. The following table includes the stakeholders and the criteria for selection:  
Type of Beneficiary  Selection Criteria  
    
Farmers37  
 
Sub-activities:  
1.1.6, 1.2.6, 2.2.1, 2.2.2 - Farmers most threatened by the impacts of climate change, especially those whose agricultural lands are 
driest and/or most affected by hurricanes and torrential rains.  
- Farmers participating in different cooperative production modalities (Credit and Service Cooperatives, Base 
Units of Cooperative Production, etc.) which will allow them a greater capacity to adapt or assimilate the changes in production that the project will bring about, and are readier to work in groups and more inclined to share knowledge with others.  
- Farmers with different extensions of agricultural land and with different uses of land from the production of grains and vegetables to larger extensions such as cattle farms.  
- Farmers living in communities most affected by out migration.     
- Farmers willing to assimilate new knowledge, with leadership capacity and willing to apply science and technology on their farms and production areas.  
- Farmers who have developed different experimental production models and who are positively  inclined to 
participate in upscaling processes.  
Local Producers’ 
Organizations38  
 
Sub-activities: 3.1.1, 
3.2.2, 3.3.1, 3.3.3  - Geographical proximity of these organizations to the project target areas.  
- Organizations have been and/or will be identified based on alignment between the proposed activities and the 
organizations’ mandates, expertise and/or services delivered.  Note that these determinations have been/will 
be made by MINAG, in consultation with FAO.   
- Organizations must be assessed a s possessing the potential capacity to sustain the implementation of the new 
productive modules as a viable enterprise beyond the duration of the project.  
- Taken into account the singularities of the economics conditions in Cuba Organizations  must have fina ncial 
independence to manage their financial resources including bank accounts to deposit their incomes.    
- Identified organizations will be invited to nominate staff to participate in the activities based on the alignment 
between the contents of the propos ed activity (e.g. technical focus of the training) and the respective 
individuals’ responsibilities and expertise within their organization.   
- Gender balance prioritizing women and young people (over 18 years old according to Cuba regulations)  
Extension service 
technicians, 
agricultural 
technicians, and 
cooperative 
leaders/administrat
ors39 (Professional 
Beneficiaries)  
Sub-activities: 1.1.2, 
1.2.2; 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 
2.1.3; 3.1.1- 3.1.4; 
3.2.1- 3.2.3; 3.3.3f  
 
 - Organizations have been and/or will be identified based on alignment between the proposed activities and 
the organizations’ mandates, political roll, expertise and/or services delivered and territorial representation 
in the project target areas (note that these determinations have been/will be made by the Project Coordination Committee);  
- Identified organizations will be invited to nominate staff to participate in the activities based on the 
alignment between the contents of the proposed activity (e.g. technical focus of the training) and the 
respective individuals’ responsibilities and expertise within their organization


---
*Page 22*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 64  
 
 17  
40 The technical description of each of the modules, as well as t he documentation of the two consultation workshops, can be found in 
Appendices 6 and 10 of the Feasibility Study.  Also, for further information on stakeholders’ engagement process during the project 
formulation, please see Annex 7.  
  
Machinery 
operators  
 
Sub-activities: 1.1.3, 
1.1.4, 1.1.5; 1.2.3, 1.2.4, 1.2.5 - Gender balance prioritizing women and young people (over 18 years old according to Cuba regulations)  
- Licenses and permits in accordance to the Cuban legislation.     
- Minimum of 5 years -experience in operating machinery in agricultural labors.  
- Commitment t o serve in the Producer Organization at least during the project implementation (desirable)  
 
 
Component 1: Climate reslient agricultural systems  
 
Output 1: Increased CC -resilient production landscapes through investment in innovative agroforestry  and silvopastoral  
systems, reforestation with close -to-nature planted forests (CTNPFs) and assisted natural forest regeneration  
51. Agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry principles , methodologies and low -impact modern technolog ies will be applied to 
restore vital ecosystem services for water regulation on 35,734 ha of producti on landscapes across the seven  municipalities 
of the target p roject areas . This will be achieved  by implementing six climate -resilient production modules ( described in 
Appendix 6 of the Feasibility Study)  in seven vulnerable municipalities . These modules have been assessed for their technical, 
financial and social feasibility. They are based on local best practice s, applied research results from national instit utions, and 
thorough assess ments  of their climate resilience , adaptation and mitigation benefits . The modules were presented, discussed 
and adjusted during two consultation workshops with the active participation of farmers  (cooperatives and independent 
producers) , experts and stakeholder s from national, provincial and municipal institutions, as well  associal actors in both 
project areas 40. The implementation of these modules will result in improved water  regulation, decreased soil erosion, 
augmented  soil moisture c ontent , increased  groundwater , and improved root penetration, as well as substantially increased 
carbon storage in soils and biomass. Crop yields will improve , as will the health and well -being  of farmers , by reducing water 
scarcity and food insecurity .  To ensure effective establishment of these modules, it will be necessary to build and  revitalize 
irrigation systems, including small water reservoirs for rainwater .  
52. Land productivity will be reconditioned through the implementation of agroforestry systems, s ilvopastoral and forestry 
systems (Modules 1 -6, described in Appendix 2. 6 of the Feasibility Study). Successful establishment of these systems will 
require installation of small -scale  water reservoirs to ensure adequate and timely supply, specifically, water storage and 
irrigation for agroforestry modules and water storage and livestock drinking facilities for silvopastoral systems. The GCF will 
cover the costs of land preparation, small water reservoir s and provi sion of  equipment , inputs  and training to producers to 
establish the modules but not pay them to implement them.  
53. Further information on water availability, crop water requirements and irrigation requirements is  provided in Appendix 2.6 
of the F easability Study and relates  to: water reservoir volume; monthly potential water harvesting for representative 
reservoirs;  potential irrigation needs, calculated for representative modules, using crop -specific coefficients and considering 
an irrigation efficiency of 90%; and c hange in volume of water in the reservoirs considering monthly water harvesting and 
crop / irrigation w ater requirements. In addition, in the case of silvopasture modules, the reservoirs have been designed to 
provide drinking water for cattle. The harvested water in the reservoirs will be distributed to a network of drinking troughs  
that will be built for e ach reservoir. Although recycling of water resources is not applicable in this case, distribution efficiency 
will be ensured.  
54. The government and FAO will coordinate the purchase and distribution of the machinery,  equipment  and inputs  required for 
the impl ementation of the modules. T he government will guarantee the implementation and efficient use of these resources.  
The GoC  has established Base Enterprises for Integrated Technical Services (UEBIST) in each municipality to  provide 
agricultural mechanization  services and technical assistance to producers (see Appendix 6  of the FS for more detailed 
information)  through which the implementation of the six agroforestry and s ilvopastoral  and forestry system modules will 
be support ed. The d irect beneficiaries of the services will be farmers , including women farmers, and other individual 
producers or extension officers from MINAG and the National Association of Small Farmers (ANAP). The UEBIST will continue 
to provide mechanization and technical assistance services to farmers after completion of the project and will be an essential 
part of the countrywide up-scaling  in phase three of the program.  UEBIST will also provide maintenance and technica l


---
*Page 23*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 64  
 
 18  
41 Miccolis Andrew et al 2017: Restoration through agroforestry: options for reconciling livelihoods with conservation in the Cerrado 
and Caatinga biomes in Brazil. Cambridge University Press doi:10.1017/S001447971700013  
42 Jacobi, J., Schneider, M., Bottazzi, P., Pillco, M., Calizaya, P. and Rist, S. (2013). Agroecosystem resilience and farmer’s perceptions of 
climate change impacts on cocoa farms in Alto Beni, Bolivia. Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems 30(2):170 –183. 
43 Bene et al., 1977; Sinclair, 2004; Vira et al., 2015, in Miccolis A 2017 
 
44 Izac, a. M. N. and Sanchez, P. a. (2001). Towards a natural resource management paradigm for international agriculture: The 
example of agroforestry research. Agricultural Systems. 69(1 -2):5–25. 
 
45 Only 2 -3% of Marabú biomass is actually used for poles or charcoal (Herrero J. 2018)  
46 Lasco, R. D., Delfino, R. J. P. and Espaldon, M. L. O. (2014). Agroforestry systems: Helping smallholders adapt to climate risks while 
mitigating climate change. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 5:825 –833. 
47 Kandji, S. T., Verchot, L. V., Mackensen, J., Boye, A., Noordwijk, M., Tomich, T. P., Ong, C., Albrecht, A. and Palm, C. (200 6). 
Opportunities for linking climate change adaptation and mitigation through agroforestry systems. Chapter 13. In World Agroforestry 
into the Future, 113 –123 (Eds D. Garrity, A. Okono, M. Grayson and S. Parrott). World Agroforesty Centre.  
 
48 Araújo Filho, J.A. de (2013). Manejo Pastoril Sustentável da Caatinga, 200. Recife, PE: Projeto Dom Helder Camara. Bargués Tobella, 
A., Reese, H., Almaw, A., Bayala, J., Malmer, A., Laudon, H. and Ilstedt, U. (2014). The effect of trees on preferential flow and soil 
infiltrability in an agroforestry parkland in semiarid Burkina Faso.Water Res ources Research 50:2108 –2123.  
 assistance for the efficient use of irrigation equipment and infrastructure , as well as all land preparation machinery. The 
multiple ecosystem goods and services provided by agroforestry, s ilvopastoral, and forestry systems (CTNPFs and assisted 
natural regeneration) have been extensively documented, indicating their suitability for restoring degraded soils 41 and 
increasing resilience to climate change42 (please see Appendix 2.6 of the FS  and Ta ble 30 in Section 5.1 of the FS for expected 
climate change benefits with the implementation of the proposed modules ). Implementation of these systems will also 
produce significant mitigation benefits over the 20 -year span of growth and utilization of agroforestry, silvopastoral  and 
forestry systems (see section 5.5 of the FS  for methodology and results regarding carbon calculations  / Appendix 2.3 ).  
55. Regarding socio -economic benefits, production landscapes with multifunctional forests provide promising options for 
increasing income and sustaining livelihoods43. They enable diversified production systems because of various intercrops, 
and reduce risks associated with pests and diseases, while also enabling a wider diversity of products, which reduces the  
impact of  variations of  seasonal harvests44 .  
Activity 1.1 Restore approximately 15,544 ha of farmland, and increase CC -resilience through sustainable agroforestry (AF), 
CTNPFs and assisted natural regeneration (mitigation co -benefit 833,950.60 million  tCO2-eq. in 7 years  of implementation)  
GCF:        20, 513, 221 USD  
MINAG:  3 8,840, 764 USD  
 
56. While marabú provides some soil cover and fixes atmospheric nitrogen, it accumulates only a fraction of the biomass of 
forests or agroforestry systems45. From the climatic and hydrological points of view, the replacement of marabú by planted 
forests has the following advantages: Forests can buffer the effects of extreme climate events, higher temperatures and 
provide alternative sources of food during droughts or floods46. Moreover, agroforestry systems and CTNPFs are known to 
improve microclimate47. 
57. Forests contribute a greater volume of biomass (litter, branches, fruit, etc.) to the soil that, when decomposed, constitu tes 
a fundamental factor in the improvement of the hydrophysical properties of the soils (structure and porosity among others). In addition, a planted forest root system is deeper and more expansive such that when penetrating the ground, it opens 
tunnels t hrough which the water filters towards lower levels, thereby influencing infiltration capacity and soil moisture 
retention.  
58. Planted forests have also been shown to regulate the quantity and availability of water, improve water quality, increase groundwater  recharge and provide riparian buffers
48. Marabú’s relative influence on the water regime is considered 
comparable to a permanent crop such as fruit trees (mango or citrus), which uses soil similarly to marabú. In this case, fore st-
covered soil has an avera ge runoff coefficient 3.4 times lower and an erosion rate 13 times lower than marabu -dominated


---
*Page 24*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 64  
 
 19  
49 Souza, M. de and Piña -Rodrigues, F. (2013). Desenvolvimento De Espécies Arbóreas Em Sistemas Agroflorestais para Recuperação de 
Áreas Degradadas na Floresta Ombrófila Densa, Paraty, RJ. Revista Árvore 37(1):89– 98 
50 An example of a mulching tractor can be s een at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fVygSS7i3kA  soil (A ppendix  6 of the FS ). Planted forests are also effective at controlling erosion and landslides and at producing organic 
matter and cycling nutrients49. 
59. Planted forests decrease wind speed , which is critical  for managing the water economy in production systems ( reducing 
losses from evapo transpira tion in pastures and agricultural crops). P lanted forests, even those not designed as windbreaks, 
fulfill these functions:  
a. Planted forests can reach up to three times the height of marabú and thereby lengthen the distance of their 
influence on winds; and  
b. Planted forests have a complex vertical structure, composed of herbaceous, shrub and other strata that serve as 
obstacles and barrier s to the passage of prevailing winds in the area. These characteristics are absent in marabu -
infested shrublands . 
60. Planted forests are superior in the provision of other services, such as CO 2 sequestration, which is much lower in marabú 
due to its slow increase in biomass (Vidal et al. 2015 in Appendi x 6 of the FS ); the increase in biomass in the planted forest is 
12 times higher than in marabu. The conversion of marabú to planted forests provides a notable contribution to CC 
mitigation.  
61. Through the project , GCF funds will be used to purchase low impact modern machinery, such as a mulching tractor50, 
successfully pilot tested under Cuban conditions, that will be applied at scale to clear m arabú thickets on soils at high risk of 
climate -driven desertification and degradation . Marabú wood and biomass will be ground to wood chips to form a mulch 
layer tha t will support in protect ing soils  from erosion  and sun and eventually restore soil  organic matter . The land  will then 
be reconditioned  through the implementation  of agroforestry systems  or CTNPF (Modules 1-4, described in A ppendix  6 of 
the Feasibility Study ). Other alternative uses for the marabu were discarded due to its aggressive and invasive nature. The 
GCF will provide equipment and training to producers  to establish the modules  and develop resilience -enhancing farm 
management plans . The government and FAO will coordinate the purchase and distribution of the machinery and equipment, 
and the government will guarantee the implementation and efficient  use of these resources  through its Base Enterprise Units 
for Integrated Technical Services  (UEBIST).  
62. The UEBIST are internal divisions that are created to organize the processes of production of goods and provision of services, 
act with relative independence, subordinate to the head of the entity that creates them and have no legal personality or heritage of their own. They are characterized by having controlled autonomy under the principle of covering their expenses 
with their income .   
63. Approximately 20% of lands on which the Project will be implemented belong to private owners and 80% are lands owned 
by the Government granted to cooperatives under N ational Decree n° 358,  which guarantees the right to freely use the lands 
for a 20 -year period, extendable for another 20 years.  Cooperatives  are voluntary association s of small farmers who have 
the property or usufruct of their respective lands and other means of production. It is a form of agrarian cooperation through 
which the technical, financial and material assistance that the State provides to increase the production of small farmer s and 
facilitate their commercialization is processed and made viable. It has its own legal personality and they respond to their actions with their assets.   
64. GCF will finance acquisition of identified technologies, development of training materials, and t raining of machinery 
operators, implementation of marabu eradication and soil preparation, establishment of agroforestry and CTNPF modules, and O&M of the marabu eradication and soil preparation technologies during the life of the project. The Government o f 
Cuba will finance logistical and technical support (transportation, lodging, trainers, materials) to trainees ; supervision, 
management and execution of  agroforestry and CTNPF production modules  once they have been planted and established ; 
and O&M of marabu eradication and soil preparation technologies , and irrigation equipment and infrastructure  after project 
end. The average implementation area for each beneficiary is estimated to be 2.3 ha.  Please see Appendix 2.6 of the 
Feasibility Stud y for further information on the agroforestry modules.  
GCF investments to support this activity will consist of the following sub -activities:  
1.1.1: Procure identified technologies and equipment  
1.1.2: Develop training materials for operations and maintena nce 
1.1.3: Train 74 machinery operators  
1.1.4: Eradicate marabu on 15,544 ha


---
*Page 25*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 64  
 
 20  
51 Livingston and Blade. Texas A&M University System 
(http://publications.tamu.edu/FORAGE/PUB_forage_Paratill%20Renovations%20of%20Pastures%20and%20Hayfields.pdf).May 5th 
2018.  1.1.5: Construct/ Install 452 water  reservoirs for the agroforestry systems of a capacity of no more than 4900 
m3 and 440 irrigation systems  
1.1.6: Establish agroforestry, reforestation and assisted natural regeneration modules, including development 
of farm management plans  
  
Activity 1.2 Restore approximately 20,189 ha of rangeland with compacted soils and increase CC -resilience through improved 
silvopastoral systems (mitigation net co- benefit  381,311.51 million t CO2eq in 7 years of implementation).  
GCF:  14,15 1,122 USD  
MINAG:  37,453, 037 USD  
 
65. There are 20,189 ha of degraded grasslands in the two project target areas  with compacted soils, often with a hardpan layer, 
into which root systems grow very poorly because of physical resistance and poor moisture movement.  These compacted 
soils do not absorb rainfall, causing accelerated runoff and erosion. During dry periods , the hardpan is an impermeable 
barrier for plant roots to  reach  groundwater reserves. To loosen the soil and break the hardpan, the project  will introduce 
low-disturbance sub- soiling, designed for conservation agriculture51, which will restore the soil’s p orosity , so that rainfall can 
be absorbed and excess moisture drain away, recharging groundwater tables and making groundwater accessible to roots 
during dry periods. Soil structure improvement and stabilization, introduction of trees and improved, more dr ought resistant, 
deep rooting and nutrient rich pastures, as well as grazing rotation , will be achieved through the implementation of the two 
modules for s ilvopastoral systems adapted to climate change, described in A ppendix  2.6 of the FS . The average 
implementation area for each beneficiary is estimated to be 2.3 ha. 
66. GCF will finance acquisition of identified technologies  (e.g. sub -soilers , rippers),  development of training materials, training 
of trainers and training of farmers  to carry out soil restoration , implementation of sub- soiling of compacted area , 
establishment of s ilvopastoral modules , O&M of the soil preparation technologies during the lif e of the project  and resilience -
enhancing farm management plans . The Government of Cuba will finance logistical and technical support to trainees during 
and after training, implementation of s ilvopastoral modules following initial established and O&M of sub -soiling 
technologies , water storage, and livestock drinking stations  after project end.    
67. The UEBIST are internal divisions that are created to organize the processes of production of goods and provision of services, 
act with relative independence, subordinate to the head of the entity that creates them and have no legal personality or heritage of their own. They are characterized by having controlled autonomy under the principle of covering their expenses with their income .   
68. Approxima tely 20% of lands on which the Project will be implemented belong to private owners and 80% are lands owned 
by the Government granted to cooperatives under N ational Decree n° 358,  which guarantees the right to freely use the lands 
for a 20 -year period, ext endable for another 20 years.  Cooperatives  are voluntary association s of small farmers who have 
the property or usufruct of their respective lands and other means of production. It is a form of agrarian cooperation through 
which the technical, financial an d material assistance that the State provides to increase the production of small farmers and 
facilitate their commercialization is processed and made viable. It has its own legal personality and they respond to their actions with their assets.   
69. The proje ct will ensure effective establishment of silvopastoral systems by guaranteeing their water security through 
improved small -scale water reservoirs and livestock drinking facilities (fountains). The project will construct a reduced 
number of new water -harve sting and storage facilities. These structures and facilities will be fed from rainwater harvesting 
and runoff water and conditioned to maximize their efficiency and sustainability through appropriate soil conservation and 
landscaping. GCF will also financ e acquisition of water provision equipment and materials for these modules.  The 
Government of Cuba will cover the costs of labor and other locally available materials for construction of these small water 
reservoirs, as well as their Operations and Mainte nance.  
70. GCF investments in support of this activity will consist of the following sub -activities:  
1.2.1: Procure  identified technologies  and equipment  
1.2.2: Develop training materials  
1.2.3: Train 68 machinery operators


---
*Page 26*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 64  
 
 21 1.2.4: Implement low impact sub-soiling of 20,189  hectar es of compacted rangeland  
1.2.5:  Construct 700 water  reservoirs for livestock (no more than 63m3) .  
1.2.6: Establish and implement silvopastoral  modules, including improved grazing systems  and development of farm 
management plans  
  
Component 2: Strengthened institutional and technical capacities  
 
Output  2: Strengthened institutional and farmer capacities to  improve ecosystem services through agroforestry , silvopastoral  
and forestry systems and enhance the climate- resilience of production landscapes  
71. To catalyze  the shift from a tightly focused  production maximization paradigm to one of productive climate resilient 
agroeco systems that enhance  ecosystem services , farmers, producer organizations and institutional staff  require significant 
capacity building . These stakeholders require technical training to understand climate change and its effects on 
agroecosystems and production landscapes, the role of forests, agroforestry and s ilvopastoral systems in the production of 
ecosystem goods and services, and how to adapt agricultural production to continually evolving climate change  - farmers 
need to develo p the skills  to adopt and apply  resilience -enhancing agricultural practices and systems . Part of the impetus  to 
adopt and apply these systems stems from interest in the sale under contract of agricultural products to government 
programs and the possibility of accessing growing supply- and-demand markets , combined with the reduction in crop losses 
and food insecurity.  
 
72. The Cuban agricultural sector is currently immersed in  major reforms and transformations with the objective to implement 
new economic measures aimed at facilitating the development of sectoral production, while establishing a resilient and sustainable agriculture in the face of growing climate change. The aim  of government policy is to achieve efficient agricultural 
production based on resilience to climate change as well as incentives for sustainable production.  
 
73. These reforms encourage production by farmers and act to balance supply and demand, contain pric es at equitable levels, 
guarantee consumer safety and interests, guarantee sustainability of production, and enhance resilience to climate change. This project is integrated within the framework of these reforms and transformative actions, including the be nefits to 
agriculture and food security from markets and marketing.  Activity 3.2 of the Funding Proposal, in particular, will support 
further analysis of the current transformations.  
 
74. As part of capacity development activities under this Output , farmers will receive training in how to effectively access the 
secondary supply- and-demand markets , and producers’ organizations will work with MINAG to analyze and develop value 
chains for specific products from climate -resilient production systems. GoC  will ensure that production contracts are 
provided to producers’ organizations for adequate sale of harvests, and will provide technical assistance to producers to 
access supply -and-demand markets.   
 
75. The Government of Cuba is implementing several programs to improve human nutrition through national food production and by reducing food lost and waste and dependence on imported food. In support of this, the National Committee for the 
Reduction of Food Loss and Waste (CNPDAC) was established in 2017 and its Secretariat is hosted by FAO Cuba. In 2018 and 
2019, a National Strategy for the Prevention of Food Loss and Waste was developed, including three reinforcing programs: 
1) Integrated Productive Program f or Urban, peri -urban and Family Farming; 2) Municipal Food Self -Supply Plan, and; 3) 
Program for the development of small scale agro -industry.  
 
76. A major focus of the strategy has been strengthening capacities of staff from different Ministries and other in stitutions, as 
well as stakeholders on Food Loss and Waste. Nutrition and food loss and waste are an integral part of Farmer Field School training under Output 2.2, below.  
 
Activity 2.1: Increase institutional capacities to support farmers and producers’ organizations to establish and maintain 
agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry systems for improved  ecosystem services  
GCF:    108,000 USD  
MINAG:   ---------- USD 
77. The project will apply a comprehensive approach to agroecosystem management with the aim of maximizing the ability of 
agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry systems to cope with variations in water availability and volumes, while maintaining  
or increasing productivity. This approach builds on farmers’ knowledge and experience , observations and response to  
observed  changes in climate conditions, cropping and livestock production systems and water management, incorporates


---
*Page 27*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 64  
 
 22 use of resilience -enhancing soil, wa ter and crop cultivation technologies  (sub -soiling, zero -till, precision fertilization, drip 
irrigation, etc.) , and implements  a package of low -cost agricultural practices based on agro -ecological principles that reduce 
risk from drought. Adoption of this approach by farmers and producers’ organizations will be enabled  through training, 
coaching and technical advice by institutional staff from the Ministry of Agriculture and its affiliated institutes and agencies.  
 
78. The Ministry of Agriculture will strengthen and intensify its training- and-visit system, coupling off -site instruction and 
participatory research through Farmer Field Schools (FFS) with farm visits to provide technical assistance. MINAG 
extensionists and “ champion farmers” (see Activity 2.2, below) will be trained to support farmers and producer organizations 
to acquire the necessary skills to establish, maintain and operate resilience -enhancing agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry 
systems across produc tion landscapes. The project will train extension workers from MINAG to train farmers in Farmer Field 
Schools (FFS) in the seven municipalities, according to the type of agroforestry , silvopastoral  or forestry system to be 
implemented and provide technical  expertise to help farmer groups maintain the agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry 
systems established under Output  1, above. Trainers of extensionists will be identified from an in -house roster of qualified 
MINAG experts. Extension workers will also promote farmer -to-farmer exchanges in the FFS and through farmer markets 
and agricultural fairs.   
 
79. At the same time, extensionists will receive the logistical and technological support they need from MINAG to monitor the 
agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry systems  in the field , collect data and store it appropriately, provide on- site advice 
and tra ining, and build an interactive network of agroforestry/ silvopastoral/ forestry practitioners.   
 
80. GCF will finance acquisition o r development of substantive pedagogical materials, training of trainers and training of 
extensionists.  
 
81. GCF investments in support of this activity will consist of the following sub -activities:  
2.1.1: Develop training materials  
2.1.2 Train 443 extension service technicians, agricultural technicians, and cooperative leaders  to lead  farmers in 
gender and age -sensitive learning- by-doing regarding the implementation, operations and maintenance of their 
agroforestry or forestry systems; topics cove red will include no -till cultivation ; inter -cropping ; cut-and-carry forage 
feeding ; sub- soiling;  soil conservation with gabions, gully plugs, bunds, and contour farming ; agroforestry and 
silvopastoral system design ; application of efficient irrigation technologies (FS paragraphs 210 -212) and water 
harvesting and storage systems ; 
2.1.3 Development of supplementary learning materials and information on CC  impacts, projections , ecosystem 
function and services, agroecolo gy, agroforestry and forestry systems, and farm business planning and marketing . 
Activity 2.2 Train agricultural producers  to collectively revitalize and manage landscape resources through climate resilience -
enhancing agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry systems for gender -equitable agricultural production and ecosystem 
services  
GCF:    718,870 USD  
MINAG:    ---------- USD 
82.  The long -term construction of climate -resilient production landscapes requires that farmers adopt and apply cropping and 
livestock systems that improve and maintain ecosystem services and agricultural productivity as they  adapt to evolving 
climate hazards.  Aside from the concrete inputs and activities provided under Output  1, above, to establish agroforestry and 
forestry systems, farmers require a substantial body of knowledge o n agroecology, climate change  adaptation and mitigation, 
agroforestry , silvopast oral and forestry systems management, and basic business economics  so that farmers can generate 
the revenue needed to sustain adopted resilience -enhancing practices and systems . Farmers, through their day- to-day 
activities, possess a solid basis of experience and knowledge to build on and complement. At the same time, farmers also need to acquire the practical skills to apply new knowledge to concretely enhance the climate resilien ce of their production 
systems. Farmer Field Schools (FFS) are the most effective and efficient way to carry out farmer training. The project will 
establish an integrated FFS program to cover the seven municipalities and their different agroforestry, s ilvopastoral  and 
forestry systems. FFS programs work at multiple scales to build social capital by helping strengthen producer organizations 
and by contributing to greater organizational capacity along the entire value chain –  from financing, post -harvest proc essing 
and marketing, to investments.


---
*Page 28*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 64  
 
 23  
52 For a  description of FFS , please see  http://www.fao .org/agriculture/ippm/programme/ffs -approach/en/  
 83. The Farmer Field Schools (FFS) approach52 was developed by FAO and its partners over 20 years ago  as an alternative to the 
then prevailing top -down extension method of the Green Revolution, which failed to work in situations where more complex 
and counter -intuitive problems existed  (see the FS- Annex 2 - Section 5. 3- Output 2 description - for more detail on FFS).   
 
84. This project will establish 17 FFS in the seven project municipalities in appropriate locations based on agroforestry, 
silvopastoral  or forestry systems to be implemented , and logistical and other considerations  such as  the availability and 
access to  markets . These FFS will provide farmers with updated information and knowledge  on CC, ecosystem function and 
services, agroecology, agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry systems, and farm economics, as well as knowledge and 
information regarding practical consequences and applications for their farming practice. In order to generate revenue to 
pay for ongoing adaptation to climate change, f armers will learn farm and business planning, as well as new practices e.g. 
no-till cultivation, inter -cropping, cut -and-carry forage feeding, sub -soiling, soil conservation with gabions, gully plugs, bunds, 
contour farming, agroforestry system design, application of efficie nt irrigation technologies and water harvesting and storage 
systems.  The FFS will pay particular attention to the specific needs of women farmers and youth, devising gender -sensitive 
and age -sensitive curricula and learning- by-doing methodologies.  
 
85. GCF wi ll finance the establishment of Farmer Field Schools – not actual buildings but rather agroforestry, s ilvopastoral and/or 
forestry plots  on farmers’ fields where irrigation and soil preparation technologies can be demonstrated and where training 
and experience of new systems and technologies can take place. GCF resources will also cover the costs of training farmers  
throughout the seven target municipalities. The Government of Cuba will finance logistical and technical support to trainees 
during and a fter training.  GCF investments in support of this activity will consist of the following sub -activities:  
2.2.1 Establish Farmer Field Schools (17) in appropriate locations in the seven municipalities based on type of 
agroforestry, s ilvopastoral or forestry system to be implemented and logistical and other considerations;  
2.2.2 Operation  of 17 Farmer Field Schools and training of 15, 549 farmers using the  participatory research and  
learning- by-doing approach.  
Component 3: Strengthened governance, lega l and regulatory framework  
 
Output 3: Effective governance to support climate resilience- enhancing production systems and ecosystem services  
86. This project is posited as a second phase of a three -phase program aimed  at establishing and operationalizing  
agroforestry/ silvopastoral /forestry systems for landscape resilience countrywide.  To enable implementation of this longer -
term vision,  concrete policy options will be identified, analyzed and discussed  under Activity 3.1.  These options, structured 
and adopted into a comprehensive legal and regulatory framework, will  ensure effective institutional coordination and 
support to farmers  to bu ild the productivity and sustainability of their agroecosystems and the resilience of their shared 
production landscapes.   The project will analyze  and evaluate  existing policies such as land usufruct Decree No 300/2012 
(see paragraph 22) and propose any needed reforms to remove barriers and facilitate individual landholders to adopt 
resilience -enhancing practices and technologies.   
 
87. The landscape resilience policy developed under Activity 3.1 will be implemented on the ground by farmers and producers’ 
organizations who will be financed through a  Landscape Resilience Fund  developed  under Activity 3.2, below. This Fund will 
provide financial resources to farmers and production units as risk-reducing incentives to motivate adopti on of resilience -
enhancing production practices and technologies. T he Fund will also lower the inherent risk associated with entry into the 
supply- and-demand markets for agricultural produce.   Please see below under Activity 3.2 for more details.  
 
88. Under Activity 3.3, below, the project will work directly with local level organizations and the local branches of national organizations  to build their capacities for multi -sectoral and multi -stakeholder support and coordination in implementing 
the landsc ape resilience policy from Activ ity 3.1 through  programs and projects  on the ground.  An in -depth analysis of 
existing coordination mechanisms at the provincial and local level, as well as the institutional resources and capacities for  
project implementati on can be found in Appendix 7 of the FS.  
 
89. Through this  Output , FAO will provide the Government with assistance in legal, normative and policy matters  needed to 
implement the clear political mandate contained in the NDP 2030, Tarea Vida and the NDCs describ ed in paragraphs 25 and 
26 above, and to overcome the barriers that still hinder their implementation .


---
*Page 29*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 64  
 
 24 Activity 3.1 Develop, discuss and analyze options for policy reforms to support implementation of agroforestry, silvopastoral  
and forestry systems for landscape resilience through improved ecosystem services 
GCF:    260,500 USD  
MINAG:    ---------- USD  
90. A concrete policy to support the building of landscape resilience through ecosystem service enhancement is essential.  This 
policy w ill build on current policies e.g. Tarea Vida, etc. , but also incorporate analyses and information from other 
experiences and studies.   
 
91. The policy analysis and development process w ill identify gaps and weaknesses in the current policy framework vis a vis the 
long- term goal of landscape resilience through enhanced ecosystem services. These include identifying  substantive 
weaknesses e.g. insufficient understanding of and focus on ecosystem services and their relation to vulnerability and 
resilience ; general lack of a comprehensive approach (multi -sectoral, multi -stakeholder) to building landscape resilience; 
implementation weaknesses  include a lack of coordination among key actors/sectors/stakeholders at the local and landscape 
levels ; and  the absence of local level strategic planning instruments; financial weaknesses  include the insufficient availability 
of micro -credit, gr ants, loans; insufficient farm -level business planning and management capacities; inefficient marketing 
capacities, etc.   
 
92. The project will analyze stakeholder roles and responsibilities under potential policy reforms, defining specific mandates and 
areas of action depending on the type of reform s envisioned.  
 
93. Multi -stakeholder and multi -sectoral w orkshops will identify or discuss policy objectives and outcomes and the role of the 
different actors in implementing a landscape resilience policy.  Expert  assistance will be applied to draft policy options and 
lead workshops and consultations. The consultation process w ill be highly participatory and well documented.  Draft policy 
options w ill be discussed and input incorporated into final drafts which w ill then be validated by national authorities.  
 
94. GCF investments in support of this activity will consist of the following sub -activities:  
3.1.1 Ten workshops with expert assistance and input (international and national experts) and involving national 
stakehol ders, including farmers to facilitate inter -institutional analyses and discussions regarding policy objectives, 
needs and options for the modification or reform of agricultural and land -use policy;  
3.1.2 Definition and discussion of institutional modifications or adaptations to  support the different options for policy 
reforms for landscape resilience through improved ecosystem services;  
3.1.3 Development of specific proposals for policy reforms;  
3.1.4 Discussion and subsequent validation of reform proposals at national level.  
Activity 3.2 Establish a Landscape Resilience Fund to support adoption and implementation of agroforestry, s ilvopastoral and 
forestry systems in support of landscape resilience through ecosystem service enhancement  
GCF:     91,500 USD  
MINAG:   551,192 USD  
95. MINAG, with project support, will transform its Forestry Development Fund (FONADEF) and Soil Conservation Fund (SCF), as well as any other funds established to support land use and rural development, into a single Landscape Resilience Fund (LRF);  
no GCF fu nding will be used to capitalize the LRF. The purpose of the Landscape Resilience Fund will be to motivate, 
incentivize and otherwise support resilience -enhancing land use –  particularly agroforestry, s i
lvopastoral and forestry 
systems - by farmers and pro ducers’ organizations around the country, starting with the most vulnerable geographic areas. 
As such, t he Landscape Resi lience Fund (LRF) is intended to support on- the-ground implementation of landscape resilience 
policy (see Activity 3.1) by farmers. The LRF will be designed and legally established by the end of this project.   
 
96. Transformation of FONADEF and SCF will initia te with expert analysis of their current funding scope, organization, financing, 
management and administration, and identification of strengths and weaknesses, lessons and best practice of these funds 
as well as others from around the world. At the same ti me, expert analysis will be carried out on the feasibility of a single 
Landscape Resilience Fund (LRF), identifying the necessary modifications, reforms and other steps required to transform 
FONADEF and SCF into a single funding mechanism . Experts and thei r institutional counterparts will identify potential legal 
requirements; governance and management arrangements; operational modalities; financing modalities; project eligibility 
criteria, review, approval and support processes; organizational structures f or portfolio management, monitoring, evaluation 
and reporting and other decision making and management factors.  A draft proposal for the LRF and its establishment and 
operationalization will be formulated.


---
*Page 30*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 64  
 
 25  
53 The formal legal establishment of LRF is part of the project scope and will require the government endorsement/approval which  will be granted 
through the publication of an Executive National Decree.   
97. As part of the LRF feasibility study, analysis w ill be undertaken on options for economic instruments to capitalize and sustain 
the fund, criteria for grants and loans, governance arrangements, integration with public policy priorities, and other topics . 
Experts and institutional counterparts will revie w existing experience in the region and globally and explore options for 
adoption and application of appropriate economic instruments.  Proposals for the most efficient economic instruments will 
be drafted and submitted to national authorities with the pro posal for the LRF.  MINAG and other authorities, as appropriate, 
will discuss and debate the expert analysis and LRF study as prelude to establishment and operationalization of the  Landscape 
Resilience Fund. With establishment of the LRF, MINAG will elabor ate and carry out a communication strategy to generate 
interest by farmers throughout Cuba in the Fund and its objectives  and to encourage their engagement with it .  
 
98. It is anticipated that farmers and production units will use LRF funds to purchase inputs  and services (e.g. land preparation, 
transport), storage, processing and value -addition facilities, breeding stock, tools, irrigation equipment and other essential 
elements of climate- resilient agricultural production and animal husbandry.  
 
99. Workshops will  be held with representatives of producers’ organizations, Ministries, institutions, tourism industries  to 
discuss on -the-ground implementation of the landscape resilience policy and what financial and technical and operational 
resources and support would be required.  These workshops will generate support for and validate the LRF and landscape 
resilience policy.  
 
100. The GCF will cover the costs of workshops and expert analyses and assistance, international exchanges to incorporate lessons 
learned from other governments and institutions, development of proposals for reforms to regulations, policies and 
planning; analyses of financial mechanisms and economic instruments to incentivize farmers to adopt and maintain 
resilience -enhancing practices and croppi ng systems, and development and execution of a communication strategy to 
engage farmers with the LRF. The Government of Cuba will provide discussion and working spaces for consulting experts and task forces and working groups, as well as logistical and org anizational support.  
 
101. GCF investments in support of this activity will consist of the following sub -activities:  
3.2.1 Expert analyses of existing funds (FONADEF, SCF) and other funds both regionally and globally (current funding 
scope, organization, financing, management and administration, and identification of strengths and weaknesses, 
lessons and best practice ); 
3.2.2 Ten workshops to analyze and develop options for a Landscape Resilience Fund to support implementation of 
landscape resilience policies on the ground;  
3.2.3 Design of a Landscape Resilience Fund to support resilience -enhancing land use by farmers and producers’ 
organizations;  
3.2.4 Formal legal establishment of the Landscape Resilience Fund  (LRF)53; 
3.2.5 Elabo ration of communication strategy and materials, and dissemination.  
Activity 3.3 Strengthen planning, governance and coordination at the landscape level in support of landscape resilience 
through enhancement of ecosystem services  
GCF:      41,500 USD  
MINAG:  ----------- USD  
102. The purpose of this activity is to build the capacities of the different institutional and organizational stakeholders in the  
project areas to coordinate their support to farmers and producers’ organizations for the implementation of the Landscape 
Resilience policy, as well as localized multi -stakeholder governance.  This support will  take the form of direct technical 
assistance, provision of inputs, aid in marketing produce, support to maintenance of machinery and equipment, enabling 
access to financing, as well as other factors.  Interinstitutional coordination is essential to avoid d uplication of efforts, 
stakeholder confusion and potential loss of beneficial synergies among landscape players. By coordinating their programming 
and on -the-ground efforts, institutions will be better able to contribute more efficiently and effectively to  landscape 
resilience and producer productivity.   
103. This project will train key organizations and farmers in the seven target municipalities to participate collaboratively in 
planning and decision- making processes that determine the management outcomes, out puts and activities in the production 
landscapes to enhance their climate resilience.  Strengthening of governance mechanisms will also include development of


---
*Page 31*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 64  
 
 26  
54 The project aim at ensuring women and youth participation in all activities proposed. For further information, please see Annex 8 on Gender Analysis 
and Action Plan as well as the Appendix  2.5 of the Feasibility Study which presents the Socio Ec onomic Characterization of the PIA.  norms, agreements and organizational capacities for the collaborative management of areas targeted  for restoration with 
the aim of augmenting the stability and sustainability of the management and use of water flows into, across an d out of the 
landscape as a key element to enhancing its climate resilience.  
104. Targeted organizations will have access to req uired modeling and visualization technologies to improve their analytical 
capacities, as well as the most effective tools and instruments for coordinated planning and management of landscape 
resources from farm to landscape level.  These organizations are s elected for their character of mass stakeholder 
organizations that represent different key constituencies at grassroots level both in the target areas, as well as nationally . 
The project will ensure that women and youth have equal opportunities to participate in the project activities54. The project 
aim at  ensur ing that their interests, concerns and perspectives are represented in these processes both individually as 
members of organizations, as well as collectively in women and youth organizations. Particip ating organizations include 
cooperatives and other producer’s associations, entrepreneurship groups,  youth groups, and women’s groups,  including the 
Asociacion Cubana de Tecnicos Agricolas y Forestales (ACTAF) , Asociacion Cubana de Produccion Animal (ACPA), Asociacion 
Nacional de Agricultures Pequeños (ANAP),  and Federaciòn de Mujeres Cubanas (FMC).  Experience accrued by these 
organizations during the project will contribute to country -wide replication of project technologies, methods and practices 
in phase three of this landscape resilience program.  
105. While capacity development under Output 2 is aimed squarely at building  technical capacities of farmers on the ground and 
the Ministry staff directly providing them services, capacities to be strengthened under this Output are intended to 
strengthen  key organizations to support landscape resilience policy at municipal and provincial levels , including planning and 
programming. These capacities include  technical and analytical  skills to better understand the links between landscape 
resilience, ecosystem services and farming sustainability and productivity; pedagogic skills for extension of climate -resilience 
enhancing farming practices; logistical capacities to ensure institutional staff can meet farmers in th e field; data and 
information management technologies so that monitoring and evaluation of performance with new practices can be credibly recorded and analyzed; and abilities of stakeholder groups at local level to participate in multi -stakeholder delibera tions and 
decision making.   
106. The project will also support multi -level review and analyses of existing landscape planning methodologies  through inter -
institutional collaborative teams (including ACTAF, ACCPA, ANAP, FMC, amongst others)  and provincial discussion and 
debate forums, with the aim of integrating climate adaptation and mitigation principles and concerns into these instruments, 
including the prioritization of agroforestry/ silvopastoral/ forestry systems for sustainable production and ecosystem service 
restoration. Institutional staff will train municipal environmental units, local development associations, and local 
communities to analyze, discuss and propose agreements and ne gotiated norms on the governance of natural resources at 
landscape level, including the protection of aquifer recharge areas, micro -watersheds and headwaters, and areas targeted  
for restoration.  
107. GCF will cover the costs of development of strategies and loc al planning for resilience -enhancing land use management , 
integration of climate change principles into local plans and programs, and use of modeling and visualization technologies 
for coordinated planning and management of landscape resources.  Government of Cuba resources will cover logistical and 
ongoing support to local organizations and institutional staff to participate in training workshops and forums.  
108. GCF investments in support of this activity will consist of the following sub -activities:  
3.3.1: Train 10 local branches of established organizations ( Asoc iacion Cubana de Tecnicos Agricolas y Forestales -  
ACTAF, Asociacion Cubana de Produccion Animal  - ACPA, Asociacion Nacional de Agricultures Pequeños - ANAP, and 
Federaciòn de Mujeres Cubanas  - FMC) to participate effectively in local planning and decision -making for climate -
resilience land use ; 
3.3.2 Multi -level review and analysis of landscape resilience policies and planning instruments as a framework for 
adaptive landscape management  to enhance climate resilience and integration of CC adaptation principl es into local 
plans and programs;  
3.3.3 Fifteen workshops to strengthen coordination in local landscape governance structures for climate change adaptation: Comision de Reforestacion, Grupo de Bahia, Comision de Cuencas Hidrograficas, Comision de Asuntos 
Agrarios; Grupos Provinciales y Municipales de Tarea Vida.  
 
109. In addition to the costs of the Outputs and Activities, the project includes a Project Management Unit:  
GCF:  1,760,079  USD


---
*Page 32*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 64  
 
 27  
55 The cost of salaries and benefits of all government officials, in whichever capacity associated with the project, will be pro vided as 
co-financing by the Government Executing Entity. The government recognizes the key importance of the project implementation and 
they will therefore ensure the mobilization of the human resources to focus on the project activities . 
 MINAG:  4,612,400 USD   
110. Finally , some costs for Evaluation ha ve been considered, including costs of an Impact Evaluation (for more details see Annex 
11): 
GCF:       562,000 USD  
MINAG:      250,000 USD   
B.4. Implementation arrangements  
111. The governance of the project and the institutional arrangements reflected below are the result of an inter -ministerial 
dialogue facilitated by FAO, led by the Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG), which includes the Ministry of Science, Technology 
and Environment (CITMA), which is the GCF's National Designated Authority (NDA) in Cuba, and the Provincial Agricultural 
Delegations.  
112. The government of C uba, represented by MINAG, will act as the Executing Entity (EE) of the project, and FAO, as requested 
by the NDA (Annex  1), will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE) and as a Co -Executing Entity (CEE) responsible for the project 
financial and operational impl ementation5556.  
113.  As FAO functions as both AE and Co -EE, FAO will consequently separate both functions and establish the following:  
• An appropriate institutional arrangement for the separation of both functions in different departments of FAO; and 
• Clear lines  of responsibility, reporting and accountability within FAO between project implementation and execution 
functions. This separation will help ensure the financial management and segregation of duties is maintained between: 
processing of payments, procureme nt processing, evaluation and monitoring, risk management and accounting.  
 
114. FAO, in its role as AE, will be responsible for the overall management of this project, including (i) all aspects of project 
appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical oversight and supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) 
ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project 
monitoring, as well as the timeliness and quality of reporting to the GCF; and (v) project closure and evaluation. To perform 
the AE functions, FAO will set up a dedicated FAO -GCF project task force comprising relevant staff from the FAO Country 
Office in Cuba, the FAO Regional Office for Latin America in Chile, and FAO Head quarters in Rome  (Appendix 2.7 FS) . The 
project supervision team will remain independent of the Executing Entity functions also performed by FAO.   
115. FAO , in its role as a E E, will set up a Project Operational Support and Financial Management Unit (OSFMU), which will be led 
by the FAO Representation of Cuba and will have the main function of supporting the National Project Management Unit 
(NPMU ), providing procurement services  and financial management services for the GCF proceeds. The OSFMU will be 
financed through the Project Management budget line of the project ’s overall budget.   
116. A Project Agreement wi ll be signed between FAO and MINAG as co -EE, which will be legally bindin g and detail the roles and 
responsibilities of FAO, CITMA, MINCEX, and MINAG, and contain the relevant provisions for the compliance by FAO with the 
requirements from the Accreditation Master Agreement ( AMA *) and Funded Activity Agreement ( FAA). The Project 
Agreement will also contain provisions on the applicability of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the 
Specialized Agencies (the "the Specialized Agencies Convention") to FAO, including to the GCF Proceeds  held by FAO.  
Project Governance Structure  
117. For the governance and strategic decisions of the project, a National Project Steering Committee (NEC) will be established, composed of Ministers from MINCEX, CITMA, MINAG and the FAO representative in Cuba. The NC will be chaired by M INAG. 
 
118. The main function of the NEC is to coordinate, guide and provide political and strategic guidance for the implementation of 
the project, as well as to ensure strong inter -institutional coordination. It will also ensure that planned co -financing from  
government entities is delivered in a timely manner, verify and approve annual work plans, and approve Financial and 
Technical Reports (IFTs).  
119. Project governance also includes a Project Coordination Committee (PCC) composed of the National Project Direct or, 
technical representatives from MINAG and FAO, and the National Project Coordinator (NPC). The PCC will serve as a key 
communication channel between the National Project Management Unit ( NPMU ) and key local stakeholders and will assist


---
*Page 33*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 64  
 
 28 in the implementa tion of the stakeholder participation plan. The PCC will be accompanied by national technical and scientific 
institutions (extensionists, academia) and provincial coordinators.  
Project Implementation Structure  
120. For project implementation, a government -funded National Project Management Unit ( NPMU ) will be established with the 
primary function of ensuring project coordination and execution through the effective implementation of annual work plans, 
following the guidelines of the NEC and PCC. The NPMU  reports  to the PCC, and will be led by the NPC. The NPC will be 
selected by MINAG, in consultation with FAO.  
121. The N PMU will establish three Provincial Project Management Units (P PMU- Las Tunas, Villa Clara and Matanzas/Los Arabos) 
to ensure sound implementation at the local level (provincial). Each P PMU will have a Provincial Coordinator, a Logistics and 
Training Assistant and an Administrative Assistant. The P PMU will be advised b y a Provincial Project Coordinating Committee 
(PPCC) - represented by the provintial delegetaions of MINAG , CITMA,  National Association of Small Farmers, Council of the 
Provincial Administration, Council of the Municipal Administration and academic and sci entific institutions (more details in 
Appendix 2.7 FS) - who will guarantee the effective ness of the actions at the provincial level, in terms of planning, 
coordination, implementation and evaluation of the processes required as part of the project.   
122. In addition, the N PMU will establish seven Municipal Project Management Units (M PMU) to ensure solid implementation at 
the municipal level. Each M PMU will have a Municipal Coordinator, a Logistics and Training Assistant and an Administration 
Assistant. The M PMU will be advised by a Municipal Project Coordinating Committee (MPCC), which will guarantee the 
effectiveness of actions at the municipal level and promote a fluid exchange of information for decision making.  
123. The provincial coordinators of Las Tunas, Villa Clara and Matanzas will be the link with the seven municipal coordinators and 
will promote a fluid exchange of information and decision making at two specific levels of management and articulation: 
territorial/national . Staff from the provincial and munici pal units will be financed by the government and will report to the 
NPMU .  
124. A description  of the governance and implementation units ’ functions/responsibilities can be found in Appendix  7 of the 
Feasibility Study . The governance and implementation structure of the project is shown in figure  3.


---
*Page 34*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 64  
 
 29  
Figure 3. Governance and Implementation Structure of the IRES Cuba Project.  
 
Collaborating Institutions  
 
125. The Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment (CITMA)  has the mission of directing, executing and controlling State 
and Government policy in the areas of science, technology and environment; promoting the coherent integration of these to contribute to the sustainable development of the country. It i s the National Authority Designated by Cuba for the Green 
Climate Fund. CITMA w ill be part of the National Project Steering Committee (NSC), according to its functions as the 
governing body, facilitating knowledge management processes and compliance with env ironmental regulations. CITMA will 
manage  the application and development of scientific knowledge, technological innovation and environmental protection in 
the process of sustainable agricultural development, promoting actions to adapt to climate change. T his Institution has 
provincial delegations and a representation at the municipal level.  
 
126. The Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG)  is in charge of proposing and implementing the policy on the use, tenure and 
sustainable exploitation of the country's agricultural surface; agricultural and forestry production for the satisfaction of the food needs of the population, industry and export. In addition, it regulates and controls local administrations in terms of 
their competence, directly or through the str uctures of provincial and municipal delegations.   It generates learning and 
technology, and coordinates the exchange of information and decision- making. The MINAG is the counterpart of the Cuban 
government for the project, will be part of the National Proj ect Steering Committee (NSC) and will act as the Project's EE.  
 
127. The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Investment (MINCEX)  is the body of the Central State Administration whose mission is to 
propose, direct and control the application of State and Government po licies on foreign trade, foreign investment and 
international cooperation. Is an important counterpart from the Government for the project. The Ministry doesn’t have 
municipal representation, but they have provincial instances with which close cooperation and exchange will be maintained 
to establish links that facilitate the good management of the Project in accordance with what is established by the norms,


---
*Page 35*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 64  
 
 30 regulations and laws related to international cooperation. They will be in charge of the governance o f the project through 
the National Project Steering Committee (NSC).  
 
128. The Cuban Association of Animal Production (ACPA)  is a national organization with vast experience in animal diversification, 
animal feed and genetics for breed  improvement. It’s role in the project will be training and extension (specialized 
knowledge), participating in learning teams and in the FFS. It has grassroots associations in the provinces and municipalitie s 
of the country. They will act as advisors to the Project Coordination Com mittee (PCC).  
 
129. The Cuban Association of Agricultural and Forestry Technicians (ACTAF)  is a national Association that facilitates ways to 
build models of sustainable agrarian systems. It has a work structure organized in branches in all the provinces. It is  
considered a key actor for the proposal due to its experience in working with local actors of agricultural development and 
the promotion of agro ecological alternatives in Cuban agroforestry systems. They will act as advisors to the Project 
Coordination C ommittee (PCC).  
 
130. The National Association of Small Producers (ANAP)  encompasses local producers’ associations and is considered a key al ly 
for the project in project  municipalities because it reflects the views and perspectives of local  produc ers. They will contribute 
to the further development of Cuba’s Agroecological Movement through farmer -to-farmer  communication and 
dissemination  of project -generated best practice.  ANAP also has extensive experience in gender analysis and programming 
for women’s empowerment and will collaborate with the project in delivering the gender action plan. ANAP  will facilitate 
Project implementatio n in relation to  farm planning and management of  agroforestr y, silvopastoral  and forestry  systems. 
ANAP will form part of the PPCC and the MPCC of the project.  
 
131. Academic and scientific institutions  will provide accompaniment and scientific- technical support and training in the 
implementation of the project. They will work as part of the agrarian extension system. Some of them are: The Central 
University of Las Villas and the University of Las Tunas have Municipal University Centers; the Tropical Viandas Research 
Institute (INIVIT) , which is the main extension institution, located in one of the AIP (Villa Clara Province, Sa nto Domingo 
municipality); the Agricultural Engineering Research Institute (IAgric), that has branches  in the provinces where the project 
will be implemented; The Tropical Fruit Research Institute (IIFT) and the Research Center for Animal Improvement and Tropical Livestock (CIMAGT) do not have offices  at the municipal level , but their researchers and technicians will join the 
extension  work  in the AIP . Researchers, professors, specialists and technicians from o ther institutions  may  participate in the 
implem entation of the Project at the local level, integrating with the  teams in each municipality.  
 Flow of Funds  
132. At the request of the Government of Cuba, FAO will be the financial and operational executor of GCF resources, including 
financial management, procurement of goods and contracting of services (through OSFMU).  Each year, FAO will present an 
annual work plan and budget that will include a procurement plan. The PCC together with the NEC will validate and approve the annual work plan , procurement plan,  and budget. FAO will be responsible for the disbursement of funds according to 
established conventions, norms and standards.   
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request  
133. Cuba is unable to cover the incremental costs of adapting to climate change  in light of the serious barriers it has historically 
faced in accessing international financing and the necessary technologies and equipment to build the climate resilience of its 
producti ve sectors. External financial support to meet the incremental costs of managing climate  risks and impacts is 
absolutely essential, particularly as Cuba’s climate vulnerability continues to increase in high priority sectors such as 
agriculture.  The Government of Cuba requests maximum concessionality to support vulnerable farmers to adapt to 
increasing rainfall variability –  including greater numbers and intensities of hurricanes and tropical storms -  and drought 
attributed to  climate change.  Cuba is  currently unable to access loans from multilateral lending institutions, making 
concessional grants the only option for financing to overcome barriers related to water security undermined by climate 
change.  Fiscal limitations currently hinder the potentia l for investments to meet the additional costs of building resilience of 
agricultural production systems.  Costs of effective adaptation to climate change will only rise with delay in action and 
investment.  
 
134. Cuba has coped with these ongoing impediments to investment in equipment and technology by building its capacities for  
knowledge generation, institutional expertise, and innovation as much as possible under intense economic pressure. 
Nevertheless, additional invest ment i s urgently needed to cover the costs of building the capacities of farmers and producers’


---
*Page 36*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 64  
 
 31 organizations and their support institutions . This would allow them  to understand and act on climate change adaptation in 
the production landscape, optimiz e ecosystem services, develop and refine resilience -enhancing agricultural production 
models, and enhance farm and business planning to generate the revenue required for continued  investment in adaptive 
responses to climate change. This additional investment in  institutional and producer capacities is, in and of itself , insufficient 
to fully meet the challenges posed by increasing climate vulnerability.  The primary limiting factor in adapting to climate 
change  in Cuba is the lack of the necessary technologies an d equipment that, when applied appropriately, w ill release Cuba’s 
adaptive potential and  well-known capacity for innovation  in agriculture . 
 
135. Farmers and producers’ organizations in the two provinces are unable access sufficient financial resources required to invest 
in the resilience of their agricultural production systems. Government financial support, while steady, is insufficient to me et 
investment needs, particularly in relation to the activities required for enhancement of ecosystem services and landscape 
resilience. The climate -driven pace of infestation by marabu, an aggressive invasive species which has taken ove r thousands 
of hectares of once productive farm land, easily overwhelms the ability of the Government to provide the technologies and 
equipment needed to eradicate it  in a timely, cost effective manner .  Water security is a fundamental need in agricultural 
adaptation to climate -induced drought –  water storage and irrigation systems are urgently needed to enable establishment 
of resilience- enhancing agricultural systems.  
 
136. While annual government investment  places  a heavy emphasis on developing and maintaining human capital, institutional 
staff and farmers lack a state -of-the-art understanding of climate change  and production landscape  vulnerability in Cuba, the 
scientific basis for emerging climate risk, and needed climate adaptation and mitigation options regarding  agroecosystems, 
including livestock systems. With increasing climate  change -driven rainfall variability, institutional staff and farmers need to 
understand the fundamental relationship between ecosystem services –  particularly water regulation –  climate change , and 
land degradation, disaster risk and loss of productivity. As such, GCF resources will be used in the project to build the technical 
and farm management capacities of farmers and producers’ organizations , as well as build the capacities of institution al and 
technical staff to plan for climate risk mitigation and manage landscape resources accordingly.  
 
137. This project represents a second phase of a three- phased program  to ensure the climate resilience of the agricultural sector 
in Cuba. Through investment  in the first phase, the Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG) analyzed the current cropping systems 
and their agronomic vulnerability to climate hazards related to increasing rainfall variability. MINAG  further analyzed the 
relationship to ecosystem services in this context and opted for a strategy of stabilizing and increasing productivity while 
simultaneously reducing climate risk, primarily through the development of more climate- resilient agro -ecosys tems. With 
increasing variability of rainfall, including drought and torrential rains, MINAG  concluded that resilient agroecosystems 
should be based on agroforestry and silvopastoral  systems, in which trees provide long -term if not quasi permanent ground 
cover, improve soil porosity, protect the soil against raindrop impact, and act to recycle nutrients back to the soil surface 
through leaf fall –  these benefits affect water regulation by increasing the ability of soils to allow penetrat ion of water  by 
slow ing its flow across the soil surface, reducing rainfall impact on the soil surface, and improving organic matter content 
and coverage of the soil’s top layer. Different agroforestry and silvopastoral  options were developed, tested and evaluated , 
with the s ix listed in this proposal selected for up- scaling to the two project areas of the country, broadly representative of 
climatic conditions  in key areas of the main island of Cuba (see Appendix 6  of the Feasibility Study).  
 
138. GCF investment in this second phase –  up-scaling of six tested agroforestry  and silvopastoral  systems in vulnerable farms and 
production enterprises –  will provide direct resilience benefits to 30,912 farmer  families in the two regions. At the same time, 
the knowledge generated and institutional capacities built during this phase, including the transformation of the Forestry Development and Soil Conservation Funds into a single Landscape Resilience Fund to finance landscape resilience policy,  will 
provide a solid foundation for the  third phase of countrywide up-scaling of the agroforestry and silvopastoral  systems, as 
well as water use efficiency measures. In this sense, investment in phase two can also be considered a pre- investment in 
phase three leading to national scale benefits.  
 
139. Investing in up- scaling of tested, innovative agroforestry systems will generate a number of other benefits impacting the 
current baseline of climate vulnerability by allowing for the production and sale of marketable climate -resilient crops . This 
will result in improved food security through the state system of food distributi on, as well as increased farmer income from 
sales in local farmers ’ markets or through contracts with tourism entities. Investing in water storage and irrigation will enable 
farmers to produce climate -resilient crops using highly efficient technologies tha t maximize water productivity . Access to 
water resources  is a critical factor in scenarios of increasing drought and dry periods.  By enhancing water storage and 
ensuring the adoption and implementation of climate -resilient agroforestry and silvopastoral  systems, GCF investment will 
play a critical role in assisting vulnerable farmers  to strengthen their  adaptive capacit y.


---
*Page 37*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 64  
 
 32  
57 Note that no GCF funds will be used to capitalize the Landscape Resilience Fun d. 140. At the same time, by investing in agr oforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems, this project will generate signific ant carbon 
benefits. Trees and bushes integrated into agricultural production, together with the corresponding effects on soil organic 
matter of reduced tillage, increased organic inputs from leaf litter, roots, will store increasing amounts of carbon (see  section 
D.1. Impact Potential, below  and Appendix 2.3 of FS ).  
 
141. This project will use incremental finance in the form of GCF grant resources to deliver direct resilience benefits to farmers  
and producers’ organizations, increasing the effectiveness of and maximizing returns on government investments in 
knowledge genera tion, capacity development and innovation,  and setting the stage for cost -effective countrywide  up-scaling 
of climate -resilient agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry systems. Women and youth are expected to benefit significantly 
from a specific emphasis  on their inclusion and  building their capacities to manage climate -resilient agricultural production . 
In the absence of GCF resources these farmers would be unable to benefit from water security measures or establishment 
of resilient agro -ecosystems.    
 
142. In shifting the prevailing agricultural paradigm from yield maximization to agro -ecosystem resilience, sustainability and 
productivity to mitigate  increasing climate vulnerability , the project will combine investments in water supply and irrigation, 
agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry systems,  and farmer and institutional capacity strengthening for climate risk 
management. Other funding sources are unavailable, in part because the project goes beyond the scope of their eligibility 
criteria and in part given the volume of resources needed to adequately address the problem.  However, lessons learned from 
the previous GEF -funded initiative on invasive species have been incorporated into the design of this proposal, particularly 
with regard to marabú, and co ordination with current and new GEF initiatives has been planned and agreed. The funding 
requested from the GCF is therefore crucial to address existing resource and technology gaps and to achieve the necessary 
paradigm shift to increase resilience of prod uction landscapes and ecosystem services.  
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability  
Government commitment and institutional capacities  
143. This project enjoys  strong government commitment as it is originated direct ly from government policies for climate change  
adaptation and mitigation . It is also fully aligned with Ministry of Agriculture strategies for  agricultural development through 
extension and technical assistance, infrastructure development, and provision of equipm ent, inputs and other goods and 
services.  Th is project will train the Ministry’s agricultural extensionists to support farmers in establish ing and operati ng 
agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems, application of water efficient technologies, climate -resilient agricultural 
practices and cropping systems, and farm business planning. The project will build the capacities of producers’ organizations  
to support extension activities  related to agroforestry and silvopastoral  systems and ecosystem services , particularly through 
Farmer -to-Farmer extension of climate- resilient agricultural and agroforestry practices.   
 
144. The government has committed to the establishment of a Landscape Resilience Fund (LRF)57 to directly support farmers with 
financial resources to implement business plans  that produce products from resilience -enhancing cropping systems . The 
project will train LRF staff in analysis and support to the development of farm enterprise business plans. Funding will be 
provided for specific farmer initiatives originating in and supporting these plans . This project will identify economic 
instruments for use in generating the financial resources required to capitalize the LRF on a continu ous basis, particularly 
within the context of phase three ( countrywide up-scaling of agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems ). 
 
145. The Cuban government will be responsible for Operations and Maintenance after project termination of equipment and 
machinery required for land preparation and crop and livestock protection. The GoC’s Base Enterprise Units for Integrated 
Technical Services will be the entities charged with O&M. O&M will be subsidized by fiscal resources supp lied through 
standard budget ary processes. Technical, planning, management and other capacities of key institutions like the Ministry of 
Agriculture are highly regarded and are the result of government prioritization of the agricultural sector for decades,  resulting 
in highly competent and skilled extensionists and other support staff.  
Capacity building of farmers to sustain climate resilient cropping systems  
146. Farmers will receive training within the Ministry’s formal capacity building structure of Farmer Field Schools, demonstration  
plots, research stations, comprehensive training- and-visit extension system, and links to academic and other experts. The 
project’ s capacity building program will ensure that farmers receive in -depth training and support on and off -site, including 
Farmer -to-Farmer exchanges and through training -and-visit approaches. Farmers will be motivated to participate in training 
by the prospect  of acquiring new skills that will enable  them to increase yields, secure and implement institutional contracts


---
*Page 38*
---

B  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 64  
 
 33  
 
58 Please see Annex 20 for more  detail.  for agricultural products, and successfully market surpluses in the growing variety of supply -and-demand markets, 
particularly the tourism marke t.  
 
Access to financing and markets  
147. Effective value chains provide a fundamental incentive to drive and support the adoption of climate -resilient agroforestry 
and silvopastoral  systems, crops and practices. Producer participation in these value chains requires access to funding as well 
as markets. With co -financing from GoC, this project will support producers to access state markets through production 
contracts, as well as the increasing number of other markets , including supply -and-demand markets and direct sales to 
tourism entities . In particular, the GoC will establish a Landscape Resilience Fund by combining the National Forestry 
Development Fund (FONADEF) and Soil Conservat ion Fund (SCF) to finance value chain enhancement  and coordination , 
including production improvements, value addition and commercialization to specific markets (e.g. tourism enterprises).  
 
148. GCF will finance the sub -activities and inputs focused on the deve lopment of climate -resilient agroforestry systems. GCF will 
also support institutional coordination and planning processes that bring together the different value chain actors –  
producers, input providers, buyers, –  to more efficiently coordinate their act ivities in support of climate -resilient value chain 
development.  
 
149. The project will build the capacities of farmers by providing them with the knowledge, information,  and access to critical 
equipment and technologies to reduce their climate risk and enable them to generate revenue for continual re -investment 
in resilience -enhancing production practices and systems. The project will train farmers to plan and manage their  production 
assets with a value chain approach to climate -resilient crop production in agroforestry systems.   
 
 
Operations and Maintenance and post -project O&M58 
150. The O&M of the project  for established infrastructure and technologies will be carried out through a hub- centered system 
managed by the Government of Cuba involving the UEB IST (Base Enterprise Units for Integrated Technical Services ).  The 
UEBIST offer services of mechanization to the agricultural entities in their resident municipality as well as repair and 
maintenance of agricultural machinery, irrigation equipment and vehicles. O&M of equipment and technologies will  be 
managed in these hubs for a specific set of farm enterprises to achieve economies of scale and maximum efficien cy in their  
use.  
 
151. O&M will be focused on Out put 1 of the Logical Framework:  Increased CC -resilient production landscapes through investment 
in innovative agroforestry systems, reforestation with close -to-nature planted forests (CTNPFs) and assisted natural forest 
regeneration and specifically activities 1.1 –  1.2 involving establishment of agroforestry systems and planted forests.  O&M 
for each of these activities is focused on specific technologies and equipment for land clearance, marabu eradication, soil 
preparat ion, and irrigation and comprises maintenance protocols, operational procedures and scheduled monitoring of use 
and repairs (please see Annex 20 for description of O&M).    
 
152. The operation and maintenance  (O&M) costs for the life of the project implementation (7 years) is US$9,189,682.9. Of this, 
US$7,972,374 represent Operation costs that will be entirely financed by the Cuban Government. Maintenance costs 
represents US$1,217,308.68 of which FVC will finance US $1,095,102, and the Government of Cuba 
finances  US$122,206.  During project implementation, the FVC contributes with 13% and the Government of Cuba with 87% 
of O&M total cost. The Operational (O) and Maintenance (M) Costs for the post -implementation project  phase (13 years) is 
US$12,690,334 (US$11,040,590-  Operational Costs (O) and US$1,649,744 de Maintenance. The O&P costs will be entirely 
financed by the Government of Cuba.  Further details about O&M are provided in Annex 20.  
 
153. Farmers and producers’ organizations  will be fully responsible for maintaining farm -level tools and equipment provided by 
the project, with technical guidance, assistance and training from MINAG  staff. Future farmer investments in O&M will be  
enabled  through small farm business planning, resulting in enhanced income generation from sales of surplus yields to 
institutions and supply -and-demand markets.


---
*Page 39*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 64 
   
 34 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) Total amount Currency  
38.207 million USD ($)   
GCF financial instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  NA Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  NA Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  NA   Enter  % equity 
return  
 
(iv) Guarantees  NA Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  NA    
(vi) Grants  38.207     
(vii) Result -based  payments  NA    
(b) Co -financing 
information59 Total amount  Currency  
81.707   million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
MINAG  Grant  23,220,250  million USD 
($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
MINAG  In kind  58,487,143  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter a mount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter a mount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
 
119.914 
  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max 0.5 page ) .  
 
 
59 MINAG contribution will be in the form of a cash grant  and in-kind support . FAO applies the official UN exchange rate set on a 
monthly basis by the UN Treasury –  this exchange rate is currently set at $1 USD to $1 Cuban Peso .


---
*Page 40*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 64 
   
 35  
C.2. Financing by Component 
  
 
Components  Output  Activity  Indicativ
e cost  
million 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1: 
Climate reslient 
agricultural systems  
 Output  1:  Increased 
CC-resilient production  
landscapes through 
investment in 
innovative agroforestry 
and silvopastoral 
systems, reforestation 
with close -to-nature 
planted forests 
(CTNPFs) and assisted 
natural forest 
regeneration  
 1.1 Restore approximately 15,544 ha of 
farmland from marabu, and increase 
CC-resilience through sustainable 
agroforestry (AF), CTNPFs and assisted natural regeneration (mitigation co -
benefit 833,950.60 million tCO2- eq. in 7 
years  of implementation)  59.354  20.513  Grants  38.841  Grants  MINAG  
1.2 Restore approximately 20,189 ha of 
rangeland with compacted soils and 
increase CC -resilience through 
improved silvopastoral systems 
(mitigation net co -benefit 381,311.51 
million t CO2eq in 7 years  of 
implementation).   51.604  14.151  Grants  37.453  Grants  MINAG  
Component 2: 
Strengthened 
institutional and 
technical capacities  
 Output  2:  
Strengthened 
institutional and farmer 
capacities to improve 
ecosystem services 
through agroforestry 
and forestry systems 
and enhance the 
climate -resilience of 
production landscapes   2.1 Increase institutional capacities to 
support farmers and producers’ 
organizations to establish and maintain 
agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry 
systems for improved ecosystem 
services  0.108 0.108 Grants  00.00  Choose an 
item.  n/a 
2.2 Train agricultural producers to 
collectively revitalize and manage landscape resources through climate 
resilience -enhancing agroforestry, 
silvopastoral  and forestry systems for 
gender -equitable agricultural 
production and ecosystem services  0.719 0.719 Grants  00.00  Choose an 
item.  n/a 
Component  3: 
Strengthened 
governance, legal  Output  3: Effective 
governance to  support 
climate resilience -
enhancing production 3.1 Develop, discuss and analyze 
options for policy reforms to support 
implementation of agroforestry, 
silvopastoral  and forestry systems for 0.261  0.261 Grants  00.00  Choose an 
item.  n/a


---
*Page 41*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 64 
   
 36 and regulatory 
framework  
 systems and ecosystem 
services  
 
 landscape resilience through improved 
ecosystem services  
3.2 Establish a Landscape Resilience 
Fund to support adoption and 
implementation of agroforestry, 
silvopastoral  and forestry systems in 
support of landscape resilience through 
ecosystem service enhancement  0.643 0.092 Grants  0.551  Grants  MINAG  
3.3 Strengthen planning, governance 
and coordination at the landscape level 
in support of landscape resilience 
through enhancement of ecosystem 
services  0.042  0.042        Grants  00.00  Choose an 
item.  MINAG  
 Project Management Costs   
 6.372  1.760        Grants  4.612  Grants  MINAG  
 
Evaluation (includes cost of an impact evaluation)  0.812  0.562        Grants  0.250  Grants  MINAG  
 Indicative total cost  (USD)  119.914 
 38.207  
 81.707


---
*Page 42*
---

C  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 64 
   
 37 C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  
C.3.1 Does GCF financing fund capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF financing fund technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
154. Over past decades, Cuba has strengthened the generation of knowledge, capacity building of institutions, production 
enterprises and technical staff, and innovation in the agricultural sector to mitigate the difficulties in accessing internat ional 
finance a nd in obtaining the requisite equipment and technology to effectively adapt to climate change.  While institutional 
and technical capacities are considered by FAO to be relatively high, farmers and producers’ organizations, as well as 
institutional staff, will benefit from training to acquire a state -of-the-art understanding of climate change and vulnerability 
in relation to Cuban agroecosystems, including livestock systems, and the scientific basis for emerging climate risk 
management and climate adaptation/mitigation options. With increasing climate -driven rainfall variability, institutional staff 
and farmers need to understand the fundamental relationship between climate change, ecosystem services –  particularly 
water regulation –  and land degradation, di saster risk and progressive loss of productivity.  
 
155. As such, GCF resources will be used in the project to train farmers and producers’ organizations as well as institutional and 
technical staff to plan for climate risk mitigation and adaptation and manage landscape resources, specifically operations 
and maintenance of agroforestry and s ilvopastoral systems. To establish agroforestry, s ilvopastoral and forestry systems 
effectively under Outcome 1, particular land preparation is required: land must be cleared of invasive marabu, conservation 
tillage effected, sub -soiling to ensure root as well as water penetration, saplings planted, etc.  While agroforestry and 
silvopastoral systems, once established, are reasonably low technology systems to operate, land prep aration requires 
technology and equipment that can be used efficiently to prepare land without augmenting carbon emissions or land 
degradation. Minimal logistical and other equipment is required to ensure adequate and timely institutional support to 
farmer s and producers’ organizations.  Since marabu removal and land preparation machinery are to be centrally managed 
by the UEBs (Base Enterprise Units) in the project areas, their staff will receive intensive training in machinery operations  
and maintenance.   
 
156. While the bulk of GCF funding is requested for technology and equipment, given historical obstacles to accessing 
international funding sources, a portion is solicited for capacity development under Out put 2. Given the already considerable 
capacities of the Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG) and other institutions, the technology and equipment requested here will allow the project to unlock and galvanize MINAG’s existing potential for innovation and adaptation to climate change. 
Farmers and producers’ organizations will receive training through their participation in 17 Farmer Field Schools located in 
the project areas. The project will build their capacities to understand and implement no -till cultivation, inte r-cropping, cut -
and-carry forage feeding, sub -soiling, soil conservation with gabions, gully plugs, bunds, and contour farming, marabu 
eradication and management, agroforestry and silvopastoral  system design and maintenance, application of efficient 
irriga tion technologies, and water harvesting and storage systems among others.  
 157. Under Output 3, the project will ensure that government of ficials from key Ministries and Provincial and Municipal authorities 
build their capacities through their participation in analysis and discussion o n climate change vulnerability, adaptation 
measures, ecosystem services, agricultural ecosystems and productivity, and land use regulations, legislation and policies.  A subset of these officials will build their capacities through  the analysis and discussion of economic instruments and financial 
mechanisms in general and their potential application in Cuba to capitalization and operations of the Landscape Resilience 
Fund.


---
*Page 43*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 64 
  D 
 
 38 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
D.1. Impact potential  
158. The project directly contributes to GCF Fund Level impact areas  of (A1.0) increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of 
the most vulnerable people, communities, and regions;  (A4.0) Improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem 
services; and (M4.0) Reduced emissions from land use, reforestation, reduced deforestation, and through 
sustainable forest management and conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks o f approximately 
2,675,727 t CO2  eq over twenty years.  
 
159. The project will reduce climate change vulnerability for farmers and producers’ organizations by improving ecosystem 
services, primarily water regulation, in two vulnerable regions of Cuba through integration of trees and bushes into 
agricultural productio n landscapes. The project will take a three- pronged approach: 1) removal of invasive marabu from 
farmland, where needed, sub -soiling of compacted soils to break up hardpans, and establishment of agroforestry, 
silvopastoral  and forestry systems (close -to-nature planted forests and assisted natural regeneration) based on a previous 
phase of research and development carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture and related institutes; 2) training of 
institutional staff and lead farmers to plan, manage and operate  agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems, including 
learning how to access Cuba’s diversity of markets; and 3) improving governance to support climate resilience -enhancing 
production systems and ecosystem services by transforming policy instrument s and incentive mechanisms to motivate 
adoption and implementation of agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems for climate change adaptation and 
mitigation, a s well as strengthening local planning, governance and coordination in support of climate resilient production 
systems and restoration of ecosystem services.   
 
160. By strengthening the capacity of farmers to adopt and apply these innovations and access markets, vulnerable farmers, 
including women farmers and youth will not only increase the ir food security but also their incomes.  Increased incomes will 
provide farmers with the means to re- invest in resilience -enhancing agricultural practices and systems and keep pace with 
ongoing climate change.  The project will directly benefit women farmer s and men through equal opportunities for training 
in resilience -enhancing agricultural practices and cropping systems as well as agroecosystem planning and management in 
response to rainfall variability and drought.  
 
161. Overall , 51,713 people or approximately 30% of the total population in climate -vulnerable areas of Las Tunas and Villa 
Clara/Matanzas provinces will benefit directly from project interventions that build resilience through restoration of 
ecosystem services. The project wi ll provide indirect benefits to 240,117 people  in communities around the target areas 
through strengthened institutional capacities for training and technical assistance, enhanced agro -ecosystem management, 
and widespread dissemination of lessons and best practices in climate -resilient agriculture.  These figures also include 
institutional staff at local, municipal and provincial levels who will benefit indirectly from improved information, institut ional 
capacities and knowledge management.  For more detail on how beneficiary numbers were calculated, please see Section 1.4 
of the Feasibility Study titled Description of profiles of target beneficiaries . 
 
162. Specifically:  
• 15,549 farmers (3,123 women  heads of household)60 on areas averaging 2.3  ha per farmer  will have the capacity to 
manage agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems to cope with rainfall variability and drought  (direct 
beneficiaries represent 51,098 people as the average number of people per household is 3 .2). 
• 443 agricultural extension  workers and staff of the Ministry of Agriculture, including extension -service technicians, 
agricultural technicians, and cooperative leaders/administrators , as well as 142 machinery operators will benefit 
from increased skills in training and technical assistance and improved capacities for agro -ecosystem planning and 
implementation of resilience -enhancing solutions.  
 
163. The project will invest in risk reduction strategies for the targeted stakeholders by increasing their productivity and stabilizing 
their agricultural production by mitigating the climate vulnerability of agroecosystems and broader ecosystem services. 
 
60 See FS Annex 2, Table 25a, p.64.


---
*Page 44*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 64 
  D 
 
 39 Inno vative agroecological practices and agroforestry and silvopastoral  systems will increase, stabilize and sustain yields while 
enhancing the climate -resilience of their agroecosystems. Yield surpluses will be sold on contract to institutions or in the 
supply- and-demand market, and with the profits, farmers will re- invest i n reducing or managing their climate vulnerability 
by improving, maintaining and sustaining the climate resilience of their production assets.  
 
 
164. The project , through Activity 2.1,  builds the technical capacities of MINAG to assess  climate risks and vulner abilities, identify 
options to build resilience of agroecosystems and identify innovations for climate -risk informed agricultural development. 
The project will also integrate gender and climate change concerns across policies and programs for resilience -enhancing 
agricultural development.  
 
165. Impact potential beyond the project lifetime will be catalysed  through investments in knowledge codification and 
dissemination; development and strengthening of FFS to build adaptive farmer capacities; and development of policies, 
regulatory frameworks and financial mechanisms that enable further dissemination and re plication of agroforestry, 
silvopastoral and forestry systems countrywide in a third phase.  
 
166. The project will also produce significant mitigation benefits through the integration of trees and bushes into production 
systems. With implementation of this proj ect, approximately 2,675,727t  CO2eq tonnes of CO2eq will be sequestered  over a 20 -
year period (please see Section 5.5 of the Feasibility Study for details ). 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential  
167. This project will shift the prevailing paradigm of production maximization to one of production systems that enhance climate 
resilience of production landscapes through the promotion of agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems as climate-
resilient production systems , supported by stronger institutions and a purpose -built financial mechanism . The current 
paradigm does not consider climate vulnerability or evolving and projected climate risk , nor does it consider the importance 
of optimizing ecosystem services for climate resilience of vulnerable households at landscape level.  As a result, institutio nal 
staff and producers are not equipped to address climate risk in planning and managing crop and livestock production. 
Financing and other incentives to adopt resilience -enhancing practices and systems are also weak. Women, in particular, 
generally receive less attention and support although they make up an increasing share of the producers in vulnerable areas, 
for example, of the 18,614 members of agricultural cooperatives in the project areas, 15% are women, and of the 4,000 
employ ees of the 40 state companies in these areas, 25 % are women.  
 
168. The project will enable farmers individually and coll ectively to plan and manage production systems that enhance ecosystem 
services and reduce vulnerability and climate risk. Farmers will receive concerted technical support and training from 
institutional staff to strengthen their understanding of ecosystem function/services in production landscapes, the relation of 
these to climate risk management, and practical application of this knowledge and development of the required skills to 
establish and manage agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems to enh ance landscape climate resilience. A specific 
funding mechanism –  a Landscape Resilience Fund -  will be established to support farmers and producers’ organizations with 
the resources required to invest in and implement resilience -enhancing approaches, ligh t irrigation and storage 
infrastructure, productivity- enhancing equipment and technologies, and value -addition enterprises and activities. Women 
will receive targeted training, access to subsidies and grants, and value -addition and marketing s upport. This Fund will result 
from the transformation of the current Forestry Development and Soil Conservation Funds of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
potentially include new fiscal and economic instruments and other sources of finance.  
 
Potential for scaling up and replication  
169. Cuba has chosen  to improve ecosystem services in production landscapes aimed primarily at water regulation to enhance 
and sustain diversified agricultural production without land degradation to  adapt to CC. In a first phase , the Ministry of 
Agriculture supported research into optimal agroforestry and forestry systems for wetter and drier areas of Cuba, including 
coastal zones and upland watershed areas, and identified and tested a number of options. The six modules designed and 
tested in this first phase are proposed for initial up- scaling in this project –  the second phase -  in two regions in the provinces 
of Las Tunas and Villa Clara/Matanzas, which are representative of prevailing climatic conditions across the island and of 
increasingly vulnerable populations. By implementing these modules at the selected project locations with selected


---
*Page 45*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 64 
  D 
 
 40 stakeholders61 in this second phase, the project will reduce climate risk for vulnerable producers, enhance production 
landscape resilience , increase producers’ and institutional capacit y to manage climate risk, and generate further knowledge 
of the performance of these agroforestry systems at scale , as well as the corresponding institutional and producer 
requirements for a program of country wide up-scaling i.e. the third phase.  This third phase will be designed based on the 
experience and lessons learned from the implementation of th e second -phase (this Project) .  
 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
170. The project builds on the lessons learned and best practices identified by the Ministry of Agriculture from research and 
analysis of the performance of a variety of agroforestry systems piloted and tested in the field during the first phase (see 
Appendix  2 of the FS, S ection 5.1).  Implementation of the second phase (the project proposed here) will yield, aside from the 
results pursued, a further wealth of knowledge based on this up- scaling of best practice. The project will monitor and assess 
the performance of each module under the conditions at each site, including agro -ecological, climate mitigation/adaptation, 
socio -economic, institutional and capacity factors. Case studies, cross -site and cross -module analyses, and thematic studies 
will be carried out to be used as a basis for e ffective up-scaling. Knowledge generated by this project will be made freely 
available on the project website by the Ministry of Agriculture, through FAO’s knowledge network and in relevant 
international and regional forums.  
 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
171.  The Project, through its activity 3.2, will improve the accessibility of incentives from the National Forestry Development Fund 
and the Soil Conservation Fund by transforming these funds into a single Landscape Resilience Fund aimed at farmer 
cooperatives and especial ly vulnerable small landholders . Through this activity , FAO will provide the Government with 
assistance in legal, normative and policy matters, and facilitate the inter -institutional dialogue needed to implement the clear 
political mandate contained in the NDP 2030, Tarea Vida and the NDCs, and to overcome the barriers that still hinder their 
implementation.  Furthermore, in activity 3.3, the  project will train key organizations in the seven target mun icipalities to 
participate effectively and collaboratively in planning and decision -making processes that determine the management 
outcomes, outputs and activities in the target landscapes to enhance their climate resilience.  Strengthening of governance 
mechanisms will also include development of norms, agreements and organizational capacities for the collaborative 
management of areas targeted for restoration with the aim of augmenting the stability and sustainability of water flows into,  
across and/or out  of the landscape as a key element in enhancing its climate resilience.  
 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
172. Knowledge generated by this  project in case studies, analyses or other forms will be presented to government authorities 
for thei r review and consideration as inputs to policy discussions and debate, as relevant.  Useful information and lessons of 
value will be available to policy makers and other stakeholders, including farmers,  who might further refine the expansion of 
climate res ilience -enhancing agroforestry in Cuba, including aspects relating to  the increased involvement and participation 
of women,  integration with biodiversity conservation programs and strategies (biological corridors), links to the tourism 
industry, input supply, commercialization, value addition, product certification an capacity development at both institutional 
and producer levels. The Project will contribute to regulatory framework adjustments by inclusion of relevant climate 
adaptation criteria into agricu ltural extension programs and policies at the national level, including in relation to revising and 
implementing Cuba´s NDC under the Paris Agreement.  
 
173. Output 3 of this project is aimed squarely at transforming policy and financial mechanisms to motivate adoption and 
implementation of agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems for climate change adaptation and mitigation, and 
strengthening local planning, governance and coordination in support of climate resilient  production systems and restoration 
of ecosystem services. The resulting reforms to policy and regulatory frameworks will provide a robust enabling environment 
for replication of and support to agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry systems by vulnerable  farmers and producers’ 
organizations. In fact, the results of Out put 3 will be vital to the follow -on phase –  phase three –  of countrywide up- scaling 
of this project’s results.  
 
 
 
 
 
61 See Section 1.3, Criteri a for selecting beneficiaries , in Annex 2 - Feasibility Study .


---
*Page 46*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 64 
  D 
 
 41 Overall contribution to climate -resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change adaptation 
strategies and plans  
174. This strategy builds on Cuban national policies, programs and legislation encompassing climate adaptation and mitigation 
priorities, particularly Tarea Vida62 (the national climate change plan, strategic actions 3 and 4, and Tasks 1, 4, 5, 8, and 11), 
and Cuba’s Nationally Determi ned Contribution, ensuring alignment with  the project proposed and GCF objectives. This 
project contributes directly to Cuba’s national adaptation strategies and plans, particularly priority 3 of the NDC: 
Incorporating the adaptation dimension into programs, plans and projects related to food production, integrated water 
management, land management, forestry, fisheries, tourism and health.  This project will also produce mitigation co -benefits 
aligned with measures proposed in the Second National Communication63: (i) CH 4 emission reduction from enteric 
fermentation (by improvement of pastures) ; (ii) transition from traditional, high -input agriculture to conservation agriculture 
to reach 220,000 ha by 205064; and (iii) a fforestation and f orest protect ion with the objective of reaching a national forest 
cover of 35% by 2050. By establishing and operationalizing a Landscape Resilience Fund, the project will enable funding to 
be made available to farmers and producers’ associations countrywide for adoption of resilience -enhancing practices and 
systems.   
D.3. Sustainable development  
175. Environmental co -benefits  will be produced by this project as a result of agricultural diversification and the extension of 
agroecological practices for climate adaptation and risk mitigation. The project will promote multi -cropping systems with the 
aim of maintaining soil cover throughout the year, enhancing soil organic matter and carbon content, reducing soil erosion, 
increa sing groundwater recharge, reducing vulnerability to insect pests and enhancing their diversity, including pollinators 
and increasing water absorption  capacity and soil biodiversity. More efficient irrigation will allow for the growth of green 
manure crops , improving nutrient cycling at farm and landscape level and providing continuous vegetative cover on farmland. 
The use of leguminous trees in agroforestry systems will permit reduction or elimination of the use of nitrogen fertilizers, 
reducing greenhouse  gas emissions from this source. Use of trees and shrubs in silvopastoral  systems will assist in avoiding 
soil compaction and provide shade for soil, thereby reducing soil temperatures , erosion  and the speed of physical, chemical 
and micro -biological proce sses. Agricultural diversification through integration of trees and shrubs into crop production will 
produce significant climate change mitigation  and resilience  benefits.  
 
176. Social co -benefits  will result from implementation by farmers and producers’ organ izations of agroforestry systems, 
resilience -enhancing agricultural practices and more efficient water use. Farmers will learn  to plan and implement their 
operations while managing climate risk. Capacity building through the established system of Farmer Fi eld Schools  and its 
proposed expansion , training -and-visit extension, and farmer -to-farmer exchanges will build a broader culture of climate 
resilient agriculture and livestock raising in which knowledge and experience are freely exchanged, contributing to  social 
cohesion and resilience.  It is expected that increased and more stable yields will permit farmers and producers’ organizatio ns 
to achieve a level of food and livelihoods  security based on contractual agreements with buyers, as well as sales to supply -
and-demand markets. Women, in particular, will receive strong support given the increasing percentage of women in  rural 
areas owing to rural -to-urban migration of male family members. Women will receive gender -sensitive training and skill 
building, including for farm management, business development, use of weather and climate information, and marketing of 
farm products.    
 
177. This project will aim at equal gender participation in all activities as well as promote increased opportunities for women 
through specific activities. Increased incomes from climate -resilient agroforestry and silvopastoral  production will empower 
women fa rmers to participate more fully in decision making and economic activity. With increases in income, women farmers 
will be encouraged to allocate a larger portion of household resources to the education and health of their household  
members . By demonstrating an increase in autonomous decision making, participating women farmers will provide positive 
role models for adolescent girls. At the same time, as women and girls become more empowered members of their 
communities, they may more effectively advocate com munity improvements to better serve their needs, which can increase 
the adaptive capacity of their communities.  
 
 
62 https://www.ecured.cu/Tarea_Vida#Acciones_estrat.C3.A9gicas  
63 Second National Communication to the UNFCCC. Cuba 2015.  
64 An inter -ministerial working group on Conservation Agriculture conveyed by the MINAG with FAO support formulated a Roadmap 
for Conservation Agriculture, which this project will help to implement.


---
*Page 47*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 64 
  D 
 
 42 178. Economic co -benefits  will accrue to producers overall through sale of farm surpluses to farmer markets, the tourism industry, 
and other  formal and informal markets. Sales of farm products to annually contracting institutions will provide a bas ic level 
of economic security to producers, while sales of surpluses to these markets will increase farm revenues and income. More 
diversified agricultural production systems will provide greater opportunities for on- farm employment throughout the year. 
Improvements in  access to and  the efficiency of water use will result in labor saving, permitting farmers to achieve higher 
degrees of economic efficiency.  
 
179. Under Tarea Vida,  the Cuban government is investing institutional, financial and technical resources to support the 
diversification of production as a strategy to build the climate -resilience of landscapes and rural communities. The 
government’s three- phase approach guaran tees incremental investments in agricultural and livestock systems based on 
scaling up of lessons and knowledge from their implementation. The project scales up proven modules developed under actual farm level conditions in response to climate change model s and assessments that predict increasing climate variability; 
this science -based approach to climate -resilient agriculture enhances economic efficiency.  With the implementation of this 
project, evidence will become available for further development and r efinement of the country’s climate adaptation and 
mitigation policies.  
 
180. Benefits expected from strengthening the climate resilience of farmers and producers’ organizations in Villa Clara/Matanzas  
and Las Tunas  provinces include  enhanced crop yields and inc ome due to increased and more reliable water during the dry 
season. With this project, loss of income from drought will be avoided. With the project, farm households will benefit from 
application of agroforestry and silvopastoral  modules  on formerly marabu -infested or degraded land . Through this project 
farm households will have access to 
35,734 has of reclaimed farmland for production of subsistence and commercial crops.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient   
181. According to the Climate Change Vulnerability Index, Cuba is classified as “high risk”65 and, as a Small Island Developing State 
(SIDS), faces serious impacts from climate change (CC)66. These include a rise in average temperatures and increasing rainfall 
variability, as well as higher hurricane frequency and increasing sea level rise. The consequences of these changes include 
diminishing availability of water for agricultural production and increasing drought, accelerating land degradation, decreasing 
productivity, growing infestation of agricultural lands by an invasive non- native species (marabu -  Dichrostachys cinereal ), 
and increasing saltwater intrusion. These impacts are increasingly affecting rural livelihoods and food security.  The 
vulnerability of the population in the rural agricultural sector is miti gated to a great degree by Cuba’s social protection policy, 
which establishes a comprehensive system of risk mitigation in regard to natural disasters, including extreme weather events 
linked to climate change e.g. hurricanes and torrential rainfall, and drought.  However, in prioritizing areas of the country for 
immediate action, the plan acknowledges the necessity of a phased approach to implementing solutions to adaptation 
challenges in the agricultural sector.  
 
Economic and social development  
182. Household and productive landscapes in the regions targeted by the Project are vulnerable to climate change effects  (see 
also the FS, Sections 1.3 and 1.4 and Appendi ces 2.1 and 2.2 to FS). This project will provide farmers with the capacities, 
technology and machinery they require to establish and operate sustainable agroforestry and silvopastoral systems that will 
improve the climate resilience of agricultural  production, as well as its productivity.  The project will stimulate resilience -
enhancing agricultural production by farmers and producers’ organizations by providing them with the information, 
knowledge, skills and technologies they require to successfull y manage their climate risk and produce the necessary revenues 
to re -invest in climate resilient production systems as the impacts of climate change continue to evolve. GCF resources will 
finance capacity building of farmers to plan and manage their agroecosystem and technological assets . Farmers and producer 
organizations will take a business approach to climate -resilient crop production with the aim of building their capacities to 
access the variety of  existing markets. Application of efficient irri gation technologies and resilience -enhancing agricultural 
practices will ensure sustainability and productivity of innovative agroforestry and silvopastoral  systems, stabilizing and 
sustaining yields while decreasing vulnerability to climate change impacts .  
 
 
65 Corporación Andina de Fomento, 2014. Índice de vulnerabilidad y adaptación al cambio climático en la región de América Latina  y el 
Caribe.  
66 Segunda Comunicación Nacional a la Convención Marco de las Naciones Unidas sobre Cambio Climático. La Habana 2015.


---
*Page 48*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 64 
  D 
 
 43  
 
 
Financial needs  
183. Every year Cuba is affected by a variety of climate change impacts that are increasing in strength and frequency: droughts, 
torrential rainfall , including from hurricanes ; saltwater intrusion, flooding; landslides and extreme temperatures. Increased 
exposure of farmers and agricultural assets to climate change impacts has been a significant source of economic losses.  
 
184. Severe recurring droughts (years 2004, 2008, 2009) and  a diminishing water balance is one of the most concerning changes 
observed in Cuba´s Eastern Region (including Las Tunas) during the last decades , along with  significant reduction s in relative 
humidity ( FS, section 1.2.3.2.1 Water Resources ). This, combin ed with a lack of climate change -adapted agriculture, has led 
to a steady reduction of the area covered with agricultural crops and pastureland, making them more prone to invasion by 
marabú.  
 
185. Future climate scenarios predict a temperature rise of 4 °C and a  decline in rainfall between 15 and 63% for  years 2050-
210067. This would result in a decline in rainfall of 975 -481 mm in Villa Clara/Matanzas, and 750- 370 mm in Las Tunas, with 
devastating impacts on agricultural productivity: y ield would be reduc ed by 6-9% for sugarcane, 10- 22% for beans, rice, 
manioc and maize , and up to 48% for potatoes ( Appendix 2.2. Tables 2 -a, 2-b ). Rice and maize  constitute more than 70% of 
cereals consumed by Cubans, while beans are the second most consumed food in Cuba (only preceded by rice) and the main 
source of vegetable protein in the diet of Cubans68. Projected cattle birth rate reduction could reach 15 -25%, while livestock 
mortality could reach 27% and up to 70% respectively by 2050 and 210069. The business -as-usual (BAU) scenario for livestock 
production in the project’s two target  regions (i.e. continuing with the traditional grazing practices) will result in a reduction 
of total grassland biomass of 18% and a growing dominance of C4 grasses, with increasing C/N ratios that would produce 
higher methane emissions from enteric fermentat ion of ruminants  (Please see Appendix 2.4 of the FS ). 
 
186. Cuba has limited  access to international financial institutions and faces  significant  obstacles in importing the machinery and 
technology that could support  adaptation of  agricultural production to the evolving impacts of climate change. While the 
Ministry of Agriculture’s organizational and technical capacities are some of the highest in the LAC region, its ability to 
transform the current production- maximizing paradigm t o one of stable, sustainable and climate -resilient production is 
obstructed by the lack of the necessary machinery and technology. Cuba’s ability to generate sufficient fiscal resources is 
hindered by the acco unt deficit of the balance of payments, bank de ductions on foreign transfers and the high degree of 
debt maturity, all of which reduce its ability to obtain necessary  loans.  
Institutional needs  
187. The Ministry  of Agriculture  has successfully concluded the research and development required to identify and test models 
of agro- ecosystems that are more resilient to climate change. While the ministry  is widely regarded by outside experts as 
having  a high level of technical and org anizational  capacity, the Ministry staff at all levels have insufficient awareness, 
understanding and knowledge of climate change and its effects on ecosystem services and agroecosystem productivity to 
lead or facilitate agricultural adaptation by farmers and producers’ organizations. Farmers and producers’ organizations lack 
technical knowledge and understanding, along with the skills and capacities to mitigate climate risk and reform maladaptive 
agricultural practices. Farmers require state -of-the-art knowledge of the agroecology of agroforestry and silvopastoral  
systems, projected climate change impacts, as well as the management and planning skills to enhance climate resilience at 
farm and landscape levels. MINAG has the technical and institutional capacities to facilitate adoption of resilience -enhancing 
agricultural practices and technologies, however, they lack the access to technology and machinery that would galvanize 
widespread adoption both individually and collectively.   
D.5. Country ownership  
Existing national climate strategy  
188. The First National Programme to Combat Climate Change ( Programa de Enfrentamiento al Cambio Climático –  PECC , 2017)  
outlines Cuba’s adaptation strategy regarding, in particular, the sustainable  use and protection of water and soil resources; 
the upgrading of Cuban agriculture; the conservation and protection of forest resources; land use planning with emphasis on 
 
67 PRECIS modelling (Centella et al 2008) in Cuba, SNC to the UNFCCC (2015); and Somoza J. de la Colina (2018)  
68 Rivero et al 2010, Rivero and Vega 2004. Rodriguez Vega et al 2003. In Somoza J. De la Colina (2018)  
69 Rivero et al 2010, Rivero and Vega 2004.  Rodriguez Vega et al 2003. In Somoza J. De la Colina (2018)


---
*Page 49*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 64 
  D 
 
 44 human settlements; and the protection of biodiversity. The PECC, coordinated by CITMA and its Executive Environmental 
Agency (AMA), is mandated to ensure that the science -based environmental dimension is included in the development and 
implementation of all climate change adaptation actions.  
 
189. In April 2017, the Council of Ministers approved the National Plan to Confront Climate Change ( Tarea Vida: Plan de 
Estado para el enfrentamiento al cambio climático ). This comprehensive plan establishes national priorities for the short 
(2020), medium (2030) and long- term (2050 and 2100), which includes assessing and updating policies such as the 
Environmental Law (Law 81) and the National Decree on Coastal Areas. Tarea Vida includes five priority actions, two of 
which directly address adaptation in the agricultural sector70, with 11 activities focused specifically on coastal and 
agricultural areas.  
Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs  
190. In November 2015, Cuba presented its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)  to the UN FCCC, listing six priority 
actions for climate change adaptation . One of these priority actions is directly related to this proposed project : 
“Incorporating the adaptation dimension into programs, plans and projects related to food production, integrated w ater 
management, land management, forestry, fisheries, tourism and health. ” 
 
191. The NDC also identifies two priority sectors for reducing GHG emissions: agricultur e and energy, which account, respectively 
for 76% and 15% of the country’s emissions . The forest ry sector has shown sustained growth –  forest coverage increased 
from 14% of the country’s surface area in 1959 to 29% in 2013. Currently, it is estimated that Cuban forests have a 
sequestration capacity of approximately 14.3 million tonnes of C O2 per year, according to data from the latest GHG inventory.  
Cuba has not yet developed either a NAP or a NAMA . However, a NAMA in the pork production sector is currently under 
development.  
Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver  
192. The Ministry of Agriculture is the body of the Cuban Government ( central administration of the state (OACE) ) resp onsible for 
proposing and implementing the policy on the use, tenure and sustainable exploitatio n of the agricultural area of the country, 
agricultural and forestry production, to meet the needs of population, industry and export. As such, it  has as respon sibility  
to direct, execute and control the policy of the Cuban government  and administration  in the following areas: use, 
conservation and improvement of soil; ownership and possession of agricultural and forestry land; plant health; veterinary 
Medicine; conservation, management and rational use and sustainable development of the country's livestock forest 
resources; mechanization and irrigation of the production programs that it is responsible for; livestock and forestry 
agricultural production activities ; profit activities and industry of rice, tobacco, citrus, coffee, apiculture  products, feed, 
forestry, poultry and activities of collection and benefit of agricultural and forestry products. Linked to the forestry sect or, 
the following must be fulfilled: Specific function No. 9: Manage the use and use of agroforestry heritage, inc luding fruit trees 
and the administration of the National Fund for Forest Development (FONADEF).  At the municipal level, specific function No. 
8: Execute and control the use and exploitation of agroforestry heritage, including fruit trees and the administr ation of 
FONADEF; for which several functions must be fulfilled. (more details on capacities to deliver is available in Appendix 2.7 t o 
the FS).  
 
193. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) is a GCF -accredited entity. It is an interna tional 
organization whose main goals are the eradication of hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition; the elimination of poverty 
and the driving forward of economic and social progress for all; and the sustainable management and utilization of natural 
reso urces, including forest, land, water, air, climate and genetic resources for the benefit of present and future generations. 
In line with the vision for sustainable food and agriculture to “Make agriculture, forestry and fisheries more productive and 
more s ustainable”, FAO promotes conservation and climate resilient, sustainable agriculture as a way to increase 
productivity, adapt and build resilience of food systems and, wherever possible, reduce GHG emissions. FAO has supported projects for climate adaptat ion and mitigation worldwide and has led and managed numerous climate change related 
projects.  
 
 
70 Adapt agricultural and livestock activities, particularly those with the greatest impact on the country's food security, to c hanges in land 
use as a result of sea level rise and drought; and re duce cropping areas of the coastal area affected by saline intrusion and diversifying 
crops, improve soil conditions, introduce and develop varieties resistant to the new temperature scenario “.


---
*Page 50*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 64 
  D 
 
 45 Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, women and 
other vulnerable groups  
194. Several consultation meetings  and stakeholder engagement workshops were held during the Project preparation (2017 -
2018). Government entities and representations of the project's beneficiaries have been continuously consulted, who have 
provided information and inputs for the elaboration of the project, in support to the work of the technical design team. The 
consultations focused on meetings with authorities, civil society organizations, cooperatives, producers and 
communities`representatives to provide information on: a) the purposes of the project; b) general information on potential impacts; and c) preliminary ideas of the way the project would be implemented. These meetings were used to exchange on 
aspects of gender, attention to young people and possible less fa vored groups, assess the interests and priorities of people 
and entities, as well as assess support for the Project. For further information, please see Annex 7, Summary of Consultation s 
and Stakeholder Engagement Plan, Section 1.2).    
 
195. Long -term instituti onal ownership and sustainability of this project has been established via the efforts of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MINAG) in leading a broad consultation process, including two national consultation workshops during the 
development of this proposal. This process involved the technical advisory team of the NDA (CITMA), the Environment 
Agency; the provincial delegations of MINAG, the technical advisory group of the agricultural and forestry sector to support local provincial development; the Agroforestry Institute; the Institute for Research on Grasses and Forages; the Livestock 
Department of the Ministry of Agriculture; the Department of Science and Technology, Innovation and Environment of the 
Ministry of Agriculture; the Institute for Fundamental Resear ch on Tropical Agriculture (INIFAT); Institute of Soils; Center for 
Research on  Animal Improvement (CI MINAG T); Institute of Agricultural Engineering (IAGRIC); Institute of Plant Health 
(INISAV); and Universities  as well as farmers, including women farmers  and farmer cooperatives.  
Role of National Designated Authority
 
196. MINAG and CITMA, Cuba’s NDA, have thoroughly participated in the development of this Proposal. FAO has facilitated 
dialogue between the Ministry of Agriculture and the NDA, who have confirmed both the relevance of the proposal and its priority. In particular , the following was addressed:  
• Coherence and alignment with the country’s national climate strategy and priorities in mitigation or adaptation: 
as described above, the project is fully  aligned with Cuba’s development and climate change adaptation policies,  
strategies and proposed actions. Cuba’s NDA granted full support to the first draft of this concept note through 
the “no -objection” letter that was submitted to the GCF in November  2019. 
• Integration of lessons learned: past and ongoing initiatives that ha ve generated substantial knowledge and 
experience regarding revitalization of productive ecosystems under changing climatic conditions have been analyzed and lessons integrated into the design of this proposal.  
 
197. This proposal was prepared in response to the expression of interest by Cuba’s NDA for assistance in building the climate 
resilience of the agricultural sector in light of increasing vulnerability. Meetings began with the NDA and the Ministry of 
Agricultur e in late 2017, when FAO, the Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG) and NDA staff identified potential technical solutions 
to the problem of diminishing water security in central and eastern Cuba due to increasing rainfall variability. Key 
stakeholders were iden tified within the Ministry of Agriculture and in the municipalities and provinces targeted by Tarea 
Vida,  the state plan to combat climate change.    
 
198. FAO assisted the government to gather technical inputs and institutional information on the mandates, roles, capacities and 
programs of these institutions and worked with the NDA in coordinating work among them. Once the targeting and scope of 
the proposed project were outlined in meetings , and following the identification of the target areas bas ed on their 
vulnerability, as outlined above,  with officials from the Ministry of Agriculture, individual interviews took place with officials 
in Las Tunas, S anta  Clara and Matanzas provinces and in the municipalities of Corralillo, Quemado de Güines , Santo Domingo , 
and Los Arabos (Central Region); and Amancio Rodríguez, Colombia and Jobabo (Eastern Region).  
 
199. Following initial scoping and information gathering, FAO and MINAG provided their preliminary findings and suggestions to 
the NDA. Based on feedback,  an expanded FAO team was put together, drawing on in -country and international technical 
expertise to explore selected issues in more detail. This team carried out field missions in 2018 and early 2019, and its in -
depth engagement has been on- going in the  form of data collection and analysis as well as through on -site visits, focus group 
meetings and field level consultations with farmers (with special attention to women), producer groups, suppliers, and others  
in the proposed project area.


---
*Page 51*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 64 
  D 
 
 46  
200. The provinci al and national governments contributed to the formulation of the project by allocating experts to provide 
specific technical information as well as data necessary for formulation of the project.  Additionally, the Project formulation 
process involved several consultations meetings with authorities, civil society organizations , cooperatives, producers and 
communities `representatives in order to ensure the Project activities would be responsive to the beneficiaries`ne eds. FAO 
also closely engaged with development partners in Cuba working in agriculture and water management in order to benefit 
from their insights and to determine how GCF financing for climate change adaptation could help increase the returns to 
investments that the country is making with the external financing they are providing. Amongst these partners, FAO has 
conferred most closely with UNDP.   
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  
201. As presented in Section 1, climate change is already affecting agricultural areas in Cuba, including forests and pastures, 
and this is expected to worsen according to climate change projections. Increased temperatures and variations on precipitation patter ns due to climate change will lead to the expansion of Marabú, the invasive species that has a high 
capacity for adaptation and growth. Rehabilitating areas after Marabú infestation is a high cost endevour and farmers who 
own land under these conditions do  not have the economic capacity to make investments needed for their recovery. This 
leads to lands abandonment, limiting the development of production systems that conserve soil and water resources, build resilience to CC and generate income to improve liv elihoods. Economic and financial analyses were therefore carried out 
to estimate the costs and benefits of the project, vis -a-vis a no -project basline.  
 
202. For the financial analysis the revenues accruing from the agroforestry modules in Out put 1 of the project were considered, 
as well as the production costs incurred. Taking into consideration that the agroforestry modules proposed in Out put 1 of 
this projec t will be implemented in areas that would remain unused without the project, all the investments, costs and 
revenues  would be incremental.  Over the project lifespan of 20 years, the proposed modules proved to be financially viable 
(please see Table 1 in An nex 3 for the financial evaluation indicators of the agroforestry and silvopastoral modules of the 
IRES project, specifically, the net present value, the internal income rate and the equivalent annual NPV for planning 
horizons of 10 years and 20 years), ex cept for the natural regeneration model. The incremental net present value and the 
internal rate of return ranged between -  US$1,998 (IRR of 2.45%) and US$82,430 (IRR of 29.52%). The Annual Incremental 
Equivalent NPV, which is equivalent to the yearly incr emental net present value, ranges from -  US$268 to US$11,036. The 
results show that the models generate benefits for farmer families that are higher than the investment costs. Sensitivity 
analyses results are presented in Annex 3 table 2.  
 
203. An economic anal ysis was carried out for the entire project, considering the costs of implementing the full project (US$ 
38.20 million contributed by the Green Climate Fund and US$ 81.70 million of national matching contribution) and project 
generated benefits in terms of generated income (from financial analyses results), as well as  improvement and restoration of ecosystem services (avoided soil erosion and carbon capture  ) in the biome s where interventions will be carried out  
(Woodlands and Grasslands) . The economic benefit for the entire project is estimated in US $22.469 million, with an 
internal rate of return of 15.4%. In other words, with an investment of US$119.9 million, it is ex pected to create economic 
benefits in excess to the opportunity cost of capital (12%) and produce a bonus of US$22.469 million. This means an economic net present value per benefited hectare of US$628.81, an economic net present value per household of 
US$1 ,407.15 and an economic net present value per beneficiary of $439.73, considering 3.2 family members per 
household.  Results of the sensitivity analyses are presented in Annex 3 Table 6.  
 
204. Cost -effectiveness of this project  was determined by evaluation of pr evious in -country experiences with rehabilitation of 
Marabú infested areas as well as agroforestry, silvopastoral systems and natural regeneration. The d esign of project 
investments was based on lessons learned from multiple sources, including FAO with its  global and decades -long 
experience in promoting climate resilient land use .  The recommendations offered as part of the Feasibility Study informed 
the process of analysis and design of this proposal and provide a high degree of confidence that the proj ect’s predicted 
impacts will be achieved cost -effectively.


---
*Page 52*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 64 
  E 
 
 47 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
☒ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
 
 E.2. Core indicator targets 
 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
only)  Annual  133,786 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  2,675,727  t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation only)  (a) Total project financing  119.914  million  USD     
(b) Requested GCF amount   38.207  million   USD  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions    2,675,727   t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO 2eq (d = a / c)  44.82    USD  / t CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO 2eq removed 
(e = b / c)  14.28   USD  / t CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project as a result of 
the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation only)  (f) Total finance leveraged   81.707  million     USD  
(g) Public source co- financed  81.707  million    USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  n/a   USD  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b)  2.139    
(j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b)  2.139   
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  n/a 
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct   
51,713  
25,136 (46%) female  
 
Indirect  240,117  
46% female  
 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  0.45 % of total population  
Female direct beneficiaries: 0.2 % of total population  
Indirect  2.1% of total population  
Female indirect beneficiaries: 0.96 % of total population


---
*Page 53*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 64 
  E 
 48 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
 
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term Final  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable 
people, 
communities and 
regions  A1.2 Number of 
males and females 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)  Secundary and 
ancillary Data 
from other 
sources, such as 
national reports and statistics,  
 
Baseline, mid -
term, final Project reports.  
 
Qualitative assessment 
through 
questionnaires 
and surveys  0 farmers  
 
Male: 0  
 
Female: 0  25,549  
 
Male: 
13796  
 
Female:  
11,753  Total: 51,098  
Male: 
27,593  
Female: 
23,505  Farmers and agricultural enterprises will be 
motivated to participate.  
Both women and men will act to participate when invited.  
A4.0 Improved 
resilience of 
ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  A4.1 Coverage/scale 
of ecosystems 
protected and 
stregnthened in 
response to climate 
variability and 
change  Progress reports  
Farm records.  
Qualitative 
assessment 
through 
questionnaires 
and surveys  Hectares:  
0 Hectares:  
17,867  Hectare s: 
35,734  
 Implementation of agroforestry and forestry 
modules will be sufficiently widespread that there will be a measurable impact on 
ecosystem function/services . 
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from land use, reforestation, 
reduced 
deforestation, and 
through sustainable 
forest management 
and conservation M4.1 Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2 eq) 
reduced or avoided 
(includi ng increased 
removals) - forest 
and land use  Progress reports 
and monitoring of carbon stock by 
comparison to 
baseline x C stock 
(see VCS Project 
Descriptions) Tonnes 
CO2e q: 
0 Tonnes 
CO2e q: 
468,252 
  
Tonnes 
CO2e q: 
2,675,727  
 
 
  Stakeholders will readily adopt and implement 
agroforestry/ forestry practices and systems and be motivated to sustain them over the next 
seven years at a minimum and over 20, 
constituting the life of the Project (target is 
reference to 20 year liftime)


---
*Page 54*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 64 
  E 
 49 and enhancement 
of forest carbon 
stocks  using Ex -Act 
Methodology  
 
E.4. Fund -level outcomes  
 
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  Mid-term  Final  
A5.0 Strengthened institutional 
and regulatory systems for 
climate -responsive planning and 
development  A5.1 Institutional and regulatory 
systems that improve incentives 
for climate resilience and their 
effective implementation   Regulatory and 
normative 
framework 
approved by 
competent 
authority and 
published in official 
media  0 01 specific 
proposal for 
policy reforms 
discuss ed and 
drafted;  01 specific 
proposal for 
policy reforms 
approved  No crisis emerges that impedes 
expeditious analyses and 
discussions of institutional and 
regulatory systems.  
 
The regulatory and normative 
framework is expected to be 
finalized and approved during the 
second half of the Project 
implementation.   
Farmers 
perception survey 
on improved 
incentives for 
Climate resilience  0% of 
response  50% of the 
beneficiaries 
have a good 
perception 
about the 
improved 
incentives for 
climate 
resilence  100% of the 
beneficiaries 
have a good 
understandin
g about the 
improved 
incentives for 
climate 
resilence  
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure 
to climate risks  A7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, communities, 
businesses and public -sector 
services of Fund -supported tools 
instruments, strategies and 
activities to respond to climate 
change and variability  Records of 
stakeholder 
participation in 
project activities 
(training, tasks, 
etc.)  
Farmers and  
producers`organiza
tions interest in 
learning  new skills 
and apply new 
knowledge will be 
assessed through 
questionnaires 0 15,329 (30%) 
of direct 
beneficiaries 
of which 7131 
(46%) are 
female with 
enhanced 
knowledge on 
CC-resilient 
production 
landscapes 
solutions  51,713 (100%) 
of direct 
beneficiaries 
of which 46% 
are female) 
with 
enhanced 
knowledge on 
CC-resilient 
production 
landscapes 
solutions. 
Farmers and 
producers’ Farmers and producers’ 
organizations continue to be 
interested in learning new skills 
and apply new knowledge to 
production.


---
*Page 55*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 64 
  E 
 50 applied at the 
Project mid -term 
and final phases . 
Questionnaires will 
follow guidances 
from FAO`s OED 
Capacity 
Development 
Evaluation 
Framework71. 
 organizations 
continue to 
be interested 
in learning 
new skills and 
applying new 
knowledge to 
production  
M9.0 Improved management of 
land or forest areas contributing 
to emissions reductions  M9.1 Hectares of land or forests 
under improved and effective 
management that contributes to 
CO2 emission reductions   Satellite 
monitoring  
Field inspections of 
agroforestry, 
silvopastoral and 
reforested areas  
 0 ha 17,867 ha 35,734 ha Plantations are unaffected by 
extreme weather events e.g. 
drought, hurricane  
 
E.5. Project performance indicators  
 
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
Output 1:  Increased CC -
resilient production  
landscapes through 
investment in innovative 
agroforestry and 
silvopastoral systems, 
reforestation with close- to-
nature planted forests 
(CTNPFs) and assisted natural 
forest regeneration  Hectares of land 
implementing 
agroforestry, silvopastoral 
and forestry modules  
 MAG field 
inspections and 
reports Farmer 
surveys and 
questionnaires  0 hectares  
 17,867  
 35,734 ha  
 Farmers will be motivated to adopt 
and sustain innovative agroforestry 
and forestry systems at sufficient 
scale  
 
Correct Implementation of 
sustainable and innovative 
agroforestry and silvopastoral 
systems will lead to improved 
overall environmental and 
ecosystem service provision    % of  farmers perception 
about the advantage of 
including new methods to 
improve resilience to CC.  0% of positive 
response by 
trained 
farmers  90% of positive 
response by 
trained farmers  100% of positive response by 
trained farmers  
Population of target 
municipalities indicating 
they preceive improved 
ecosystem services   0% 10%  35%  
 
71 The Office of Evaluation (OED) Capacity Development Evaluation Framework is a document developed in 2019 by FAO to provide gu idances on how to assess capacity development at 
different levels in projects and programmes. Detailed information on the evaluatio n framework is available on  http://www.fao.org/3/ca5668en/ca5668en.pdf  .


---
*Page 56*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 64 
  E 
 51 % of  
Resilience of production as 
perceived by farmers  Random 
representative 
survey  Low Medium  High  
Output 2:    Strengthened 
institutional and farmer 
capacities to improve 
ecosystem services through 
agroforestry and forestry 
systems and enhance the 
climate- resilience of 
production landscapes  - Numbers of instituti onal 
staff trained  MAG field reports 
and follow -up 
surveys of lead 
farmers 
participating in FFS  
Training records  
The application of 
the skills from 
trainings will be 
assessed through 
questionnaires 
applied to the 
Project 
beneficiaries 
participating in 
tranings at the 
Project mid -term 
and final phases. 
Questionnaires will 
follow guidances 
from FAO`s OED 
Capacity 
Development 
Evaluation 
Framework72. 0 Institutional 
staff  300 
institutional 
staff trained  585 Institutional staff trained  
 
Farmers will be motivated to attend 
and participate fully in Farmer Field 
Schools  
 
 
 - Numbers of farmers 
trained  0 Farmers  9,228 farmers 
trained (4,614 
will be women)  15,549 farmers trained  
(7,774 will be women)  
- Percentage of trained 
farmers who, indicate they 
have acquired new 
knowledge on Climate 
resilience of production 
landscape   0% of the 
farmers  90% of the 
trained farmers 
identify 
themselves 
with new 
knowledge on 
CC and 
resilience . 100% of the trained farmers identify 
themselves with new knowledge on 
CC and resilience  
- number of institutional 
staff trained who indicate 
they use or apply 
information received  0% 100 
institutional 
staff  468 insitutional  staff trained  
% of farmers trained who 
indicate they use at least 
one of the practices 
learned in FFS on their 
own farms  Follow -up surveys 
of extension 
services and le ad 
farmers 
participating in FFS  Low 30% farmers 
trained  80% farmers trained  
Farmers’ capacity on 
agroforestry and forestry 
systems that includes CC 
adaptation  Low Medium  High  
Output 3:  Effective 
governance to support 
climate resilience- enhancing 
production systems and 
ecosystem services  Proposals for policies, 
plans, financial incentives 
to motivate and sustain CC 
adaptatio n by farmers 
formally approved  Evidence of 
integration of CC 
adaptation 
principles into Currently no 
relevant 
financial 
incentives 
exist  Analyses and 
discussions 
ongoing  
 Proposals for policy, planning 
reforms;  
Landscape  Resilience Fund 
established and operational  Interinstitutional collaboration can 
be effectively achieved to establish 
multi -sectoral resiliency mechanism 
to provide financial incentives to 
farmers  
 
72 The Office of Evaluation (OED) Capacity Development Evaluation Framework is a document developed in 2019 by FAO to provide guidances on how to assess capacity development at 
different levels in projects and programmes. Detailed information on the evaluation framework is available on  http://www.fao.org/3/ca5668en/ca5668en.pdf  .


---
*Page 57*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 64 
  E 
 52 planning and 
programming;  
Existence of 
Landscape 
Resilience Fund  
% of perception of 
governament authorities 
that new policies, plans, 
financial incentives are 
including CC adaptation 
elements   Perception survey 
per year amongst 
government 
officials  0% of 
response   
60% of the  
surveyed 
individuals have 
a good 
perception that 
new policies, 
plans, financial 
incentives are 
including CC 
adaptation 
elements  100% of the  
surveyed individuals have a good 
perception that new policies, plans, 
financial incentives are including CC 
adaptation elements  
NGOs, CSOs participate in training 
and are invited to and permited to 
participate in relevant meetings and 
planning discussions at municipal, 
local, regional and national level  Representatives of key 
organizations in seven 
target municipalities that 
indicate they have 
improved capacity to 
participate effectively and 
collab oratively in local, 
regional and national 
planning and decision-
making processes related 
to management of the 
target landscapes  Training reports, 
surveys of 
organizations, 
NGOs and CSOs in 
target 
municipalities  Currently 
limited 
capacity for 
participation  10 20 
Women and youth 
organizations targeted 
and involved in trainings  
 Workshop, training 
reports  0 2 5 Of minimum 10 organizations to be 
trained  
 
 
 
E.6. Activities  
 
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables


---
*Page 58*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 64 
  E 
 53 1.1 Restore 
approximately 15,544 
ha of farmland from 
marabu, and increase 
CC-resilience through 
sustainable agroforestry 
(AF), CTNPFs and 
assisted natural 
regeneration 
(mitigation co -benefit 
833,950.60 million 
tCO2 -eq. in 7 years  of 
implementation)  GCF funds will be used to clear marabú thickets on soils at high risk of 
desertification and degradation73. Low impact technologies will be 
acquired that have been successfully pilot tested under Cuban or similar 
conditions and will be applied at scale. Marabú wood and bioma ss will be 
ground to wood chips to form a mulch layer that will protect soils from rain 
and restore soil organic matter. Agroforestry systems, CTNPF and assisted 
natural regeneration will then be initiated through the application of 
Modules described in Appendix 6 of the Feasibility Study attached to this 
proposal to restore ecosystem function and services. GCF funding will 
provide equipment, training and inputs to producers to establish the 
agroforestry modules but not pay for their implementation once 
established. Government and FAO will coordinate the purchase and 
distribution of technology and equipment, and the government will 
guarantee application, proper use and maintenance of the technologies, 
equipment and inputs.  1.1.1: Procure identified technolog ies and 
equipment  
1.1.2: Develop training materials for operations and maintenance  
1.1.3: Train 74 machinery operators  
1.1.4: Apply technologies to marabu eradication on 15,544 ha  
1.1.5: Construct /install  452 water reservoirs for the 
agroforestry systems
 of a capacity of no more than 
4900 m3 and 440 irrigation systems  
1.1.6: Establish agroforestry, reforestation and 
assisted natural regeneration modules, including 
development of farm management plans  
 
 a) Training materials developed  
b) 74 machinery operators 
trained  
c) 15,544 hectares of marabu 
eradicated  
d) 452 water reservoirs and 440 
irrigation systems 
constructed /installed  
e) Agroforestry, assisted natural 
regeneration and reforestation 
modules , including farm 
management plans established 
and under implementation  
1.2 Restore 
approximately 20,189 
ha of rangeland with 
compacted soils and 
increase CC -resilience 
through improved 
silvopastoral systems 
(mitigation net co -
benefit -381,311.51 
million t CO2eq in 7 years  of 
implementation).  The project will introduce low -disturbance sub -soiling, designed for 
conservation agriculture,74 which will improve soil structure so that rainfall 
can be absorbed and excess moisture can drain away, recharging 
groundwater tables and allowi ng roots to more easily reach groundwater 
during dry periods. Soil structure improvement and stabilization, 
introduction of trees and improved, more drought resistant, deep -rooting 
and nutrient -rich pastures, as well as grazing rotation will be achieved 
through the implementation of the two modules for silvopastoral systems 
adapted to climate change, described in Annex X of the Feasibility Study 
attached to this proposal. The average implementation area for each 
beneficiary is estimated to be 5 ha.  
 1.2.1: Procure and field identified technologies and 
equipment  
1.2.2: Develop training materials  
1.2.3: Train 68 machinery operators   
1.2.4: Implement sub -soiling of 20,189 hectares of 
compacted rangeland  
1.2.5: Construct 700  small  water reservoirs for 
livestock  (no more than 63m3 ) 
1.2.6: Establish and implement silvopastoral 
modules, including improved grazing systems  
 f) Training materials developed 
for machinery operations  
g) 68 machinery operators 
trained  
h) 20,189 hectares of compacted 
soils improved  
i)  700 small  water reservoirs 
constructed  
j) Silvopastoral modules 
established and under implementation  
2.1 Increase 
institutional capacities 
to support farmers and 
producers’ 
organizations to 
establish and maintain 
agroforestry, 
silvo pastoral and 
forestry systems for 
improved ecosystem 
services  The project will train 443 extension -service technicians, agricultural 
technicians, and cooperative leaders/administrators in integrated landscape rehabilitation and CC adaptation.  Local extens ion service 
capacities will be strengthened to improve climate risk 
planning/management and service delivery.  2.1.: Develop training materials for use by trainers 
of extensionists  
2.1.2 Train 443 extension service technicians, 
agricultural technicians, and cooperative leaders to 
lead  farmers in gender and age- sensitive learning -
by-doing regarding the implementation, operations 
and maintenance of their agroforestry or forestry syste ms; topics covered may include no- till 
cultivation; inter- cropping; cut -and- carry forage 
feeding; sub- soiling; soil conservation with gabions, 
gully plugs, bunds, and contour farming; 
agroforestry and silvopastoral system design; k) Training materials developed for trainers of extensionists  
l) 443 extension service 
technicians, agricultural 
technicians, and cooperative 
leaders/administrators trained  
 
73 Due to the extremely aggressive,  invasive nature of m arabú,  total mechanical clearing of these areas is projected.  
74 Livingston and Blade. Texas A&M University System (http://publications.tamu.edu/FORAGE/PUB_forage_Paratill%20Renovations%20of%20Pastures%20and%20Hayfields.pdf).May 5th 
2018.


---
*Page 59*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 64 
  E 
 54 application of efficient i rrigation technologies and 
water harvesting and storage ;  
2.1.3 Development of supplementary learning 
materials and information on CC  impacts, 
projections , ecosystem function and services, 
agroecology, agroforestry and forestry systems, and 
farm business p lanning and marketing   
2.2 Train agricultural 
producers to 
collectively revitalize 
and manage landscape 
resources through 
climate resilience-
enhancing agroforestry, 
silvopastoral and 
forestry systems for 
gender -equitable 
agricultural production 
and ecosystem services  The project will train 15,549 farmers to plan and manage production 
landscapes to enhance resilience and productivity of agricultural 
ecosystems as well as ecosystem services.  
Training will go beyond technical aspects of agro- ecosystem revitalization 
and production to include topics vital to landscape resilience such as gender equality of farmers and beneficiaries as well as value chain 
improvement, market access, rural entrepreneurship and other rural 
employment opportunity- creating activities.  
Capacity development, in conjunction with the activities of Out put 1, will 
lead to a number of permanent jobs being created, with a particular emphasis placed on creating opportunities for women and youth. Direct 
interventions for young people are expected to reduce out -migration of 
this group to urban areas, there by decreasing the vulnerability of older 
populations with regards to climate change and food security  2.2.1 Establish Farmer Field Schools (17) in  
appropriate locations  the seven municipalities 
based on type of agroforestry, silvopastoral or forestry syste m to be implemented and logistical 
and other considerations;  
2.2.2 Operation  of 17 Farmer Field Schools and 
training of 15,549 farmers using the participatory research and learning -by-doing approach.  
 m) 17 Farmer Field Schools established  
n) 15,549 farmers, of which 50% 
are female, trained in 
revitalization and management 
of production landscapes for 
climate- resilient agriculture 
and ecosystem services  
3.1 Develop, discuss 
and analyze options for 
policy reforms to 
support 
implementation of 
agroforestry, 
silvopastoral and 
forestry systems for 
landscape resilience 
through improved 
ecosystem services  
 The project will facilitate processes of policy review to determine 
adjustments to or modifications of existing land use, devel opment, 
environmental or other policy instruments to enhance national scale 
adoption of agroforestry and forestry systems for climate change 
adaptation and mitigation. This will be achieved through a combination of 
expert -led desk reviews of the instrument s and their implications and 
provisions, multi -level and multisectoral forums informed by the desk 
reviews with the aim of discussing and prioritizing needs for adjusting the policy instruments, and institution- specific analytical, advisory and 
orientation  support. An inter -institutional working group will be 
established and an operational plan will be developed to adjust public 
policies and regulatory frameworks as necessary. Corresponding discussion 
spaces will be established at technical, institutional/ ministerial and 
legislative levels, as well as at local/municipal levels.  
 3.1.1 Ten workshops with expert assistance and 
input (international and national experts) to 
facilitate inter -institutional analyses and discussions 
regarding policy objectives, nee ds and options for 
the modification or reform of agricultural and land -
use policy;  
 
3.1.2 Definition and discussion of institutional 
modifications or adaptations in support of the 
different options for policy reforms to support 
landscape resilience through  improved ecosystem 
services;  
3.1.3 Development of specific proposals for policy 
reforms;  
3.1.4 Discussion and subsequent validation of 
reform proposals at national level.  o) Workshops/expert leading to 
analyses, discussions, options  
p) Proposals for reforms of policy, 
regulatory, planning instruments  
 
3.2 Establish a 
Landscape Resilience 
Fund to support 
adoption and 
implementation of 
agroforestry, MINAG, with project support, will transform its Forestry Development Fund 
(FONADEF) and Soil Conservation Fund (SCF), as well as any other funds 
established to support land use for rural development, into a single 
Landscape Resilience Fund (LRF). The purpo se of the LRF will be to support 
resilience- enhancing land use by farmers and producers’ organizations 3.2.1 Expert analyses of existing funds (FONADEF, 
SCF) and other funds both regionally and globally  
(current funding scope, organization, financing, 
management and administration, and identification 
of strengths and weaknesses, lessons and best 
practice ); q) Landscape Resilience Fund 
established and operational  
r) Communication strategy and 
materials 
Workshops/expertise


---
*Page 60*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 64 
  E 
 55 silvopastoral and 
forestry systems in 
support of landscape 
resilience through 
ecosystem service 
enhancem ent around the country in support of climate change adaptation and mitigation 
policies, starting with the most vulnerable geographic areas.  
Expert analysis will be carried out on the feasibility of a single Landscape 
Resilience Fund, identifying the necessary modifications, reforms and other 
steps required to make it a reality. As part of the feasibility study, analysis 
will be undertaken on options for economic instruments to sustain the 
fund, criteria for grants and loans, governance arrangements, integration 
with public policy priorities, and other topics. MINAG and other authorities, 
as appropriate, will discuss and debate the expert analysis and feasibili ty 
study as prelude to decision making regarding establishment and 
operationalization of a Landscape Resilience Fund.  3.2.2 Ten workshops to analyze and develop 
options for a Landscape Resilience Fund to support implementation of landscape resilience polic ies on 
the ground;  
3.2.3 Design of a Landscape Resilience Fund to 
support resilience- enhancing land use by farmers 
and producers’ organizations;  
3.2.4 Formal legal establishment of the Landscape Resilience Fund;  
3.2.5 Elaboration of communication strategy and 
materials, and dissemination.  
3.3 Strengthen 
planning, governance 
and coordination at the 
landscape level in 
support of landscape 
resilience through 
enhancement of 
ecosystem services  This project will train key organizations in the seven target municipalities to 
participate effectively and collaboratively in planning and decision -making 
processes that determine t he management of the target landscapes to 
enhance their climate resilience.  These organizations will have access to 
required modeling and visualization technologies to improve their 
analytical capacities, as well as the most effective tools and instrument s for 
coordinated planning and management of landscape resources from farm 
to landscape level. Participating organizations include cooperatives and 
other producer’s associations, entrepreneurship groups, etc., including the 
Asociacion Cubana de Tecnicos Agricolas y Forestales (ACTAF), Asociacion 
Cubana de Produccion Animal (ACPA), Asociacion Nacional de Agricultures 
Pequeños (ANAP),  and Federeaciòn de Mujeres Cubanas (FMC) . 
Women and youth will receive specific attention to ensure that their 
interests, concerns and perspectives are represented in these processes 
both individually as members of organizations, as well as collectively in 
women and youth organizations.   
The project will support multi- level review and analyses of existing 
landscape planning inst ruments through inter -institutional collaborative 
teams and provincial discussion and debate forums, with the aim of 
integrating climate adaptation and mitigation principles and concerns into 
these instruments, including the prioritization of agroforestry/ forestry 
systems for sustainable production and ecosystem service restoration. The 
instruments in question will involve Territorial Planning and Urban 
Development Territorial Water Resources Program, Territorial 
Reforestation Plan, Watershed Management Pla ns, Municipal Food Self -
sufficiency Plan, Territorial Land Use Planning.         3.3.1: Train 10 local branches of established organizations (Asociacion Cubana de Tecnicos 
Agricolas y Forestales -  ACTAF, Asociacion Cubana 
de Produccion Animal  - ACPA, Asociacion Nacional 
de Agricultures Pequeños - ANAP, and Federaciòn de 
Mujeres Cubanas  - FMC) to participate effectively in 
local planning and decision- making processes  for 
climate resilient land use ; 
3.3.2 Multi -level review and analysis of landsc ape 
resilience policies and planning instruments as a framework for adaptive landscape management  to 
enhance climate resilience and integration of CC 
adaptation principles into local plans and programs;  
3.3.3 Fifteen workshops to strengthen coordination 
in local landscape governance structures for climate 
change adaptation: Comision de Reforestacion, 
Grupo de Bahia, Comision de Cuencas 
Hidrograficas, Comision de Asuntos Agrarios; 
Grupos Provinciales y Municipales de Tarea Vida.  s) 10 local  branches of 
established organizations 
trained to participate in local 
planning/decision making 
processes  
t) Existing landscape planning 
instruments integrate climate 
adaptation and mitigation 
principles and considerations  
u) Local institutional staff trained to produce and negotiate 
agreements for governance of 
landscape resources


---
*Page 61*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 64 
  E 
 56  
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements  
205. Project -level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with FAO policies. FAO will ensure the 
implementation  of a well -designed, operational and effective impact monitoring and measurement system to measure 
the causal and attributable cha nge, the contribution and the overall causal results of the project. This will include an 
implementation of a monitoring system to understand efficacy, targeting and verifying the assumptions that the program 
is making as well as implementing a learning pl an so elements emerging from the monitoring systems can feed back into 
the project implementation and planning Out comes (Annex 11) . 
 
206. FAO Cuba as E xecuting Entity  will have oversight of monitoring and reporting throughout the reporting period. FAO  Cuba  
will implement tools and methods to facilitate monitoring of the project. The methods will support vertical monitoring, 
from the beneficiaries to management, and will facilitates comparative and standardized monitoring.   The National Project 
Management Un it (NPMU) will use the tools including workplans platform to monitor activities, and develop reports to 
the National Project Steering Committee (NEC) that combining financial reporting and progress toward achieving results 
set out in the Performance Management Framework.  
 
207. Within the monitoring system, the detailed articulation is contemplated between the Project workplan and the action 
plans for gender, indigenous people, biodiversity and the social and environmental framework to safeguard and ensure a com prehensive and holistic monitoring system.  
 
208. The day- to-day project monitoring and implementation responsibility rests on a national recruited Coordinator that will 
lead the N PMU. S/he will be supported by a monitoring and evaluation specialist, who will lead the N PMU's Monitoring 
and Evaluation Unit . The M&E Specialist will coordinate the annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of 
the project. The Coordinator will inform the ESC and FAO Country Office of any delays or difficulties during implementation, 
including M&E plan, so that appropriate and corrective measures can be adopted. The National Coordinator will ensure 
that all project staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting 
project results. FAO will support the Nationa l Coordinator as needed, including through annual monitoring missions. 
Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troubleshooting support will be provided by FAO as needed. 
The Technical and Scientific Committee ( TSC), project beneficiaries and stakeholders will be involved as much as possible 
in project -level M&E.  
 
209. A project inception workshop will be organized  in order to aid to: a) orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and 
discuss any change in the overall conte xt that might influence implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of 
the project team and ESC , including reporting and communication lines; c) review the results framework and discussion, 
reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and respo nsibilities, and to finalize the M&E plans; d) review financial reporting 
requirements; and e) planning and scheduling ESC meetings; and f) finalize the first year work plan. The final Inception Report will be approved by the ESC and FAO.  
 
210. The National Coordinator will provide inputs to the Annual Report for each year of implementation. The National Coordinator and the M&E Specialist will ensure that the indicators in the results framework are monitored annually. The 
Annual Reports will be shared with the E SC and other stakeholders. The annual performance reports will be submitted to 
the GCF less than  60 days after the end of each calendar year. The final project annual report and the terminal evaluation 
report will serve as the final project report package.  
 
211.  In accordance with the AMA between FAO and GCF, the FAO Office of Evaluation will be responsible for the independent 
interim and final evaluations. The evaluations will be conducted using a question- driven approach, and may include 
assessments against t he criteria of relevance, effectiveness and sustainability, among others. The interim evaluation will 
be instrumental in contributing –  through operational and strategic recommendations –  to improve implementation, 
setting out any necessary corrective meas ures for the remaining period of the project. The final evaluation will assess the 
relevance of the intervention, its overall performance, as well as sustainability and scalability of results, differential im pacts 
and lessons learned. The evaluation should also assess the extent to which the intervention has contributed to the Fund’s 
higher -level goal of achieving a paradigm shift in adaptation to climate change in Guatemala. The evaluation will draw on 
mixed -methods, using qualitative methods (e.g. partici patory rural appraisal) in combination with counterfactual analysis, 
depending on the existence of reliable control group data from the project’s baseline and endline surveys. In addition to


---
*Page 62*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 64 
  E 
 57 primary data collected by the evaluators and secondary national d ata, both interim and final evaluations will draw on the 
monitoring reports and activities prepared by project staff. Careful attention will be paid to the disaggregation of data, 
results and outcomes by gender and cultural groups, considering the high per centage of indigenous peoples in the project 
area and the different level of vulnerability of project beneficiaries.  The independent Mid- Term Evaluation will be 
undertaken when delivery will reach 50% of the initial total budget or mid -point of CGF  schedul ed as mention before. The 
MTE will be instrumental for contributing through operational and strategic recommendations to improved 
implementation for the remaining period of the project’s life.  
 
212. The following additional M&E actions will take place to ensure compliance with GCF evaluation requirements:  
-Methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of the project.  
-An overview of the methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of the project are briefly described 
belo w, and will be elaborated in a detailed Monitoring Plan that will be included as part of the Project Inception Report. 
The first activity will be to verify and update the baseline information included in this proposal (see Annex B Feasibility Study). Monit oring activities will be overseen by the  National Project management Unit  M&E Specialist. Monitoring of 
impacts and results will be guided by the Logic Framework, which will be the basis for a Performance Management 
Framework. Monitoring of results will ta ke place on a quarterly basis, with the Municipal and Project management Units  
providing input to the M&E Specialist.  
 
213. Monitoring the progress toward expected outcomes will be supported through a series of studies to be undertaken in the third and fifth year of implementation, listed below:  
Outcome A5.0: Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive and low -emission planning and 
development - institutional strengthening and territorial governance  
Outcome A7.0:  Strengthened adapt ive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks  
Outcome M9.0:  Improved management of land or forest areas contributing to emissions reductions  
Progress toward Outcome A5.0 will be monitored by tracking the number of policy instruments and incentive m echanisms 
that enable climate change adaptation that are developed and presented to the national government for discussion and 
policy dialogue.  
 
214. The farm plans will provide information for monitoring and reporting on Outcome A7.0. Monitoring of the impleme ntation 
of farm plans by beneficiary farmers (sex -disaggregated) will enable the tracking of uptake of climate resilient agricultural 
practices within agroforestry and silvopastoral  systems. The farm plans will include clear and precise indicators for soil  
quality, water availability, production quality and quantity, number of trees planted, crop phenology, weather behavior, 
and the incidence of extreme climate events, such as droughts and floods, among others. MINAG  technicians will gather 
this information  once a month with the assistance of community extension agents. In- depth analysis in the third year of 
the project of the results of demonstration farms will enable tracking of food production, for consumption and for market; increases in or maintenance o f crop yields during extreme weather events; improvements in water regulation in 
production landscapes; uptake of rainwater harvesting activities, use of water purifying filters , improvements in water 
quality.  
 
215. The methodologies to measure Outcome M9.0 wil l focus on measurement of the area of degraded land and the expected 
tCO2 -eq sequestered through activities of the project. GIS, such as aerial and satellite imagery, as well as specialized 
software programs to generate maps, will be used to measure forest  areas and trees on farms. MINAG  will work with the 
the NPMU's Monitoring and Evaluation Unit, to show how the project has increased or decreased forest cover. FAO’s EX -
ACT tool will be used to determine the tCO2 -eq sequestered because of project activities. These measurements will be 
undertaken at the mid- point of the project (third year of implementation) and after Project is completed (sixth or seventh 
year after the start date of the project).  
 
216. An independent mid- term technical and financial evaluation will be conducted  and the independent final evaluation will 
be initiated within three months prior to the actual completion date (NTE date) of the GCF intervention to be completed  
within six months from the end of project implementatio n delivery date. The evaluation will aim at identifying outcomes 
achieved, their sustainability and actual or potential impacts. It will also have the purpose of indicating future actions 
needed to assure continuity of the process developed through the pro ject.  A self – assessment will also be conducted at 
the mid -term and final stage of the Project.  
 
217. Also, the following considerations are to be considered as part of the M&E: a) On the first year of the project, during the 
implementation of the baseline stu dy (during which the baseline values given in the results framework will be completed


---
*Page 63*
---

  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 64 
  E 
 58 and validated), two groups will be defined: a) group of direct beneficiaries, and b) control group; to mark the initial 
situation of the direct beneficiaries. Subsequentl y, the monitoring system will be established to record the changes that 
will arise during the implementation of the project, b) the monitoring and evaluation will focus on the measurement of 
the results attributable to the project as a consequence of the i mplementation of measures and practices for adaptation 
to climate change. As well as, the impact on the harmonization of policies at territorial level, c) Based on farm plans and 
adaptation practices outside farms; the lines of action for monitoring and ev aluation will be established to collect  
qualitative and quantitative information; and evaluate the effect of actions in the process of adaptation to climate change. 
In this process, the project will directly involve the beneficiary producers as key actors in the execution, monitoring and 
evaluation process, and d) The project will have monitoring and evaluation specialists who will be responsible for the 
preparation of the means of verification (surveys and analysis) and internal and external coordination ( stakeholders). The 
project will be supported by the information management and monitoring system developed and used by MINAG , which  
will complement FAO´s tools and methods. The results of the monitoring process will serve as a basis for the evaluation 
processes of the project and the decision making for the incidence in public policy.


---
*Page 64*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 64 
   
 59 F. RISK  ASSESSMENT  AND  MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures  
The Project has been classified as Moderate risk (Category "B") and its activities are expected to activate the 
following Socio- Environmental Safeguards Policies: ESS2 and ESS5.  
The primary reason for the moderate risk categorization is due to the use of herbicides in the control of marabu, a highly invasive species, as well as the risks of controlled use of one specie that may show invasive behavior in 
conditions without management.
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low High 
Description  
The project will not  introduce any new potential Invasive or Alien Species (IAS) . The only potential IAS  included in the project 
(Moringa (Moringa oleifera) which is well known in the country. The specie already exist s in the project areas, and technical 
recommended and promoted in all the Cuban methodological documents and guidelines for livestock management (Manual of 
Livestock Technology July 28, 2014, Ministry of Agriculture). The technologies designed consider measures evaluated and 
validated for more than 20 years by Cuban scientific institutions, with the approval of environmental authorities (Ministry of 
Science Technology and Environment) and ensure that due to the management there are minimal risks for agro -biodiversity and 
natural biodiversity. See more details in Annex 6 - Environmental and Social management framework.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
For the Moringa oleiferea, a risk assessment on the use of it in Cuba context, is enclosed in the Appendix 2.6 of the Annex 2 : 
Feasibility study, under the supplementary material 2.6.7.   Some management measures are more deeply explained in the 
technical annex 2.6 of the Feasibility study. Among the measures envisaged for the management of the Moringa oleifera are the 
following:   
● Periodic monitoring of Moringa's behavior will be carried out.  
● Management plans of the species will be elaborated for the different areas of the project.  
● Farmers who manage the species will be informed of the risks of the species and will receive training.  
● Moringa will be planted away from the boundaries of farms, roads and highways.  
● The planted areas will be surrounded by tree barriers (Guazuma ulmifolia) to prevent them from being carried by the wind.  
● Herbaceous barriers (grasses) will be placed to prevent the water from promoting dispersion, especially where runoff is directed.  
● The landuse planning within the farms of the SILSOM  module will consider location for the planted areas of Moringa, 
including siting which is far away from rivers, where their expansion is known to be greater.  
● The schedule foreseen for cutting and carrying fodder will be respected, always avoiding periods when the plant 
produces flowers and fructifies.      
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description  
The use of herbicides may cause problems of contamination in  soil and wate r and may affect biodiversity and human health. 
Herbicides will be used to control marabu  regrowth , following integrated management practices ( IPM). These will be applied to 
a limited extent, in specific  areas and only in the initial phase of the project. N o highly hazardous pesticides will be used in the


---
*Page 65*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 64 
   
 60 project areas.  The applications will be carried out in a restricted way, and only in the areas that require it, depending on the 
degree of infestation and there commendations of the experts. Pesticides will  be used only when the mechanical methods of 
elimination have been exhausted. Pesticides will be dose limited under supervision and technical evaluation (Agriculture 
Vegetable Health Department and National Project Management Unit). To mitigate this, the p roject will use IPM and train 
producers, among other mitigation measures that will be listed later. The use of highly dangerous herbicides will also be avo ided.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
● Implement Integrated Pest Management (IPM).  
● Prepare a Pest Management Plan that will be a part of the Project's Social and Environmental Commitments.  
● Ensure the acquisition and use of the means of protection necessary to ensure the health of the producers, who will be 
trained to perform these tasks.  
● The entities that store and handle pesticides will follow  their established management plans.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Limited availability of qualified human resources with the necessary field experience to mainstream climate resilience and adaptation concepts and approaches into agroforestry , silvopastoral  and forestry  schemes and m arabú eradication.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will use FAO’s experience and contacts in the region to support the identification of highly qualified and motivated 
candidates with the required experience to introduce and promote the new landscape restoration and multifunctional, 
sustainable plantation and agroforestry concepts.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  High 
Description  
Farmers, communities and new landholders benefitting from the project show low interest in engaging in project activities and 
implementation of agroforestry and CTNPF modules.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will promote the previous experiences that were successfully implemented and provide the basis for the proposed Modules. The project will engage stakeholders by providing training opportunities, access to new technologies and financial incentives to promote the implementation of the modules with a focus on the areas classified as most vulnerable to climate change. Financial incentives already have a successful history of implementat ion in Cuba. Producers will be motivated to engage 
in the project due to the possibility of improving conditions caused by CC in the Project areas. The improvement of living conditions is one of the incentives but not the only one. The idea is to combine t he project’s models with financial incentives 
through the National Soil Fund and the Forest Fund, which would combine financial incentives for the farmers in conjunction w ith 
the adoption of the modules. Likewise, the material improvements that the project  will bring in terms of resources for the 
implementation of the modules would play a role in the motivation and sustainability of the change, combining it with payment s 
from the aforementioned national funds for the adoption of the modules proposed by the project . 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description


---
*Page 66*
---

F  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 64 
   
 61 Hurricanes and tropical storms are striking Cuba with increasing frequency and intensity. The intensity and prospective impac t 
on soils and water are unpredictable, with stronger storms doing greater damage overall.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
As a country, Cuba has a strong civil defense system which when deployed before storms strike, has resulted in reduced 
numbers of casualties and property damage. Every effort will be made to limit damage to property and loss of life in the proj ect 
areas if these are str uck by hurricanes or tropical storms. The project itself is oriented to creating and strengthening 
agroecosystems that are resilient to these extreme events; over time, as the agroforestry, silvopastoral  and forestry modules 
increasingly take root and prov ide greater ground cover, damages from these storms can be expected to decrease 
proportionately.


---
*Page 67*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 62 OF 64 
   
 62 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  
218. Overall, the cumulative impacts of the project are expected to be positive. The positive impacts of the project are wide-
ranging and include increased resilience of agro -ecosystems to myriad climate change impacts, as well as an increase in 
carbon capture capacity. Furthermore, the project will also increase connectivity and contribute to recovery of productive capacity of agricultural systems. Project interventions will support regulation of the hydrological cycle by absorbing torren tial 
rains, preventing or reducing soil erosion , and improving the rates of water infiltration in soils across the landscapes to 
recharge the water table. Extension services will train producers on the integrated rehabilitation of landscapes and on 
measures to adapt to climate change. Actions will be taken to restore landscapes , which will  enrich biodiversity. Positive 
social impacts will include an improvement in livelihoods  with increased sources of employment and the expansion of 
production. These will lead to greater local food security and accessibility to food. The project will involve women through a Gender Action Plan that ensures the elimination of gender gaps, a s well as women’s empowerment and equitable 
incorporation in development processes throughout the Project.  
 
219. The project has been classified as Moderate risk (category B) due to the risks associated with the use of herbi cides in the 
control of marabu  (Dichrostachys cinerea ), a highly invasive species, and the risks related to the controlled use of non -native 
species for reforestation that can show invasive behavior in unmanaged conditions. The potential negative impacts o f the 
establishment of the six modules of agroforestry and silvopastoral systems are mitigatable and predictable. Some risk is 
introduced through the use of machinery, which will be used in agricultural work and for the e radication  of marabu . This 
equipmen t will be acquired in substitution of  existing inefficient equipment, providing a more efficient and appropriate 
solution for marabu removal, current ly done with bulldozers.  
220. Limited amounts of environmental waste will be generated due to the application o f slow -release chemical fertilizers. These 
are to be used only in the initial phase of implementation and then progressively replaced by organic fertilizers, as production 
capabilities  increase . As indicated, herbicides  will be used to control regrowth of marabu, following integrated management 
practices ( IPM). These will be applied to a limited extent, in certain areas and only in the initial phase of the project. No highly 
hazardous pesticides will be used in the project areas. Certain tree species that m anifest invasive behavior will be managed 
under  control s that limit  risks to biodiversity, while favoring native species as appropriate. It should be noted however that 
all species used are already present in Cuba, have a long history of use with no signif icant problems , and no new species will 
be introduced.  
221. To mitigate the moderate risks associated with the use of invasive alien species (IAS), several measures will be put in place. 
Trees will be placed to act as barriers to the expansion of herbaceous IAS , and the behavior of species in and near the 
implementation areas will be constantly monitored. An Early Warning protocol will be established and included in the 
management plan to detect, control, and eradicate invasive species. Workers will be trained t o identify and manage the IAS. 
SILLEC and SILSOM module activity calendars will be modified to guarantee adequate planning aimed to minimize risks. The 
Environmental and Social risk assessment and accompanying mitigation measures are described in the Envir onmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) found in Annex 6  to this document .  
222. To mitigate the risks associated with the use of pesticides, the Project will implement an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
program. A Pest Management Plan will be part of the Project's Social and Environmental Commitments. Producers ’ health  
will be safeguarded  with  training on how to safely perform tasks related to use of the pesticides. The entities that store and 
handle pesticides will follow their own established managem ent plans. Both environmental and social risks are considered  
to be  moderate, with a limited spatial footprint, of limited temporal duration , and controllable through protocols outlined in 
the project’s Environmental and Social Management Framework.  
 
G.2. GENDER ASSESSMENT AND ACTION PLAN   
223. Despite important advances in women's participation and leadership in the economic, social and political spheres over the 
past 60 years in Cuba, women still face aspects of structural gender inequality related to cultural norms, household 
responsibilities and in the face of climate change impacts.  
 
224. In the areas where the project will be implemented, major gender gaps include sexual division of labor and family and social co-responsibility. In general, women are ove rrepresented in unpaid domestic work (of the total hours worked by women, 
63% are unpaid) , and there is no reconciliation between work and family life for women. Of the total hours of unpaid work 
performed by Cuban citizens overall , it is estimated in the project’s Gender Assessment and Action Plan that men perform 
9% and women 91%. Finally, there is also evidence of gender -based violence occurring in the project’s target communities. 
Furthermore, women may face additional challenges in the context of work,  where they are often placed in a position of


---
*Page 68*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 63 OF 64 
   
 63 subordination to men and may be at a disadvantage due to lack of education, lack of employment, and insufficient 
transportation to employment.  
 
225. Globally, as well as in the local Cuban context, women are more v ulnerable to climate change in the Project regions th an 
men, due to factors related to household responsibility and access to resources. The scarcity and storage of water is a 
significant problem for women, who are primarily responsible for household water  collection. The migration of men for work 
due to climate change also effectively confines women to remain in communities to care for the elderly, children and the 
disabled. These vulnerabilities are exacerbated by the impacts of climate change, such as increased pests, drought and 
hurricanes.  
 
226. The project will contribute significantly to obtaining gender equality goals by increasing community resilience to climate 
change and directly benefiting 3,783 women who are producers in  selected agricultural and liv estock production entities , in 
addition to women throughout the communities.  
 
227. Actions proposed in the comprehensive Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Annex 8  attached to this document ), includ e 
the acquisition of producti on technologies for climate resili ence, directly helping women adapt to climate change. These 
technologies include the installation of water pumps that will help ease the burden of collecting water, as well as bio -
digestors that will enable more women to cook food using biogas.  
 
228. The Projec t will create jobs for men and women by establishing six  producti on modules couple to the  promotion of new and 
improved existed business models, for example, six  new technologically equipped nurseries will employ more than 30 
women. The Project also aims t o improve gender equality in the workplace; a ll project work spaces will have at least one 
bathroom for men and another for women  to ensure the comfort and security of female employees. Significantly, gender -
sensitive training will be implemented for men and women involved in the project.  
 
229. Themes of gender -sensitive policies and communication will be incorporated into all administrative and leadership aspects 
of the Project throughout its lifetime. Actions will include the promotion of women in leadership positions and the creation 
of gender committees that monitor the actions of the project. Designated GAP focal points will be identified in the 
communities, and permanent spaces will be created for reflection, debate and review of p rojec t actions with a gender 
approach. Finally, communication and education about gender equality will be disseminated within the Project regions, making visible the contribution of women toward increasing climate resilience. These actions will not only help fo ster gender 
equality throughout the p roject and its communities, they will also help improve livelihoods, access and availability of better -
quality water, as well as increasing local production of food, jobs and income.  
 
G.3. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND PROCUREMENT   
230. Financial management and procurement under this project will be guided by relevant FAO rules and regulations, as well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed by FAO and the GCF. These  rules and regulations 
were reviewed and deemed satisfactory by the GCF Secretariat and Accreditation Panel as part of FAO’s accreditation to the 
GCF.  
 
231. In the project  execution, GCF resources will be managed  directly by FAO in accordance with its rules, re gulations, policies 
and procedures.  
 
232. FAO has deployed an Oracle based Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system the ‘Global Resources Management System’ 
(GRMS). This system provides all FAO employees around the world with travel, human resources, procureme nt and finance 
functionalities. Using GRMS improves the flow of financial information, supports financial monitoring and reporting, 
increases transparency and visibility, and strengthens internal control. FAO maintains a Chart of Accounts which is used by 
the whole Organization and that allows for a separation of income and expenditure by donor and project and it provides a 
standardised coding structure that enables data to be recorded, classified and summarised to facilitate internal management 
and externa l reporting requirements.  
 
233. Direct procurement by FAO is done in accordance with the FAO Manual Section 502, “Procurement of Goods, Works and 
Services”. To sub -contract the delivery of specific activities using Letters of Agreement, FAO operates in accordan ce with its 
Manual Section 507, “Letters of Agreement”. Such services are managed under the FAO Procurement Service, which provides 
policy and operational support to FAO offices and staff undertaking these activities to ensure the Organization procures


---
*Page 69*
---

G  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 64 OF 64 
   
 64 goods, works and services based on “Best Value for Money” principles. To sub -contract delivery for agreed results, FAO 
operates in accordance with its Manual Section 701, “Operational Partners Implementation Modality”.  
 
234. The project will be subject to FAO’s audit regime, including the external audit and internal audit function.  
Please see Annex 10 Procurement Plan for further details.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information:  FAO confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, 
as no information is being provided in confidence.  
235. According to both GCF and FAO policies on access to information, all safeguard instruments under this project, including the 
ESMF and the Gender Action Plan must be disclosed online in English and Spanish at least 30 days prior to GCF board meeting 
and approval of the project. Access to the documents must be possible for any local  people (i.e. it must be d isclosed locally 
in an accessible place) in a form and language understandable to key stakeholders. Such disclosure of relevant project 
information helps stakeholders effectively participate. FAO is committed to disclosing information in a timely manner an d in 
a way that is accessible and culturally appropriate, placing due attention on  the specific needs of community groups which 
may be affected by project implementation (e.g. literacy, gender, differences in language or accessibility of technical 
informat ion or connectivity).  
 
236. This is a moderate risk project, so FAO will release the applicable information as early as possible, and no later than 30 days 
prior to project approval. The 30 -day period will start only when all relevant information requested from  the project has 
been provided and is available to the public. FAO undertakes disclosure for all moderate risk projects, using a disclosure 
portal to publicly disclose all of the projects’ documentation related to environmental and social safeguards (e.g. 
Environmental and Social Management Frameworks, Gender Action Plans, Indigenous Peoples Plans, and other relevant documents). The website is:  
http://www.fao.org/environ mental -social -standards/disclosure -portal/en/ . 
 
237. To ensure the widest dissemination and disclosure of project information, including any details related to applicable 
environmental and social safeguards, local and accessible disclosure tools including audiovisual materials (e.g. flyers, 
brochures, community radio broadcasts) will be utilized in addition to the standard portal disclosure tool. Furthermore, 
particular attention will be paid to farmers, illiterate or technological ly illiterate pe ople, people with hearing or visual 
disabilities, those with limited or no access to internet and other groups with special needs. The dissemination of informati on 
among these groups will be carried out with the project counterparts and relevant local acto rs.


---
*Page 70*
---

H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 65 OF 64 
   
 
 
 65 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA No -objection letter 
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study, including technical annexes  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and /or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed b udget  plan  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation  timetable  including  key project milestones  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):   
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify  – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People ’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan , etc.)  
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project -level action plan   
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plans  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable   
☐ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule


---
*Page 71*
---

H  GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 66 OF 64 
   
 
 
 66  H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval    
☒ Annex 16  Maps indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☒ Annex 18 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 19 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 20 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☐ Annex x  Other references


---
*Page 72*
---

FUNDING PROPOSAL TO THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND  
-IRES- CUBA-   
INCREASED CLIMATE RESILIENCE OF RURAL HOUSEHOLDS 
AND COMMUNITIES THROUGH THE REHABILITATION OF 
PRODUCTIVE AGROFORESTRY LANDSCAPES IN SELECTED 
LOCALITIES OF THE REPUBLIC OF CUBA  
ANNEX 1  No Objection Letter from NDA  
Oct
ober 2019  
Republic of Cuba  No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 73*
---

2


---
*Page 74*
---

3


---
*Page 75*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Increased climate resilience of rural households and 
communities through the rehabilitation of production 
landscapes in selected localities of the Republic of Cuba 
(IRES)  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  [Yes] 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Central Region:  
- Las Villas Province, Cuba: Corralillo, Quemado de 
Güines and Santo Domingo  
- Matanzas Province, Cuba: Los Arabos  
Eastern Region:  
- Las Tunas Province, Cuba: Amancio Rodríguez, 
Colombia and Jobabo .  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, February 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Spanish  
Explanation on language  Spanish is the official language of Cuba. The documents were 
provided in English and Spanish, so both national and 
international readers can easily understand the content.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
 
Spanish  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
 
 
Other link(s)  FAO Disclosure Portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
 
FAO Cuba:  
http://www.fao.org/cuba/es/   
 Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Cuba:  
https://www.minag.gob.cu/
  
 
Remarks  An environmental and social risk assessment consistent 
with the requirements for Category B projects is contained 
in the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) that is available at the above -mentioned links.


---
*Page 76*
---

Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, February 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Spanish  
Explanation on language  Spanish is the official language of Cuba. The documents 
were provided in English and Spanish, so both national and 
international readers can easily understand the content.  
Link to dis closure  English:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
 
Spanish :  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
  
Other link(s)  FAO Disclosure Portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
 
FAO Cuba:  
http://www.fao.org/cuba/es/   
 
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Cuba:  
https://www.minag.gob.cu/   
 
Remarks  Preliminary environmental and social management 
planning consistent with the requirements for Category B 
projects is contained in the ESMF that is available at the 
above -mentioned links.  
 
A Site -specific Environmental and Social Management 
Plans consisten t with the requirements for Category B 
projects will be developed for relevant sub -activities once 
project sites are identified during project implementation, 
in line with the process specified in the ESMF that is 
available at the above -mentioned links.  
 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  [__] 
Explanation on language  [__] 
Link to disclosure  [__] 
Other link(s)  [__] 
Remarks   
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, February 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Spanish


---
*Page 77*
---

Explanation on language  Spanish is the official language of Cuba. The documents were 
provided in English and Spanish, so both national and 
international readers can easily understand the content.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
 
Spanish  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
  
Other link(s)  FAO Disclosure Portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
 
FAO Cuba:  
http://www.fao.org/cuba/es/   
 
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Cuba:  
https://www.minag.gob.cu/    
Remarks  A Pest Management Plan  consistent with the requirements 
for Category B projects is contained in the ESMF that is 
available at the above -mentioned links   (APPENDIX 6.3 )  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, February 7, 2020  
Place  FAO Cuba (country office) website:  
http://www.fao.org/cuba/es/   
 
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Cuba  
https://www.minag.gob.cu/   
 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Tuesday, March 10, 2020  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 78*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 78 
 
 
Secretariat ’s assessment  of FP126 
Proposal name:  Increased climate resilience of rural households and 
communities through the rehabilitation of production landscapes in selected localities of the Republic of Cuba (IRES)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Country/(ies) : Cuba  
Project/programme size : Medium  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat   
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks:  
Strengths  Points of caution  
• The p roject will reduce emissions by 
133,786 tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent annually through 
improved land use and agroforestry ; 
lifetime emission reductions are estimated at 2.6  million  tonnes of 
carbon dioxi de equivalent  
• The p roject will pave the way for 
necessary enabling conditions that 
will result in significant mitigation 
and adaptation benefits arising from 
ecosystem -based adaptation and 
restoration of ecological functions at 
the landscape level  • The use of herbicides in marab ú 
control  may cause contamination 
problems in the soil and water and 
may affect biodiversity and human health ; however , the use  of herbi cides  
will be  limited  and used following 
integrated pest management 
practices  
• The project provides a scalable model 
approach to tackle the problem of marab ú, which poses challenges  in 
many tropical countries in areas that 
have been overgrazed , creating  a 
future risk.  There is very high 
potential for scaling up the model proposed in Cuba to many other countries to turn the marab ú 
challenge into sustainable economic benefits for smallholders   
• The project will establish a landscape 
resilience fund to support long term


---
*Page 79*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 79 
 
 
agro -forestry activities , which will 
provide a solid foundation for the 
third phase of countrywide up -scaling 
of the agroforestry and silvopastoral systems as well as water use efficiency measures 
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum I X, titled “List of  proposed  
conditions and  recommendations”.  
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment  
2.1 Project background  
2.1.1.  Background/hist ory of the project to inform assess ment of  the funding proposal :  
3. this project constitutes the second phase of a three -phase program me to enhance the 
climate resilience of Cuba’s agricultural sector countrywide. During  the first phase , 
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture  (MINAG)  of Cuba, research, testing and analysis of 
potential resilience -enhancing land use systems was conducted and six agrofo restry, 
silvopastoral and forestry modules  were identified that are both productive and sustainable. 
The present proposed GCF project represents the second phase, which will implement the 
proven modules at the macro level in order to build the ir performanc e at scale and enhance 
institutional capacities for extension and adaptation . It will also establish and operationalize a 
financial mechanism to support farmers in applying resilience -enhancing technologies and 
practices to their agro -ecosystems.  A third p hase , to be funded in the future , will implement the 
approach and lessons learned from th e project nationwide, supported by the financial 
mechanism established under th e proposed GCF project.  
2.1.2.  Climate objective:  
4. Future climate change patterns , such as increased temperature, prolonged dr oughts and 
decreased rainfall , will affect agricultural production, particularly of staple crops  (rice, beans) , 
negatively impacting the livelihoods of farm households and the availability of agricultural 
produc ts, and ultimately putting food security at risk. The selected seven municipalities for the 
two project locations  in the provinces of Villa  Clara , Matanzas ( central region)  and Las Tunas 
(eastern region) are a mong the municipalities most affected by agricultural drought in Cuba.  
5. It is p rojected that under the business -as-usual scenario, net primary agricultural 
productivity and biomass density will decline . An estimated reduction in yield under projected 
current climate scenarios will be as high as 65  per cent  for 29 crops studied  with  reductions 
ranging from 12  per cent  for beans  and rice to 16 per cent  for m anioc  and as much as 48  per 
cent  for potatoes . 
2.1.3.  Financing information, environmental and social safeguards ( ESS)  category:  
6. This project will use incremental finance in the form of GCF grant resources to deliver 
direct resilience benefits to farmers and producers’ organizations, increasing the effectiveness 
and maximizing returns on government investments in knowledge generation, capacity 
develo pment , and innovation, and setting the stage for cost -effective countrywide up -scaling of


---
*Page 80*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 80 
 
 
climate -resilient agroforestry, silvopastoral , and forestry systems. The project is requesting 
total GCF financing of USD 38.2 million in the form of grants, with co -financing of USD 81.7 
million of grant financing, which will be provided in Cuban p esos (CUP) by the executing entity 
(EE),  MINAG , thus bringing the co -financing ratio to 1: 2.1. The project ESS C ategory is B, and the 
entity has submitted relevant documentation ( an environmental and social management 
framework  (ESMF ) as part of the f unding proposal package.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis 
Component 1 : Increased climate change resilient production landscapes through investment in 
innovative agrofores try and silvopastoral systems, reforestation with close- to-nature planted 
forests and assisted natural forest regeneration  (total cost: USD 110.9  million ; GCF  cost : USD 34.8 
million , or 31 per cent ). 
7. Under component 1, the project aims to restore approximately 15 ,544 ha of farmland 
and 20,189  ha of rangeland with planted forests . For this purpose, specific land preparation is 
required: land must be cleared of the invasive marabú  spec ies and subsoiling  must be  
introduced  to ensure root as well as water penetration , etc. While agroforestry and silvopastoral 
systems are reasonably low technology systems to operate, land preparation requires 
technology and equipment that can be used efficiently to prepare land without augmenting 
carbon emissions or land  degradation.  
8. The GCF funds will be used to purchase special modern machinery  to clear marabú  
thickets on soils at high risk of climate -driven desertification and degradation. Marabú wood 
and biomass will then be ground ed to wood chips to form a mulch layer that will support the 
soils from erosion  and sun, and to help  restore its organic matter. T he land will then be 
reconditioned through the implementation of agroforestry systems . The GCF funding will be 
used to provide equipment and training to producers to establish the modules tested during 
phase 1 and develop resilience -enhancing farm management plans.  
9. The GCF funds will  also  be used to  construct water reservoirs for the agroforestry 
systems (with a capacity of 4 ,900 m3), including irrigation system s, and small- sized water 
storage facilities (ponds)  for livestock use as well as pur chasing of inputs (seedlings) . These 
structures and facilities will be fed from surface water and conditioned to maximize their 
efficiency and sustainability through appropriate soil conservation  practices.  
10. The Government of Cuba will cover the costs of labo ur and locally available materials for 
the installation of small water reservoirs as well as the installation of the irrigation systems and their operations and maintenance.  
Component 2 : Strengthened institutional and farmer capaciti es to improve ecosystem services 
through agroforestry and forestry systems and enhance the climate -resilience of production 
landscapes (total  cost : USD 0.8 million ; GCF cost: USD 0.8 million , or 100  per cent ). 
11. While most of the GCF funding is requested for purchasing technology and equipment, a 
certain amount is allocated for capacity development under components 2 and 3. Through 
component  2, farmers and producers’ organizations will receive training via 17 dedicated 
farmer field schools  (FFS) , located in the project areas. FFS  have proven to be  the most effective 
and efficient way to carry out farmer training s. The project will establish an integrated FFS 
program me to cover the seven municipalities and their different agroforestry, silvopastoral and 
forestry systems. FFS program mes will work at multiple scales to strengthen producer 
organizations , contributing to greater organizational capaci ty along the entire value chain – 
from financing, post -harvest processing , and marketing to investments.  GCF will finance the 
establishment of FFS: not the actual building of schools, but  the identifying of potential


---
*Page 81*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 81 
 
 
agroforestry, silvopastoral , and/or for estry plots on farmers’ fields where irrigation and soil 
preparation technologies can be demonstrated and where training and experience of new 
systems and technologies can take place.  
12. The project will also  build  farmers’  capacities in sustainable land management, such as 
no-till cultivation ; inter -cropping ; cut-and-carry forage feeding ; subsoiling ; soil conservation 
with gabions;  marab ú eradication and management ; agroforestry and silvopastoral system 
design and maintenance ; applicat ion of efficient irrigation technologies ; and water harvesting 
and storage systems;  among others . Finally, under this component, the farmers will receive 
training on how to effectively access secondary markets as well as  analyse and develop value 
chains for resilient production systems.  
Component 3 : Effective governance to support climate resilience -enhancing production systems 
and ecosystem services ( total cost: US D 1.7 million ; GCF  cost:  USD 0.93 million , or 55  per cent ). 
13. Under component 3, the project will analy se stakeholder roles and responsibilities , and 
potential policy reforms with the aim of defining specific mandates and areas of action ; 10 
multi -stakeholder and multi -sectoral workshops  will formulate the type of reforms necessary , 
and specific proposals for policy reforms will be developed , followed by a national validation 
exercise.  
14. This project will train key organizations and farmers in the seven target municipalities 
to participate collaboratively in planning and decision- making processes, which will determine 
the management outcomes, outputs and activities in the production landscapes to enhance their climate resilience. Strengthening of governance mechanisms will also include development of 
norms, agreements and organizational capacities for the collaborative management of areas 
targeted for restoration.  
15. The Forestry Development Fund and Soil Conservation Fund will be transformed into 
one single landscape r esilience fund, which will  be designed and established by the end of this 
project for the purpose of providing funding to farmers and producer organizations , in 
particular, farmer cooperatives and smallholder farmers  for activities that would implement the 
landscape resilience policy, to be developed as part of activity 3.1 . 
Component 4 : Project management ( total cost: US D 6.3 million ; GCF cost: USD 6.3 million , or 100 
per cent ) 
16. The project management costs will be used for  the project operational support and 
financial management unit (OSFMU), which will be led by the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  Representation of Cuba and will have the main 
function of supporting the n ational project management unit (NPMU), providing procurement 
services and financial management services for the GCF proceeds . 
III. Assessment of performance against  investment criteria  
17. The project will combine investments in water supply and irrigation, agroforestry, 
silvopastoral and forestry systems, and farmer and institutional capacity -building  for climate 
resilience. The project will be implemented in t wo of the  most vulnerable regi ons to climate 
change  impacts in Cuba, which the Government  of Cuba  has selected based on climate scenarios 
and projections of temperature increase and low precipitation levels.  
18. As a result of this project, critical ecosystem services will become more climate resilient, 
in particular, the water flows into the product ive landscape s, through landscape rehabilitation 
and management that enhances agro -ecosystem productivity and sustainability . This will be 
achieved  by improving water infiltration rates and redu cing or preventing run -off and soil


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 82 
 
 
erosion. A s a result, significant mitigation benefits will result from the integration of trees and 
bushes into agroforestry and silvopastoral systems as well as through reforestation using close -
to-nature planted forest s and assisted natural regeneration.  
19. Through component 2, technical assistance, capacity -building and knowledge will be 
provided to farmers to replace current production practices with new resilien t production 
practices,  necessary for effective implementation of the landscape rehabilitation modules . 
Through component 3, the project w ill support the transformation of the policy and planning 
frameworks required to shift the paradigm of production maximization and will inclu de 
analyses of and reforms to the current financial mechanism  in order to finance  resilience of 
farmers.  
3.1 Impact potential                                                                             Scale: High  
20. The project will reduce climate change vulnerab ility for farmers and producers’ 
organizations by improving ecosystem services, primarily water regulation, in two vulnerable 
regions of Cuba through integration of trees and bushes into agricultural production landscapes. 
The project will also produce sig nificant mitigation benefits . With implementation of this 
project, approximately 2,675,727 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent  will be sequestered over 
a 20 -year period.  
21. A total of approximately  51,713 people , or 30 per cent  of the total population in climate -
vulnerable areas of the selected provinces , will benefit directly from project interventions 
through building resilience and restoration of ecosystem services. The project will reduce the 
climate vulnerability of approxi mately 7,728 lower income producers, provide direct resilience 
benefits to 30,912 farmer families in the two regions and enhance climate resilience of 
approximately 35,734 ha of production landscapes as well increase producers’ and institutional 
capacities to manage climate risk ; it will also  generate further detailed knowledge of the 
performance of these agroforestry systems at scale.  
22. The project will provide indirect benefits to 2 40,117  people in communities around the 
target areas through strengthened in stitutional capacities for training and technical assistance, 
enhanced agro -ecosystem management, and widespread dissemination of lessons and best 
practices in climate -resilient agriculture.  
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                                                        Scale: High  
23. The project will pave the way for necessary enabling conditions that will result in 
significant mitigation and adaptation benefits arising from ecosystem -based adaptation and 
restoration of ecological functions at the landscape level. For instance, th e project  will improve 
the accessibility to finance by merging the  National Forestry Development Fund and Soil 
Conservation Fund and  transforming these funds into a single landscape r esilience fund aimed 
at farmer s’ cooperatives and especially vulnerable small landholders. As a result of this project, 
FAO will provide the Government of Cuba with assistance in legal, normative and policy 
matters ; facilitate the inter- institutional dialogue needed to implement its nati onal development 
plan  2030, Tarea Vida and its nationally determined contribution ( NDC ); and assist in  
overcom ing the barriers to  implementation  of these plans .  
24. Furthermore,  the project will train key organizations in the seven target ed 
municipalities to participate effectively and collaboratively in planning and decision -making 
processes in the target landscapes  in order  to enhance their climate resilience.  Strengthening of 
governance mechanisms will also include development of norms, agreements and organ izational capacities for the collaborative management of targeted areas .


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 83 
 
 
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                    Scale:  Mediu m 
25. The project will have significant sustainable development potential, with environmental, 
social and economic co -benefits . In terms of environmental co -benefits, t he project will promote 
multi -cropping systems with the aim of maintaining soil cover througho ut the year;  enhancing 
soil organic matter and carbon content ; reducing soil erosion ; increasing groundwater recharge ; 
reducing vulnerability to insect pests and enhancing their diversity, including pollinators;  and 
increasing water absorption capacity and  soil biodiversity.  
26. With this project, loss of income from drought will be avoided , and farmers will gain 
access to 35,734 ha of reclaimed farmland for production of subsistence and commercial crops . 
In addition, as  a result of increased and more stable yi elds , the farmers will be able to achieve 
food and livelihoods security through increased sales to food markets.  
27. In particular, women  will receive support  via gender -sensitive training and skill 
building, including for farm management, business development, use of weather and climate 
information, and marketing of farm products.  
28. Key economic benefits include a m ore diversified agricultural production system, which  
will provide opportunities for on -farm employment throughout the year, and i mprovements in 
access to and the efficiency of water use which will result in labo ur saving, permitting farmers 
to achieve higher degrees of economic efficiency.  
3.4 Need s of the recipient                                                                Scale: High  
29. According to the Climate Change Vulnerability Index, Cuba is classified as “high risk” and 
is extremely vulnerable to climate change. Additionally, as a small isla nd developing State, Cuba 
faces serious climate change impacts . These include a rise in average temperatures and 
increasing rainfall variability as well as higher hurricane frequency and increasing sea level rise. Every year Cuba is affected by a variety o f climate change impacts that are increasing in 
strength and frequency , such as : droughts ; torrential rainfall, including from hurricanes; 
saltwater intrusion ; flooding; landslides ; and extreme temperatures. Increased exposure of 
farmers and agricultural assets to climate change impacts has been a significant source of 
economic losses.  
30. Future climate scenarios predict a temperature rise of 4  °C and a decline in rainfall 
between 15 an d 63 per cent  for the years 2050 -2100. Under the business -as-usual scenario, 
livestock production in the project’s two target regions (i.e. continuing with the traditional 
grazing practices) will result in a reduction of total grassland biomass of 18  per c ent and a 
growing dominance of warm season ( C4) grasses, with increasing carbon -to-nitrogen  ratios that 
would produce higher methane emissions from enteric fermentation of ruminants . 
3.5 Country ownership                                                                   Scale: High  
31. The p roject is part of Tarea Vida , the core government policy on climate change and 
sustainable development. It also reflects the country’s NDC, submitted to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change i n November 2015, which lists six priority actions 
for climate change adaptation. One of the priority actions is directly related  to this project, 
namely,  incorporating the adaptation dimension into program mes, plans and projects related to 
food production, integrated water  management, land management, forestry, fisheries, tourism 
and health.  
32. The NDC also identifies two priority sectors for reducing greenhouse gas ( GHG)  
emissions: agriculture and energy, which account, respectively , for 76  per cent  and 15  per cent


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 84 
 
 
of the country’s emissions. The forestry sector has shown sustained growth – forest coverage 
increased from 14  per cent  of the country’s surface area in 1959 to 29  per cent  in 2013. 
Currently, it is estimated that Cuban forests have a sequestration capacity of ap proximately 14.3 
million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent  per year, according to data from the latest GHG 
inventory.  
33. Long -term institutional ownership and sustainability of this project has been 
established via the efforts of MINAG in leading a broad co nsultation process for development of 
this proposal , including two national consultation workshops as well as a dedicated 
commitment from the Government  of Cuba  to take on the responsibility of the operations and 
maintenance  plan , included in the funding p roposal package . 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                     Scale:  High  
34. The accredited entity ( AE) requests support  in the form of grant in order  to support the 
Government of Cuba’s efforts to help vulnerable farmers to  adapt to climate change. Cuba is 
currently unable to access loans from multilateral lending institutions, making concessional 
grants the only option for financing to overcome barriers related to  food and  water security. 
Cuba’s ability to generate adequate fiscal resources is hindered by the account deficit of the 
balance of payments, bank deductions on foreign transfers , and the high degree of debt 
maturity, all of which reduce its ability to obtain necessary loans.  These  fiscal limitations do no t 
provide opportunities for private investment and thus the country does not have the additional 
funds  required to build  resilience to agricultural production systems.  
35. Farmers and producers’ organizations in the two provinces are u nable to access the 
financial resources required to invest in the resilience of their agricultural production systems. 
Government financial support is insufficient to meet investment needs, particularly in relation 
to the activities required for enhancemen t of ecosystem services and landscape resilience . 
36. Economic and financial analyses were carried out to estimate the costs and benefits of 
the project vis -à-vis a no -project bas eline. The economic benefit for the entire project is 
estimated at US D 231.2 million, with an internal rate of return of 29.3  per cent . Therefore, with 
an investment of US D 119.9 million, the project is expected to create economic benefits in 
excess to the opportunity cost of capital (12  per cent ) and produce a bonus of US D 231.2 m illion.  
37. The Government of Cuba has committed to  co-financing of USD 81.7 million, which will 
be used for  technical and logistical support , training of farmers , and assistance to farmers for 
business planning and access to credit and markets.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
38. The AE has classified the project with moderate risk ( category B) due to activities that 
are expected to trigger the socio -environmental safeguards policies of the AE on: natu ral 
resources management  ESS 1 (1.1) ; biodiversity, ecosystems and natural habitats , ESS 2 (2.3, 
2.4); plant genetic resources for food and agriculture, ESS 3 (3.2.1) ; and pest and pesticide 
control , ESS 5 (5.1). Key reasons identified include the risks an d impacts posed by the  limited 
use of herbicides in the control of marabú  (Dichrostachys cinerea , a non -native invasive tree 
species) as well as the use of heavy machinery in its control, risks in the selection of seed that might potentially result in  the introduction of alien species that may show invasive behaviour  in 
conditions without management,  the generation of waste due to the application of slow -release 
chemical fertilizers that do not completely decompose  and limited pesticides use particularly at


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 85 
 
 
the initial stages of the project. Nevertheless, the project will promote integrated pest 
manag ement (IPM) practices. Water resources from rainwater harvested in small reservoirs to 
be used mainly for small drip irrigation systems and for livestock raising is also expected.  
39. An ESMF was developed to guide the identification and management of environmental 
and social risks and impacts. It also provided for the selection criteria for sub -activities, the type 
of safeguards instruments to be developed, the institutional arrangements, and monitoring and 
reporting procedures to comply with environmental and  social safeguards requirements. The 
ESMF provided an overview of the environmental and social features of the area,  including 
labo ur and land tenancy, profiles of target beneficiaries and the existing social protection in the 
country. The ESMF also discus sed the current national legal and institutional framework and 
applicable environmental and social safeguard policies.  
40. The ESMF provided an overview of the potential environmental and social impacts of 
the project as well as the mitigation measures on the identified impacts. An approach to enhance positive impacts is also provided. The ESMF includes defining sub -activities, 
conducting an environmental and social risk screening , and developing management measures , 
including monitoring and reporting. The sele ction of project areas was also done in consultation 
with environmental authorities and other stakeholders and will avoid those which will affect protected areas or their buffer zones.  
41. The ESMF has an exclusion list that indicates the practices and activit ies that will not be 
supported by the project. This includes activities that will result from “changes in land tenure or 
displacement (permanent or temporary) of people from their homes or places of work and subsistence or restrict their access to them”. W hile “activities in areas with cultural, historical or 
transcendent values for individuals and communities” are also included, a chance find 
procedure is  envisioned to be developed and included in third party agreements with 
contractors . It also provides for guides to manage invasive alien species and pests (in the form 
of a pest management plan).  
42.  The AE undertook screening for indigenous peoples and confirms that there are no 
indigenous peoples in project area. Nevertheless, the project takes into consideration the 
specific needs and requirements of all minority ethnic groups present in the targeted 
communities in order to ensure they are actively involved and their participation is facilitated, 
in line with national legislation, both the AE and GCF guidel ines on indigenous peoples, and 
following standard practice and experience in Cuba where the AE has been operating for over 40 years.   
43. Stakeholder engagement during project preparation and formulation is presented. 
Various stakeholders have been identifie d and consultations have been conducted at both the 
national and at the provincial and local levels  with communities, cooperatives, authorities and 
various organizations. The issues were presented, discussed and adjusted in the consultation 
workshops with the active participation of the stakeholders . During project implementation, 
consultation with interested parties is also planned to be conducted at the initial phase, halfway 
through the project life and almost at the end of the project life to cater for possib le 
adjustments. The AE indicated that it w ould  carry out the disclosure of all moderate risk 
projects and an outreach portal has been established to publicly disclose documentation related 
to safeguards.  
44. As far as the arrangements for implementing safeguards are concerned, the project will 
establish an NPMU at the national level, which will include a specialist who is exclusively 
assigned the task of managing environmental and social safeguards issues and concerns. This 
arrangement is cascaded down to  the provincial and municipal levels where the provincial and 
municipal coordinators are expected to perform this function.  The ESMF is also expected to be 
cascaded and adopted up to the operational level where contractors, sub -contractors and other 
entit ies involved with the project are expected to comply with the indicated protocols. Capacity


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 86 
 
 
building in the form of training will also be undertaken. The ESMF provided for a grievance 
redress mechanism (GRM) based on the AE’s requirements and a community -specific grievance 
redress mechanism preferred by the local beneficiaries at the project level will be developed.  
4.2 Gender policy  
45. The AE has submitted a gender assessment and gender action plan ; therefore , it 
complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy . 
46. The assessment includes information on the enabling environment that exists in Cuba 
for promot ing gender equality and women’s empowerment. L aws and legislation  have been 
amended to ensure these right s are maintained. Cuba has achieved women’s equality in the 
areas of education  and the political space , among other development indices.  While this is 
generally true, the assessment also highlights the existence of stereotypes and traditional gender r oles  and the existence of a patriarchal culture, which have an impact on men and 
women. The Cuban reality reveals contradictions that demonstrate that , in different social 
spheres , gender relations are going through processes of change, both in their values and in 
certain social and cultural behavio urs. The predominance of “machista” attitudes and 
perception s at community and family levels hinder women's engagement, participation and 
sustained existence in the labo ur market in the agricultural sector. The g ender assessment 
identified women, youth and particularly women -headed households as disproportionately 
affected by climate change. The information provided in the funding proposals also recognizes 
youth and women as disadvantaged , particularly when it com es to accessing finance, technical 
resources and training to enable them to address the impacts of climate change on  the farm.  
47. Men migrate in search of higher incomes due to harvest losses and low yields due to the 
impact of severe climatic events and incr eased pests and diseases. Thus , women's working time 
at home  increases and their employability  is reduced  as women stay at home with care tasks. 
Access to land and machinery is mostly in the hands of men, which means that access to contractual agreement s is restricted to men. In the communities it is thought that women are 
more affected by drought and lack of water because they have the responsibility for domestic tasks (very dependent on water), which generates stress. Access to agricultural input is eith er 
through the government outlets of through cooperatives. Cooperatives provide supply to 
member producers who should have the ability to pay. Here is where women lose out and men 
seem to have in most cases the ability to pay and use the services of the co operatives. 
Further more,   most women do not have decision making power over incomes earned and where 
it is spent , whil e they  also  do not have land through inheritance or usufruct rights.  In the 7 
municipalities where the project will operate only 1000 wom en are usufruct rights (0.86%) and 
just over 500 are owners (0.46%) making it difficult to make production decisions. In addition, 
in the cooperative sector in the 197 co -operatives studied, only seven women are presidents of 
co-operatives (3.6%) and 15% o f the membership of co -operatives.  
48. The objective of the assessment is to identify causes inequality in the context of climate 
change and agro -biodiversity, thus tapping into existing knowledge and capacities thereby 
ensuring communities including women are  more resilient to climate -related risks and impacts. 
The current assessment will be followed up with in -depth study to identify the specific 
challenges and needs of women and other vulnerable groups.   
49. The project will contribute to overcoming  stereotypes  through the  following:  acqui ring  
means of production for production personnel ; provid ing technologies ; ensur ing training 
processes;  and generat ing traditionally female jobs to which men could have access, or mak ing 
traditional male jobs available to  women  after training processes or affirmative actions aimed at 
achieving this end. Gender vulnerability will also be considered,  and equitable access will be 
sought, with emphasis on support for women. The project plans to create jobs that are


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 87 
 
 
traditionally considered as  women's , such as : seedling management ; grafting of forest and fruit 
species in nurseries;  activities in mini industries;  management of collected milk ; and quality 
assessment, including  in laboratories . These services  will be strengthened to ensu re essential 
support to agricultural and livestock production.  It is possible that traditionally male jobs may 
arise for women for which  they feel interest and empowerment to assume them or vice versa. 
The p roject is also related to  the recovery and development of handicrafts that make use of 
vegetable fib res; women who live in the settlements will be able to count on sufficient raw 
materi al to create products,  market them and improve their quality of life.  
50. Difficulties regarding access to water , which are  especially pertinent to women,  are 
identified as one of the fundamental problems for  inhabitants of the project areas. To this end, 
the project will support measures aimed at collecting water and improving access to identified 
sources, such as installing water pumps for their extraction.  
51. The action plan provides a list of activities with baselines , indicators and sex 
disaggregated targets  (as does the Funding proposal and the logical framework) . It also 
provides timelines and illustrates the responsible bodies for the implementation of the 
activities.  A gender specialist will be hired to ensure the implementation and monitoring of the 
gende r action plan. There is no specific budget allocated for the implementation of the gender 
action plan.  According to the accredited entity, the activities linked to the Gender Action Plan 
(GAP) are cross -cutting for the project and underpin its overall imp lementation , and  that it is 
difficult to calculate and put timelines for the GAP. This is a concern given there are some 
activities that could be separately budgeted for , such as the hiring of the gender expert, and 
specific activities such as the ge nder diagnosis, and mapping of key actors working on gender in 
each zone.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall proposal assessment (medium risk)  
52. GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 38 million , which will be invested in the 
removal of invasive species for sustainable land use and provision of technical assistance for 
farmers and institutional staff for climate -resilient agricultural practices in Cuba.  This project 
constitutes the second phase of  a three -phase programme to enhance the climate resilience of 
Cuba’s agricultural sector. A first phase of research and analysis has been carried out, and GCF 
financing will be used to implement and apply resilience -enhancing technologies and practices.  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute (medium risk)  
53. FAO will serve both as AE and EE for the project. The AE has funded over USD 600 
million in projects supporting countries in the field of climate change and disaster risk 
management. FAO will be the financial and operational executor of GCF resources, including 
financial management, procurement of goods and contracting of services for this project.  The 
FAO country office has been implementing projects with an annual budget rang ing from  USD  0.7 
million to USD  5 million for the past five years in the country.  
54. MINAG is a co -EE for the project. MINAG will lead interventions in the field , such as 
management units and coordination committees at the provincial and municipal level. MINAG 
has experi ence in implementing projects funded by external donors with a total budget rang ing 
from  USD  6 million to USD  50 million.  
4.3.3.  Project -specific risks (medium risk)


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 88 
 
 
55. Power source of pumping units: the project will construct 452 water reservoirs and 896 
drip irrig ation system s with electric pumping units. According to a  response  from the AE , the 
electric pumping units will be powered by solar energy. GCF resources will finance acquisition 
of small -scale irrigation equipment, solar panels and materials. The funding proposal could 
provide greater detail of the locations and capacity of solar p anels, indicating if this will cover 
100 per cent of the energy demands for the irrigation equipment, and if back -up generators or 
batteries will be required; the status of existing infrastructure in Cuba could also be reviewed . 
56. Water use: GCF financing wi ll deploy efficient irrigation technologies and install water 
harvesting and storage systems. The available water resources from the project via water 
reservoir and/or irrigation equipment need to be efficiently managed and distributed. 
According to a  resp onse  from the AE , the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources is 
responsible for the protection and management of terrestrial water resources. There will be no 
water tariff for the use of harvested rainwater and operation and maintenance ( O&M ) cost s will 
be financed by the Government of Cuba during and beyond the implementation of the project for 20 years. Far mers will also be responsible for the O&M of the water facilities after  the 
project ends. The AE also indicated that there are no specific regulatio ns regarding the use of 
rainwater. Given the regulatory gap and free provision of water supply, the decision -making 
process of allocating water resources needs to be carefully monitored , and the government’s 
commitment for O&M will be critical for the sust ainable usage of the equipment. 
57. Waste management of invasive species: o nce the invasive species (e.g. marab ú) are 
removed, there are multiple uses for them. The feasibility study recommends that the wood and 
other components of the plant be put to economic  use. The funding proposal states that it will 
be processed to wood chips to improve the structural quality and water retention of  the soil. 
The AE and EE rely on the economic and eco -friendly use of marab ú after its removal to prevent 
pollution and re -infestation.  
58.  Financial and e conomic analysis: the project provides analyses based on the 
appropriate interventions (e.g. agroforestry and silvopastoral production modules) from previous studies. The financial analyse s were conducted over a 10- year and 20 -year period, 
respectively. The incremental net present value and internal rate of return ( IRR) ranged 
between USD 1,998 (IRR of 2.45  per cent ) and USD  82,430 (IRR of 29.52  per cent ). The 
economic analysis considers the same assumptions that were included in t he financial analysis  
and additionally includes monetary values for ecosystem service of woodland and grassland and 
social carbon cost. The economic internal rate of return  results ranged between 21.38  per cent  
and 31.11  per cent. At the time of preparing the assessment, more clarification and English 
translations are pending from the AE on the financial and economic analysis.  
4.3.4.  Compliance risk (medium risk)  
59. Although the funding proposal does not provide much detail in terms of compliance risk 
level assessments, it is noted that much of the project is devoted to capacity -building, including 
financial management.  Procurement and many other activities involving the expenditure of 
funds will be managed by the AE (FAO) directly.  No particular activities indicate a uniquely high 
risk of compliance issues, such as money laundering, terrorist financing, or prohibited practices.  
Based on the commitment, experience, and close involvement and oversight of the AE in this project, Compliance risk is assessed as medium . 
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
60. In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result s area and single proposal is not material.


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 89 
 
 
4.3.6.  Recommendation  
61. It is recommended that the Board conside r the above factors in its decision.  
 
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  The Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations as a co -executing 
entity ( EE) will be responsible for 
procurement and financial management, 
and the Ministry of Agriculture will lead 
the interventions in the field. Close 
coordination between the two EEs to 
purchase, deploy and carry out 
groundwork will be imperative for the 
successf ul implementation  of this project  
Given the free provision of water 
services,  the Government  of Cuba’s  
commitment for operation and maintenance  will be critical for the 
sustainability of the project  
The accredited entity and EEs  are relied 
upon for the det ailed plans for 
installation and management of solar 
panels and to ensure the systems would 
not create additional greenhouse gas 
emission s Accredited entity/executing 
entity  capability to implement 
this programme  Medium  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary   
62. The AE for the project is FAO , which will be responsible for the overall management of 
this project, including (i) all aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and 
technical oversight and supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are 
effect ively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project 
monitoring as well as the timeliness and quality of reporting to GCF; and (v) project closure and evaluation. To perform the AE functions, FAO will set up a dedic ated FAO -GCF project task force 
comprising relevant staff from the FAO Country Office in Cuba, the FAO Regional Office for Latin America in Chile, and FAO Headquarters in Rome. The project supervision team will remain 
independent of the EE functions , also performed by FAO.  
63. The EEs for the project are the G overnment of Cuba, represented by MINAG , and FAO , as 
requested by the national designated authority . In its role as EE, FAO will set up an  OSFMU, 
which will be led by the FAO Representation of Cuba and will have the main function of 
supporting the NPMU, providing procurement and financial management services for the GCF 
proceeds. The OSFMU will be financed through the project management budget line of the 
project’s overall budget. MINAG will , on the other h and, in its role as EE, lead the interventions 
in the field (provincial management units, provincial coordinating committees, municipal


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 90 
 
 
management units, municipal coordinating committees, communication with beneficiaries and 
local stakeholders, extension work).  
64. A project agreement will be signed between FAO and MINAG as EEs, which will be 
legally binding and detail the roles and responsibilities of FAO ; the Ministry of Science, 
Technology and Environment ; the Ministry of Foreign Trade ; and MINAG, and conta in the 
relevant provisions for compliance by FAO with the requirements from the accreditation master 
agreement  and funded activity agreement . 
65. The government -funded  NPMU will be established with the primary function of 
ensuring project coordination and exec ution through the effective implementation of annual 
workplans, following the guidelines of the National Project Steering Committee (NEC) and 
Project Coordination Committee (PCC). Separately, the main function of the NEC is to 
coordinate, guide and provide  political and strategic guidance for implementation of the project 
as well as to ensure strong inter -institutional coordination. It will also : ensure that planned co -
financing from government entities is delivered in a timely manner ; verify and approve annual 
workplans ; and approve financial and technical reports . The PCC, on the other hand, will serve 
as a key communication channel between the NPMU and key local stakeholders and will assist 
in the implementation of the stakeholder participation plan. The NPMU reports to the PCC, and 
will be led by the National Project Coordinator. The National Project Coordinator  in turn is 
selected by MINAG, in consultation with FAO.  
66. The financial management and procurement function under this project will be guided 
by re levant FAO rules and regulations, as well as relevant provisions in the AMA signed by FAO 
and GCF. In the project execution, GCF resources will be managed directly by FAO in accordance 
with its rules, regulations, policies and procedures. At the request of the Government of Cuba, 
FAO will be the financial and operational executor of GCF resources, including financial 
management, procurement of goods and contracting of services (through OSFMU).  Each year, 
FAO will present an annual work plan and budget that will include a procurement plan. The PCC 
together with the NEC will validate and approve the annual work plan, procurement plan, and 
budget. FAO will be responsible for the disbursement of funds according to established 
conventions, norms and standards.  
67. FAO has deployed an Oracle -based enterprise resource planning system called the 
Global Resources Management System. Using this system improves the flow of financial 
information, supports financial monitoring and reporting, increases transparency and visibility, and strengthens internal control. FAO maintains a chart of accounts that allows for a separation 
of income and expenditure by d onor and project to facilitate internal management and external 
reporting requirements. The project will be subject to FAO’s audit regime, including the external 
audit and internal audit function.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
68. The project is a cross- cutting project with mitigation and adaptation benefits related to 
increased climate resilience of rural households and communities through the rehabilitation of 
production landscapes. The project is the second phase of a three- phase project and aims at the 
implementation of agroforestry, silvopastoral and forestry modules that were tested during the 
first phase on a mesoscale. Through this, the project will support the replication of the modules 
in the field and at scale, enhance institutional capacities for extension and adaptation of the 
modules, and establish and operationalize a financial mechanism to support farmers in applying 
resilience -enhancing technologies and practices to their agro -ecosystems. The logical 
frame work  is aligned with the GCF performan ce measurement framework  at the fund- level 
impact and outcomes. The project output includes both qualitative and  quantitative results 
indicators.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 91 
 
 
The GHG emission calculations have been reviewed and are considered to represent in a 
transparent manner the b aseline assessment and project emission calculations. The approach is 
in line with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change guidelines (2006) and established 
GHG methodologies.  
4.6 Legal  assessment  
69. The accreditation master agreement was signed with the AE  on 8 June 2018, and it 
became effective on 4 October 2018 . 
70. The Accredited Entity has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
71. The proposed project will be implemented in Cuba, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further 
assessed. There are no ongoing negotiations w ith the Government of Cuba.  
72. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries wh ere GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country,  or 
has been provided w ith appropriate privileges and immunities.  
73. In order  to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any recommendation of the funding 
proposal by the Secretariat for approval by the Board is made  subject to the following 
conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activi ty agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date on which the 
AE has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all internal 
approvals, whichever is later; and  
(b) Completion of all due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 92 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP126 
Proposal name:  Increased climate resilience of rural households and 
communities through the rehabilitation of production landscapes in selected localities of the Republic of Cuba (IRES)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  (FAO)  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                 Scale: Medium -High  
1. The primary objective of the project is to increase climate resilience of the agricultural 
production of seven  vulnera ble municipalities ensuring food security through improve d 
ecosystem services including  agroforestry, s ilvopastoral systems, reforestation and assisted 
natural forest regeneration . The project aims to decrease vulnerability and enhance resilience of 
farmer s to climate -driven impacts such as drought and rainfall variability (including torrential 
downpours) by strengthening ecosystem functionality and ensuring water regulation to 
maintain and enhance agricultural production.  
2. The project consists of three interdependent outputs . Output 1 will rehabilitate 
production landscapes through tested and approved agroforestry, s ilvopastoral, reforestation 
and assisted natural regeneration modules  and techniques . The re habilitation  will involve 
removal of marabu, a non -native invasive tree , in order to allow regeneration of native species. 
It will also involve the installation  of resilience -enhancing water storage and irrigation systems 
to ensure water supply to maintain the agroforestry and s ilvopastoral cropping systems.  
3. Output 2 will provide technical assistance and capacity -building to ensure that farmers 
acquire the know -how to replace current production practices with new resilience -enhancing 
production practices necessary for effective implementation of the landscape rehabilitation 
modules under o utput 1. Output 3 will target policy and planning frameworks  aiming to adopt 
laws and regulations to allow effective institutional coordination and support to farmers to 
build the productiv ity and sustainability of their agroecosystems and the resilience of their 
shared production landscapes. This will involve the creation of a national l andscape resilience 
fund to finance farmers’ resilience efforts.  
4. The project will target members of agri cultural cooperatives and individual landholders  
with the purchase  of essential machinery, equipment and inputs (e.g. seedlings), and it will 
invest in training modules as well as in providing assistance to  farmers in business planning, 
financing and marketing .  
5. The project will directly benefit 50,3311 people , or approximately 30 per cent  of the 
total population of the North Zone of Villa Clara/Matanzas, including Corralillo, Quemado de 
Güines, Santo Doming o and Los Arabos municipalites,  and the South Zone of Las Tunas formed 
by the municipalities of Amancio Rodríguez, Colombia and Jobabo . This includes 15,549 farmers 
(3,123 women heads of household)2 on areas averaging 2.3 ha per farmer that will have the 
 
1 The project proposal has a different number of 51,098 direct beneficiaries; thus the calculation appears incorrect.  
2 See Feasibility Study annex 2, table 25a, p. 64.


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 93 
 
 
capacity to manage agroforestry, silvopastoral and forestry systems to cope with rainfall 
variability and drought (direct beneficiaries represent 51,098 people as the average number of 
people per household is 3.2).  These figures also include  433  institution al staff at local, municipal 
and provincial levels who will benefit indirectly from improved information, institutional 
capacities and knowledge management , and 142 machinery operators . 
6. The project expects to provide indirect benefits to 232,815 people in communities 
around the target areas through technical assistance and widespread dissemination of lessons 
learned and best practices in climate -resilient agriculture.  
7. Even though the project is an adaptation project, the proponents have estimated 
emission r eductions of the agroforestry and forestry systems, assuming tha t farmers will be 
motivated to sustain them over the next 7 years at a minimum and over the next 20 years , 
constituting the life of the p roject. Activities include crop production, land rehabilitation, forest 
management, livestock and grassland production systems among others. The proponents used the Ex-ante Carbon- balance Tool,  (Ex-ACT
3), developed by the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the U nited Nations (FAO) in collaboration with the World Bank to assess  how 
the impact of a planned intervention compares to the business -as-usual scenario. In this context 
the estimated reduced emissions from land use, reforestation, reduced deforestation, and  
through sustainable forest management and conservation is of the order of  2,675,727  tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent ( tCO 2eq). 
8. While the  Ex-ante  Carbon -balance Tool account s tractors and agricultural inputs 
(fertilizers and herbicides), the independent Technical Advisory Panel ( TAP)  recommends 
making  an analysis of the best options to reduce the carbon footprint , including a possible shift 
towards using bio -inputs.  
9. The GCF budget includes US D 4.9 million to purchase food supplements for livestock. 
While this could be a reasonable request under a livestock management program me, it is not 
providing a clear climate rational. The independent TAP asked the proponents for the climate 
rational and they explained that the food supplements will be  produced at the national level and 
made from a mixture of locally produced protein crops with vitamins and minerals and will be 
used as strategic supplements to ensure animal health (including reducing the incidence and 
impact of diseases and parasites) , as well as higher productivity and efficiency, thereby 
contributing to reduced  greenhouse gas  (GHG)  intensity.  The statement remains unclear and 
needs to be better justified and accounted in the GHG emissions analysis.  
10. The project number of direct benefici aries is relatively small for the amount of 
investment in the project of US D 119 million. The project is seen as a  second phase of a project 
that will be scaled to other Cuban m unicipalities in a third phase . However, as stated in the 
effectiveness and eff iciency potential, it will be difficult to scale this model at the present 
estimated cost.  
1.2 Para digm shift potential                Scale: Medium -high   
1.2.1.  Innovation  
11. The project is expecting to support vulnerable communities in shifting their production 
system to ensure climate resilience and more sustainable productive systems through 
agroforestry and silvopastoral systems  with common practices that do not present a paradigm 
shift . The project expects to ensure food security as one of the main strategies of the country 
and to create financial and market mechanisms to ensure that farmers and communities are 
able to sustain t heir farms and livelihoods.  If policy reforms eventually  driv e the country’s food 
 
3 See http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/ex_act/pdf/Technical_guidelines/EX -ACT_tech nicaldescription_  
EN_v7.pdf>.


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 94 
 
 
systems towards a more integral approach involving conservation and regeneration efforts, 
increased sustainable production while at the same time promoting healthy diets and reducing 
food lo ss and waste through effective market and financial mechanisms, there could be a 
potential paradigm shift in the Cuban context.  
12. Cuba has good institutions , and it has the knowledge and capacity to strengthen the 
agricultural sector , but , due to the difficulties in accessing international finance to acquire 
modern equipment and technology, the country is lagging  behind in ensur ing climate 
compatible agriculture. The technology and equipment requested  (40 per cent  of the budget)  
will allow the  country  to unlock and galvanize the Ministry of Agriculture ’s (MINAG ) existing 
potential for innovation and adaptation to climate change . However, most of the equipment and 
technology appear s to be conventional  and fossil fuel dependent. Therefore, and as stated 
above, the independent TAP recommends revising the acquisition of tractors and agricultural 
inputs (fertilizers and herbicides) to ensure  a lower carbon food print, including a possible shift 
towards usin g bio -inputs.   
13.  On the other hand,  the project is also tackling increasing climate -driven rainfall 
variability, connecting climate  change, ecosystem services – particularly water regulation – and 
land degradation . The project is proposing to use efficient irrigation technologies and water 
harvesting and storage systems to ensure access to water by farmers throughout the year . Since 
Cuba depends on harvesting water, the independent TAP requested  an assessment of the 
potential of the rainwater harvesting sche mes for increasing drought resiliency , including 
values for average monthly precipitation and tank volumes , to ensure water for the proposed 
irrigation schemes.  The proponents provided a clear estimate to the request but will need to 
ensure a proper design  with concrete water balance for each of the municipalities during 
project implementation.   
14. The construction of reservoirs  and water security systems are common practices 
around the world and do not represent an innovation. However, since the project depen ds on 
the availability of water to achieve an effective and tru ly climate resilient agriculture ( CRA ) 
system, the  ability to ensure water for the selected landscapes and communities is crucial and 
the reservoirs  and tanks are effective measures . However, the system will be effective only if o n 
the demand side there are measures to ensure that the available water will be sufficient  to 
compensate for the crop -specific evapotranspiration loss and growing deficit for each of the 
target crops in each growing season . Therefore, in each of the landscapes the selection of crops 
that are less water dependent will be a key fact or to ensure a paradigm shift.  
15. Moreover, the water will also be used by livestock that could potentially require higher 
volumes of water. Therefore, the project needs to develop a more comprehensive water analysis 
in order to ensure an accurate water balan ce scheme for the climate resilient agriculture 
systems.  
16. Under output 3, the project will promote better policy measurements to mainstream 
climate change in land use and agricultural policies and legislation. At the same time , the project 
will promote eco nomic instruments and financial mechanisms including the capitalization of a 
landscape resilien ce fund.  
17. As stated in the answers to the independent TAP questions, a n underlying incentive for 
farmers to apply resilience -enhancing practices and systems is t he sale under contract of 
agricultural products to government program mes and the possibility of accessing expanding 
supply -and-demand markets while reducing crop losses and food insecurity. The Government of 
Cuba  will ensure that production contracts are p rovided to producers’ organizations for the sale 
of harvests and  will provide technical assistance to producers to access supply -and-demand 
markets.


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 95 
 
 
18. This could potentially represent a paradigm shift in the Cuban context, as providing 
financial schemes and  market opportunities would allow farmers  and cooperatives  to sustain 
their agricultural systems without depending on governmental assistance .  
1.2.2.  Potential for knowledge and learning  
19. The project is starting by scaling the research done by the Ministry of Agriculture to 
optimize agroforestry and forestry systems for wetter and dryer areas of Cuba. Capacity 
development under component 2 will allow producers and farmers to benefit from trai ning and 
use scientific knowledge to manage climate risks and decide suitable climate 
adaptation/mitigation options. The trainings will include  technical and analytical skills to better 
understand the links between landscape resilience, ecosystem services and farming 
sustainability and productivity . Institutional staff from the Ministry of A griculture and selected 
non- governmental organizations will have the pedagogic skills to provide  extension  services on 
climate -resilience farming practices . This will be  enhanced with  accurate information systems 
to monitor and evaluate performance.  
20. Component 3.3 will build the capacities of the different institutional and organizational 
stakeholders in the project areas to coordinate their support to farmers and produce rs’ 
organizations for the implementation of the l andscape resilience policy as well as localized 
multi -stakeholder governance. Participating organizations include cooperatives and other 
producer’s associations, entrepreneurship groups,  youth groups and women’s groups . The 
project will  coordinate stakeholders at the municipality level to ensure better coordination and 
to provid e direct technical assistance  to ensure learning and knowledge -sharing . Moreover, it 
will train key organization s and farmers in the seven target municipalities to participate 
collaboratively in planning and decision -making processes that determine the management 
outcomes, outputs and activities in the production landscapes to enhance their climate 
resilience.  
1.2.3.  Cont ribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
21. The Government of Cuba has the commitment to implement the political mandate of the 
national development plan 2030, namely “Tarea Vida”,  as well as to ensure the commitments to 
the Paris A greement and it s national ly determined contribution . To do so, the government will 
create a single landscape resilien ce fund, that will  need to coordinate and integrate diffe rent 
policies at the country level and to be effective at the municipal level to reach farmer s’ 
cooperatives and especially vulnerable smallholders.  The implementation of Tarea Vida will 
contribute to create an enabling environment to mainstream climate change in the agricultural sector  
22. On the other hand, the Cuban agricultural sector is currently immersed in major reforms 
and transformations with the objective to implement new economic measures aimed at 
facilitating the development of sectoral production, while ensuring climate resilience and 
incentives for sustainable production.  This in cludes redistribution and change in land 
ownership including more responsibility by cooperatives and producers, expansion of market 
options, devolution of decision -making authority to the municipal level for planning and 
management of production , initiatin g the creation of municipal agricultural companies,  and 
ensur ing efficient value chains to support markets.  
1.2.4.  Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
23. The project will contribute to adjust ing the existing agricultural policies and regulatory 
framework to allow the inclusion of relevant climate adaptation criteria at the national and 
municipal levels.  Output 3 of the project is aiming to adjust policy and financial mechanisms to


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 96 
 
 
allow better planning, information systems and governance mechanisms  to ensure an integral 
vision of restoration and increased agricultural productivity.   
24. The governance mechanisms will allow for the implementation of agroforestry, 
silvopastoral and forestry systems. There is a need to enable a better understanding of the 
water regimes in combination with selection of the most resilient crops to be able to ensure 
productivity under the rising climate change regime.  
25. The transformation of the Forestry Development and Soil Conservation Funds into a 
single landscape resilien ce fund will provide an opportunity to create a governmental 
program me focusing on climate change resilience. However, there is a need to understand the 
sustainability of the fund in order to scale the model to the country at large.  
1.2.5.  Scalability and replicabi lity 
26. The project represents the second phase of a three- phase program me to ensure the 
climate resilience of the agricultural sector in Cuba. The first phase proved the model in six 
municipalities in two regions in Cuba  through an investment of MINAG in dif ferent agroforestry 
and silvopastoral models . The program me expects to scale the project countrywide in phase 3, 
based on the se foundations including institutional capacities, lessons learned, and financial 
mechanisms and markets promoted in phase 2.  
27. The technical side of the proposal is proven,  and the institutional capacity is in place to 
scale the model to other municipalities in Cuba. However, the scalability depends on the 
resources given by the G overnment of Cuba and other possible funding source s to the climate 
adaptation fund. Therefore, scalability depends on the ability of the Government of Cuba to 
ensure more resources to reach more farmers, cooperatives and , especially , vulnerable 
communities in other municipalities.  
1.3 Sustainable development  potential                  Scale: High    
1.3.1.  Environmental co-benefits  
28. The program me could have several potential environmental benefits , including the 
recovery of natural habitats, which will enable biodiversity conservation  in line with the Aichi 
targets and  the biodiversity convention. Forest cover will also ensure water retention and 
support soil conservation in the selected landscapes.  
29. The project will also ensure that the marabu invasive  species is controlled, allowing 
other species to grow to sustain healthy forest  and agroforestry systems . The project will 
further promote multi -cropping systems, reducing soil erosion and enhancing soil organic 
matter and carbon content .  
30. The project will also e nsure sustainable forest management. According to the 
proponents, forests in Cuba are nationally owned and managed through the state forest service. 
The state forest service establishes signed usufruct lease agreements for 25 years or longer with 
farmers w ho work and live in the forests. Farmers thus become perpetual beneficiaries entitled 
to use the forests and their lands and ensure their maintenance and management. The 
agreements are negotiated between the State Forest Service, the Local Forestry Company  of the 
territory that manages forestlands, and farmers and local communities to whom the State grants 
the land in usufruct. It is the farmer who, with his/her signature on the agreement, will develop 
forest management actions and will be responsible for e xecution of the tasks.  
31. The project is ensuring the provision of environmental services, including the diversity 
of species and pollinators able to sustain nature. Furthermore, the project is ensuring more 
efficient water harvest and irrigation systems to allow agricultural production.


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 97 
 
 
32. However, the project could potentially have some harmful effects on the environment  
from  using  tractors that could potentially compact and degrade soils and also through the use of 
herbicides and fertilizers that c ould potentially contaminate soils and water resources.  
1.3.2.  Economic  co-benefits  
33. The benefit of ensuring water provision will in  turn  secure the sustainability of the 
agriculture  systems, providing benefits to the national economy at large and to the selected 
vulnerable communities . Through this project farm households will have access to 35,734 ha  of 
reclaimed farmland for production of subsistence and commercial crops through agroforestry 
and silvopastoral schemes. Promoting agroforestry systems will increase  the yields of forest and 
agricultural product ion, favouring the local economy and impacting the agricultural gross 
domestic product .  
34. Improved and d iversified agricultural production systems will ensure food security and 
will provide opportunities to connect to markets,  generating revenues to achieve a better 
quality of life for the communities. There are also new possibilities for creat ing on-farm 
employment throughout the year , and to gener ate better cooperatives able to support local 
economies.  
35. Having access to water and irrigation will imply that agricultural production could be 
maintained throughout the year s, improving yields and avoiding economic losses during 
drought periods.   
1.3.3.  Social co-benefits  
36. The communities will strengthen their capacities to manage their land s and the ir 
agroforestry, silvopastoral and forestry systems and will be able to ensure long term benefits 
for conserving the ecosystems.  They will benefit from improved agricu ltural systems , ensuring 
revenues for their livelihoods.  
37. Communities will potentially also improve the ir diets, through  diversified food 
production and the opportunity to have more proteins from silvopast oral systems, which could 
bring potential health be nefits.  However, the project does not mention any connections to the 
Cuban program mes aimed at  ensur ing healthy and nutritious diets. More specific connections 
should be made not only to ensure healthy diets but to reduce food loss and waste in the 
country . 
38. Farmer Field Schools and the opportunity given to farmers and cooperatives to plan 
their own landscapes could improve social cohesion. Moreover, improving t he water availability 
as well as the market options will ensure more permanent and reliable income  to communities.   
1.3.4.  Gender -sensitive development  
39. The project  developed an assessment of the role of wom en in Cuba showing high levels 
of education and a strong representation in government, technical and administrative areas . It 
also promotes the inclusion of strong constituencies like the  Federation of Cuban Women, which 
is open to  all Cuban women aged  15 and over , including  representation from the national level  
and the N ational Association of Cuban Peasants, which has contributed to  progress by 
developing a strategy for justice and gender equity in the community of peasant s. According to 
the proposal, d espite the ach ievements, there are still numerous gaps and inequities, especially 
at the level of collective and individual practices, traditional gender conceptions and stereotypes typical of a patriarchal culture.  
40. The Northern Zone of Villa Clara/Matanzas together with the Southern Zone of Las 
Tunas, have 197 agricultural cooperative entities that are dedicated to agriculture as their


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 98 
 
 
fundamental activity in each of the territories where the project will be implemented. These 
cooperatives have altogether  18,614 members of which 15  per cent  are women. 
41. The project provides an action plan that stipulates the main roles of women and men in 
the context of the project , aspiring to have equal participation of both genders  in th e different 
activities including jobs  and economic opportunities offered by the project.  
42. The project will also ensure equal access to information and to education, technical 
knowledge and services and technologies. Equal opportunit ies to participate in go vernance 
mechanisms will be promoted. Moreover, the project will guarantee the political participation of 
the Federation of Cuban Women as an ally  to propose agendas that position women's rights in 
at least four key dimensions: e conomic and labour  rights, access and control of resources , 
prevention of gender -based violence  and s ocial co -responsibility of care . 
1.4 Needs of the recipient                                Scale: High   
1.4.1.  Vulnerability of the country  and vulnerable groups  
43. Cuba  is a small island developin g State with a population of more than  11 million people. 
The Cuban archipelago consists of the island of Cuba, Isla de la Juventud and more than 1 ,600 
islands, islets and cays, which altogether cover a surface area of 110,922 square kilometres . 
Since 1965, the State has been governed by the  Communist Party of Cuba. The economy is 
dominated by the tourism industry and the exports of skilled labour , sugar, tobacco and coffee. 
The country is divided into 16 provinces and 168 municipalities, including the special 
municipality of Isla de la Juventud.  
44. According to the Climate Change Vulnerability Index, Cuba is classified as “high risk”,4 
facing serious imp acts from climate change .5 In addition to  the rise in temperature and 
increasing rainfall variability, Cuba is also being affected by higher frequency of hurrican es. 
Farmers have been exposed to droughts, torrential rainfall , flooding and landslides, saltw ater 
intrusion, and  extreme temperatures that have impacted their agricultural production and 
caused  significant economic losses. The country has suffered from severe recurring droughts ( in 
the years 2004, 2008  and 2009) and the water balance and relative humidity has been affected. 
The project has selected seven  municipalities that have been most affected and are therefore 
more vulnerable to climate change, mostly in the e astern region . This has resulted in the 
decrease in agricultural productivity and the reduction of  agricultural and pastoral areas, 
making them more prone to the invasion of m arabu.  
45. The project document presents future climate scenarios predicting a temperature rise of 
4 °C and a decline in rainfall between 15 and 63  per cent  for years 2050 -21006 with a 
consequent decrease in the country’s  main crops like sugarcane, beans, rice, manioc and maize. 
Moreover, according  to appendix 2.4 of the feasibility study, livestock  will be also affected and  if 
continuing with its current business -as-usual model, the dominance of C4 grasses would 
produce higher methane emissions from enteric fermentation of ruminants.  
46. Cuba has limited access to global markets and international financial institutions, 
limitin g the acquisition of machinery and technology to support climate resilient agriculture. 
Cuba has faced  severe obstacles to generat ing sufficient  fiscal resources or to obtain 
international loans. Whi le Cuba has good technical capacity to ensure the transfo rmation of the 
 
4 Corporación Andina de Fomento, 2014. Índice de vulnerabilidad y adaptación al cambio climático en la región de 
América Latina y el Caribe.  
5 Segunda Comunicación Nacional a la Convención Marco de las Naciones Unidas sobre Ca mbio Climático. La Habana 
2015.  
6 PRECIS modelling (Centella et al 2008) in Cuba, SNC to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (2015); and Somoza J. de la Colina (2018)


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 99 
 
 
island into a more resilient agricultural model , the limiting factor is the availability of financial 
resources to transform its current agricultural model in to a more climate -resilient model.  
47. Cuba is also one of the countries with the high est level of overweight and obese persons 
in Latin America and the Caribbean; as a result of the lack of healthy and diversified food, 42 per  
cent of the Cuban population is overweight : of these, 47 per  cent are female,  37.6 per cent are 
male  and 13 per  cent are children. At the same time, the population of Cuba is one of the oldest 
in the r egion  with  20.4  per cent  aged  60 years or older.  
48. The independent TAP inquire d about the relation of this project to the promotion of 
healthy diets and food loss and wa ste. FAO answered that , with their support and th at of the  
World Health Organizati on, the Government of Cuba is implementing several program mes to 
improve people’s nutrition through national food production and by reducing food lo ss and 
waste and dependenc e on imported food. There is a National Committee for the Reduction of 
Food Loss and Waste , (CNPDAC) with FAO acting as the secretariat. The program me supports 
the Integrated Productive Program me for Urban, Peri-urban and Family Farming, the M unicipal 
Self-supply Food Plan and a program me for the development of small- scale agro -industry.  
49. There is an urgent need to link the proposed project with the Municipal S elf-supply Food 
Plan, which aims to diversify healthy and nutritious food and the program mes on food loss and 
waste. The food systems in Cuba will need to involve all the relevant projects to ensure better 
livelihoods under a climate change lens.  
1.4.2.  The need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity  
50. Despite the resource limitations of the Government of Cuba, it is willing to put resources 
into the project as co -financing and to continue funding the adaptation fund in the future. The 
Government of Cuba is  known to have an excellent educational system and therefore to have 
adequate research and implementation capacities within its institutions, in this case, the MINAG . 
However, due to the need to ensure food security within the island and have some additional 
revenues from the agricultural sector, especi ally in terms of sugar and tobacco , the aim  has been 
mostly to increase  production rather tha n promot e climate -resilient agriculture. Therefore, the 
project is aiming to ensure that a climate focus is given to rural agriculture and to mainstream climate ch ange within its institutions.  
51. Moreover, a new approach to markets and financing is needed to  ensure that producers, 
cooperatives and small holders will  have additional revenues after their food security is assured 
from the selling of surplus production , to improve their quality of life.  
52. The project is therefore dedicating one component to strengthen ing the capacities of 
institution s and farmer s to improve ecosystem services through agroforestry, silvopastoral and 
forestry systems and enhance t he climate resilience of production landscapes with significant 
capacity -building. Relevant stakeholders need to understand climate change and its effects on 
agroecosystems and production landscapes.  MINAG  will strengthen and intensify its training -
and-visit system, through farmer field schools with farm visits to provide technical assistance  
training of trainers and farmer -to-farmer exchanges.  
53. The project also propos es devot ing resources to strengthen planning, coordination and 
governance at the national and landscape level as a framework for climate -resilient agriculture 
that could be scaled up to other municipalities in the country.  
1.4.3.  Absence of alternative sources of financing


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 100 
 
 
54. According to  the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean,7 economic 
growth in Cuba slowed to 1.1  per cent  in 2018, following the already meagre 1.8  per cent  
growth recorded in 2017. This slower pace of activity reflected reduced visitor flows owing to 
the impact of Hurricane Irma on tourism infrastruct ure in late 2017 . This was compounded by 
travel restrictions imposed by the Government of the United States  of America  on its own 
nationals and by a moderate fiscal adjustment. As a result, the fiscal deficit edged up to 8.8  per 
cent  of gross domestic prod uct from 8.6  per cent  in 2017.  
55. Cuba has limited  access to international financial institutions and faces  significant  
obstacles in importing the machinery and technology that could support  adaptation of 
agricultural production to the evolving impacts of cl imate change. Cuba’s ability to generate 
sufficient fiscal resources is hindered by the account deficit of the balance of payments, bank 
deductions on foreign transfers and the high degree of debt maturity, all of which reduce its 
ability to obtain financi al resources to mainstream climate change in its agricultural strategy.  
1.5 Country owne rship                     Scale: High  
1.5.1.  Alignment with national climate strategy  
56. In April 2017, t he Government of Cuba approved the National Plan to Confront Climate 
Change, namely “Tarea Vida: Plan de Estado para el E nfrentamiento al Cambio Climatico – 
PECC”. The p lan establishes national priorities for the short (2020), m edium (2030) and long 
term (2050 and 2100). Tarea Vida include s five priority actions , including the need to address 
adaptation in the agricultural sector. Th e plan also prioritizes the sustainable use and protection 
of water and soil resources; the upgrading of Cuban agriculture; the conservation and 
protection of forest resources; land use planning with emphasis on human settlements; and the 
protection of biodiversity.  
57. The Tarea Vida is coordinated by  the Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment  
(CITMA ) and its Executive Environmental Agency (AMA),  ensuri ng that science -based climate 
change solutions will be mainstreamed in the Cuban development agenda.  
58. In November 2015, Cuba presented its n ationally determined contribution  to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change , listing six priority actions , including 
“incorporating the adaptation dimension into programs, plans and projects related to food 
production, integrated water management, land management, forestry, fisheries, tourism and health ”. Cuba ’s emissions are mainly concentra ted in the agriculture and energy sectors , 
accounting for 76 per cent  and 15  per cent  of the country’s emissions . The forestry sector has 
shown sustained growth with  forest coverage increased from 14  per cent  of the country’s 
surface area in 1959 to 29  per cent  in 2013. Currently, it is estimated that Cuban forests have a 
sequestration capacity of approximately 14.3 million tonnes of CO
2 per year, according to data 
from the latest GHG inventory.  
1.5.2.  Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to del iver  
59. FAO , the accredited entity, is a specialized agency of the United Nations that leads 
international efforts to defeat hunger. The goal of FAO  is to achieve food security for all and 
make sure that people have regular access to enough high -quality food to lead active, healthy 
lives. FAO has been supporting Cuba since 1978 , when they officially opened a representation 
on the island.  FAO has a recognized capacity to support food and land use activities promoting 
conservation  and climate resilient, sustainable agriculture as a way to increase productivity, 
adapt and build resilience of food systems and, wherever possible, reduce GHG emissions. FAO 
 
7 Economic survey for Latin America and the Caribbean – 2019. Economic commission for Latin America and the 
Caribbean - ECLAC .


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 101 
 
 
has supported projects for climate adaptation and mitigation worldwide and has l ed and 
managed numerous projects in Cuba in coordination with the government.  
60. MINAG is responsible for proposing and implementing policy on the use, tenure and 
sustainable exploitation of the agricultural areas  of the country, and for agricultural and fore stry 
production, to meet the needs of the population, industry and for export. MINAG is responsible 
for the policies relating to use, conservation and improvement of soil; ownership and 
possession of agricultural and forestry land; plant health; veterinary  medicine; conservation, 
management and rational use and sustainable development of the country's livestock  and forest 
resources; mechanization and irrigation of the production program mes for which  it is 
responsible; livestock and forestry agricultural pro duction activities; the industries and profit 
activities related to  rice, tobacco, citrus fruits , coffee, apiculture products, animal feed, forestry  
and poultry ; and the activities of collection usage  of agricultural and forestry products.  
Therefore, MINAG  is responsible for all the activities relating to this project.  
61. For the governance and strategic decisions of the project, a national project steering 
committee will be established, composed of ministers from the Ministry of Foreign Trade and 
Investment , CITMA , MINAG and the FAO representative in Cuba. The National Project Steering 
Committee  will be chaired by MINAG.  
62. The project will have a project coordination committee composed of the National 
Project Director, technical representatives from MINAG and FAO, and the National Project 
Coordinator. The project coordination committee will serve as a key communication channel 
between the National Project Management Unit and key  local stakeholders , and it will assist in 
the implementation of the stakeholder participation plan. The project coordination committee 
will be accompanied by national technical and scientific institutions (extensionists, academia) 
and provincial coordinat ors.  
63. The National Project Management Unit  will establish three provincial project 
management units ( in Las Tunas, Villa Clara and Matanzas/Los Arabos) to ensure sound 
implementation at the  provincial level. These units will be advised by the provincial de legations 
of MINAG, CITMA, National Association of Small Farmers, Council of the Provincial Administration, Council of the Municipal Administration , and academic and scientific 
institutions.   
1.5.3.  Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant s takeholders  
64. The project presents evidence of several consultation meetings and stakeholder 
workshops that took place between 2017 and 2018. The consultations involved national and 
regional authorities, civil society organizations, cooperative producers and  representatives 
from the communities. The meetings involved sharing ideas on the project purpose and expected impacts and exchange aspects on gender, attention to young and more vulnerable 
people.  
65. The project consultation plan proposes to continue the consultation with the interested 
parties during the first months of implementation, mainly to conclude the identification of risks 
and guarantee the compliance commitments of the socio -environmental safeguards . In general, 
the design process will need to f urther define the acti vities and sub -activities, the 
implementation areas and the specific details of the interventions.  
66. In this context the consultations will need to further involve critical institutions like the 
Agroforestry Institute; the Institute for Research on Grasses and Forages; the Livestock Department of the Ministry of Agriculture; the Department of Science and Technology, 
Innovation and Environment of the Ministry of Agriculture; the Institute for Fundamental 
Research on Tropical Agriculture;  Institute of Soils; Center for Research on  Animal 
Improvement; Institute of Agricultural Engineering; Institute of Plant Health; and u niversities as 
well as farmers, including women farmers and farmer cooperatives.


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 102 
 
 
67. Moreover, consultations will need to be developed to ensure better coordination across 
the proposed programme and the Cuban and FAO program mes on healthy and nutritious diets 
and food loss and waste.  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale: Medium -high  
1.6.1.  Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
68. The project is requesting a total GCF financing of USD 38.2 million in the form of grants, 
with co -financing of USD 81.7 million, which will be provided in Cuban p esos by the executing 
entity ( MINAG ). It is worth noting that the accepted conversion rate is USD 1 per one Cuban 
peso.  The project will only reach seven municipalities and a limited number  of beneficiaries , 
implying a high ratio of investment per number of beneficiaries . 
69. The project has a well- developed economic and financial cost -benefit analysis that was 
carried out for the four agroforestry production modules and the two proposed silvopastoral 
modules.  The flows of costs and benefits for the situation with and without th e project were 
forecast for a 20 -year period, which includes the 7 -year project implementation period.  
70. Market prices of inputs and outputs were considered for the projection of costs and 
benefits, as well as reference values for ecosystem goods and services obtained from peer -
reviewed sources. A 20 -year horizon was considered given the type of investments, as this  
reflects the full income flow and the project lifespan. The analysis was completed with a financial discount rate of 12  per cent  and the following percentages of project area 
incorporation were considered: 10 per cent  of the area was incorporated into the project in year 
one, 20 per cent  in year 2, 30  per cent  in year three , and 30  per cent  in year four , which means 
that the full incorporation is completed in year five with the remaining 10  per cent .  
71. The proposed models proved to be financially viable exc ept for the natural regeneration 
model that is focused on the conversion of marabuzales into forests through assisted natural 
regeneration. The incremental net present value and the internal rate of return (IRR) ranged 
between US D 1,998 (IRR of 2.45  per ce nt) and US D 82,430 (IRR of 29.52  per cent ). The Annual 
Incremental Equivalent net present value, which is equivalent to the yearly incremental net 
present value, ranges from US D 268 to US D 11,036. The results show that the models generate 
benefits for farm er families that are higher than the investment costs.  
72. On the other hand, an economic analysis was performed to evaluate the incremental 
benefits of the project for society. The analysis consider ed two types of benefits: (i) commercial 
benefits derived fr om increases in the production of climate -resilient  agroforestry and 
silvopastoral systems;  and (ii) the non -commercial benefits associated with the provision of 
ecosystem services as a result of the activities of landscape restoration, considering indicat ive 
monetary values for the provision of these services (per hectare/year). This analysis separated 
the benefits of carbon sequestration and storage from other climate benefits.  
73. The two indicated sources of benefits (agricultural production and climate) we re 
aggregated to obtain the overall estimation of the economic value of the project , considering the 
total investment cost of US D 119.9 million. The economic benefit for the entire project is 
estimated in US D 22.469 million, with an internal rate of return of 15.4  per cent . From this 
economic benefit the project estimates that 23.53  per cent  are global in nature, relating to the 
provision of ecosystem services in the form of carbon sequestration, and the remaining benefit 
is in the form of increased resilience of agriculture.  
74. It is worth mentioning that 40  per cent  of GCF funds will be used to purchase essential 
machinery, equipment, and inputs,  including tractors, retrovators and several additional items  
inclu ding chainsaws, manual tillage equipment, soil laboratory equipment and office equipment , 
as well as cars and motorcycles.


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 103 
 
 
75. Thirty -three per cent  of GCF  funds will be used for the construction of 11 ,362 small-
scale water systems and 452 excavated reservoirs  and 896 drip irrigation units with electric 
pumping units. As mentioned above, the independent TAP asked questions on the water balance 
to ensure water provision during the year, receiving accurate estimates.  
76. The Cuban co -financing resources are paying pr imarily for the labour cost s of workers 
and technicians  employed by MINAG and the National Forest Development Fund .  
77. Given the lack of other sources of finance, GCF funds  will provide a  genuine  opportunity 
for the Cuban government to acquire machinery and equipment. The machinery and equipment 
to be acquired with GCF co-financing will be distributed and managed by the integrated basic 
technical services business units, located in each of the seven municipalities of the project 
intervention area ; the fee to be charged for the service provided will be defined by the 
UEBIST/municipalities according to the existing cost sheets. Each integrated basic technical 
services business unit  must have an operations and mainten ance plan to ensure the provision of 
services efficiently , focusing on sustainability.  
78. According to the general operations and maintenance plan , the Cuban Government will 
finance 100  per cent  of the operations and maintenance costs of the project results b eyond 
seven years, estimated at USD 12,690,33.   
79. However, the project is not clear on how the Government of Cuba will  ensure that the 
areas that have been cleared of m arabou will be maintained, as the idea is to scale the model to 
other areas using the marabou brush cutter, rotavator and trailers. Moreover, the project will 
need to maintain s ilvopastoral  and agroforestry  systems , including harvesting, replacement and 
planting, cultural work, fertilization, pest control, pasture renewal, as well as implementing 
environmental measures and safeguards for sustainable development and strengthening of 
climate resilience .  
80. In the view of the i ndependent TAP, the third phase of the project will demand large 
amounts of resources, including the maintenance of the water facilities and irrigation systems 
as well as the silvopastoral and agroforestry systems. This will add to the ambition of the 
Government  of Cuba  to scale the model t o other municipalities, with equipment that will have 
deteriorated but still  has a useful lifespan . Therefore, there is a need to have a more robust plan 
to ensure the sustainability of the project interventions  after project completion.  
81. According to the answers given to the questions from the  independent TAP, at the 
beginning of the 1990s, the Cuban administration owned 80 per  cent of agricultural land with 
the remainder in the hands of cooperatives and the private sector. This ratio has changed over 
the past years and today cooperatives have been granted 80 per  cent of the lands, with an 
agreement to freely use them for a 20 -year  period extendable to another 20 years ; the Cuban 
administration own s the remainder. The more recent market -driven policies are allowing 
farmers and cooperatives to sell their agricultural products under their own pricing agreements  
directly to hotels and tourist companies in general, including restaurants.  
82. If cooperatives and farmers are able to  have revenues from increased agricultural 
productivity, they might be able to pay for agricultural services and equipment  to ensure 
sustainability of the interventions. However, the proposal also states that the G overnment of 
Cuba will offer direct govern ment contracts to incentivize farmers who opt to practice more 
climate -resilient production.  This implies that  even though there is a willingness to have a more 
open , market -driven economy for farmers, they will , however, continue to depend on 
governmental decision s in terms of markets and prices.   
83. Therefore, to allow for greater financial and economic sustainability, the project will 
depend on government polic ies and market -driven reforms.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 104 
 
 
84. The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve the project , subject to the 
following condition : 
(a) Prior to the second disbursement in respect of the project , the a ccredited entity shall 
submit to the Secretariat a report, in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat , which contains:  
(i) A detailed report with  improve d water balance estimates and projections, 
calculated on the basis of well- established methodologies,  in order to sup port 
the implementation of the project, including  in respect of : (i) the construction of 
the reservoirs  and drip irrigation systems as well as the water security systems;  
and (ii)  the selection of  more diversified crops that are less water -dependent 
based  on a crop -specific evapotranspiration analysis; and  
(ii) An analysis of GHG emission reductions resulting  from  the food supplements 
provided to livestock  under  sub-activity 1.2.1 .  
85. The independent TAP further recommends that the project coordinate actions with the 
country program mes aiming to ensure healthy diets and tackle food loss and waste, 
incorporating  pilots in each of the municipalities.


---
*Page 105*
---

GCF/B.25/02/Add.03  
Page 105 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP12 6) 
Proposal name:  Increased climate resilience of rural households and communities 
through the rehabilitation of production landscapes in selected localities of the Republic of Cuba (IRES)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Impact potential  
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
FAO confirms its intention to follow the recommendation by the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel (iTAP ) and  carry out an analysis of viable options to reduce the carbon 
footprint  of tractors and agricultural inputs , including a possible shift towards using bio -
inputs. This will be carried out during the inception phase of the project and  take into account 
local conditions.  FAO will share the  results with the Secretariat.  
Concerning the provision of food supplements for livestock, FAO confirms it will comply with 
the condi tion provided by iTAP and will provide additional details and calculations of GHG 
emissions  prior to the second disburseme nt. 
FAO would like to confirm that the number of direct beneficiaries is 51,713, including 23,788 women. This will be adjusted in the respective documents . 
Paradigm shift potential  
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
FAO confirms its intention to  follow the recommendation by the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel (iTAP ) and  carry out an analysis of viable options to reduce the carbon 
footprint of tractors and agricultural inputs, including a possible shift towards using bio -
inputs. This will be carried out during the inception phase of the project and take into account 
local conditions.   FAO will share the results with the Secretariat.  
As specified in the project feasibility study and implementation plan, FAO will ensure a proper design with con crete water balances for the proposed irrigation technologies and 
water harvesting and storage systems for each of the municipalities. The studies and water analyses will take into account crop -specific evapotranspiration to develop site -specific water 
balances .  This will form the basis to determin e the climate resilient crops  and livestock water 
needs of the different  modules .  
The project sustainability is ensured through strong government commitment. This GCF proposal is part of a broader program initia ted by the Government of Cuba (GoC), which has 
directly originated in government policies for climate change adaptation and mitigation and is aligned with the Ministry of Agriculture’s strategies for agricultural development.   
Sustainable development potential  
FAO takes note of the assessment. As part of its engagement in Cuba for the past 40 years and its mandate, FAO will continue to work alongside government counterparts and in 
cooperation with relevant stakeholders and farmers to ensur e that the project contributes to 
ensuring healthy and nutritious diets . In addition, it will take into consideration the increased


---
*Page 106*
---

  
       GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 106 
 
 
 need and opportunities offered by tackling food loss and waste directly in relevant project 
activities, particularly those f ocused on farmer training in Farmer Field Schools, which will be 
established or supported through the project.  
Needs of the recipient  
FAO takes note of the assessment.  
FAO commits to ensuring appropriate linkage of the proposed project with the Municip al Self -
supply Food Plan, which aims to diversify healthy and nutritious food and the programmes on 
food loss and waste. In addition, FAO will seek relevant coordination with other projects 
focusing on food systems, agriculture and related sectors to foste r an exchange of lessons 
learned and take advantage of synergies to build resilience and facilitate adaptation to 
climate change while contributing to reducing emissions.  
Country ownership  
FAO takes note of the assessment.  
As per the proposed implementation plan of the project, FAO will further define the activities, 
sub-activities, implementation areas and specific details of the intervention, involving 
relevant stakeholders and in consult ations with critical r esearch institutions, government 
departments, ministries and centres  as well as universities, farmers, including women 
farmers, farmer cooperatives.  
As for all its projects and programmes, FAO will ensure that this GCF Funding Proposal is 
implemented in coordination with any other relevant programme s (Government or resource 
partner funded).  All necessary consultations  will take place to incorporate other wor k being 
implemented  on healthy and nutritious diets and on food loss an d waste.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
FAO takes note of the assessment.  
It is expected that, in areas where the Marabu will be removed, improved  practices promoted 
by the GCF Funding Proposal, will contribute to ensuring  the continued  control of Marabu.   
FAO will work closely with the government of the Republic of Cuba and the Ministry of 
Agriculture to mobilize necessary support and resources to ensure project scalability.  This 
GCF proposal is part of a broader program initiated by the Government of Cuba (GoC), which 
has directly originated in government policies for climate change adaptation and mitigation 
and is aligned with the Ministry of Agriculture’s strategies for agricultural development.   
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
FAO thanks the independent Technical Advisory Panel for its review of the proposal and its 
recommendation to be approved by the Board . In addition, FAO acknowledges the condition 
put forward and confirms that prior to the second disbursement in respect of the project, it 
will submit to the Secretariat a report which contains:  
a) A detailed report with improve d water balance estimates and projections, calculated on 
the basis of well -established methodologies in ord er to support the  implementation of  the 
project, including  in respect of : (i)  the construction of the reservoirs and drip irrigation 
systems as well as the water security systems and (ii)the selection of  more diversified


---
*Page 107*
---

  
       GCF/B.25/02/Add. 03 
Page 107 
 
 
 crops that are less water -depende nt based on a crop -specific evapotranspiration analysis; 
and 
b) An analysis of GHG emission reductions resulting from  the food supplements provided to 
the livestock  under sub -activity 1.2.1.   
In addition, FAO, in collaboration with relevant governmental and o ther stakeholders will 
ensure the project coordinates actions with country programmes contributing to healthy 
diets and tackling food loss and waste, incorporating, where relevant and feasible, pilot 
activities in target municipalities.


---
*Page 108*
---

FUNDING PROPOSAL TO THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND  
-IRES- CUBA-   
INCREASED CLIMATE RESILIENCE OF RURAL HOUSEHOLDS 
AND COMMUNITIES THROUGH THE REHABILITATION OF 
PRODUCTIVE AGROFORESTRY LANDSCAPES IN SELECTED 
LOCALITIES OF THE REPUBLIC OF CUBA  
ANNEX 8 . GENDER ANALYSIS  
N
ovember 2019 
Republic of Cuba  Gender documentation for FP126


---
*Page 109*
---

1 
 Contents  
Part I: Gender Analysis/Evaluation…………………………………………………………………………………………….2  
  
1.1 Basic Statisti cs at country leve l….……………………………………. …………………….………………..4  
 1.2 General information at country level ……………………………………………………… .……. .………7  
 
 1.3 General information at the Zone of influence of the Project ………………………………… .11 
 
1.4 Expected roles of women and men in the context of the project……………… .....……….13  
  
Part II: Gender Action Plan……………………………………………………………………………………………..………..1 7


---
*Page 110*
---

2 
 Part  I: Gender Analysis/Evaluation  
 
Cuban society has made important advances in terms of women's participation and protagonism  in the 
economic, social and political spheres, because women have been given the necessary conditions and opportunities to improve their social status. This is largely due to the political will of the Government, the 
unconditional support of the Federatio n of Cuban Women and women's activism, which have been 
expressed in the Constitution of the Republic, labour legislation, the Family Code and other legal norms and policy documents that protect and enhance women's rights on an equal footing with men.  
 
Duri ng the project preparation stage, a preliminary gender evaluation was carried out, which was 
summarized in a document that shows the characterization and gender analysis in the areas defined to 
implement the project, based on the perception and information  handled by the people contacted in the 
territories and the analysis of various documents and data offered by local actors.  
 
The aforementioned document included:  
- Characterization of the Gender Context in Cuba.  
- Cuba's achievements in the area of gender e quity.  
- Gaps and stereotypes that reproduce gender inequalities  
- Characterization of territories from different dimensions.  
- Proposal for a gender action plan  
 The inputs gathered from this analysis have served to complete most of this annex. Cuban women have space to insert themselves and participate in the country's development process as both protagonists and beneficiaries of policies and programmes that have taken place over the past 60 years. This is expressed in the following successes:  
 
• Female population with high levels of education. They represent 65.7% of the technical staff in 
the country and 80.8% of the administrative staff.  
• Female composition of Pa rliament: 53.2%
1.  
• 49 women deputy ministers; 8 ministers (out of 21 possible ministries in 2017).  
• Women represent 40% of the State Council.  
• Female composition of the Provincial Assemblies of People's Power: 40.6%.  
• Percentage of Presidents of Municipal Assemblies: 33.4%.  
• Percentage of Vice- Presidents of Municipal Assemblies: 55.95%.  
• The Federation of Cuban Women (FMC), made up of all Cuban women over the age of 14, from a structural point of view, with representation from each constituency to the natio nal level.  
• Existence of a National Association of Cuban Peasants, ANAP, which has made progress on the 
basis of a strategy for justice and gender equity in the peasant sector.   
• Existence of a National Action Plan to comply with the Beijing agreements.  
• Achievements in sexual and reproductive health (specific programmes for women's health).  
• Cuba's participation in international mechanisms and agreements (CEDAW, World March of 
Women, etc.).  
• Right to abortion.  
 
1This figure corresponds to the current legislature and the remaining data on women in territorial government 
structures from the previous legislature (2018).


---
*Page 111*
---

3 
 • Visibility of the problem of violence, sexual and gender diversity.  
• Visibility of a new family model with recognition of paternity rights.  
• Women make up 60.5% of university graduates, and they are the ones who enter Higher 
Education the most. The panorama of university graduates by branches of scien ce has varied, with 
a greater presence in careers that were previously masculinized, such as Natural Sciences and Mathematics (53.7%), Agricultural Sciences (51.7%) and Technical Sciences (41.8%). The branch of knowledge with the least female presence is P hysical Culture (20.8%). 56.2% of university 
women participate in postgraduate education. In technical and vocational education, boys are in the majority, which guarantees them the most immediate insertion into the labor market and the acquisition of incom e, but not the highest level of specialization. Every year, women make up 
more than 60% of pre -university graduates, which is the main source of higher education
2.  
 
However, they face challenges in reconciling their productive work and political participa tion with 
caregiving tasks, given that obstacles persist to the full scope of their rights by male employers, and that women have traditionally been considered in the role of caring for the family, or linked to domestic work. Processes such as population a geing and internal and external migration limit women's social and labor  
participation, since they traditionally dedicate more of their time to caring for children, the elderly and the disabled. In other words, women have been incorporated into agricultura l work, without this having 
implied a revision or redistribution of care work within households.  
 
At the same time, the most common family structure in the country has a tendency for most domestic 
and care work to be carried out by women. This phenomenon i s accentuated in rural regions.  
 According to the Statistical Yearbook of Cuba of 2016, of the total number of people employed in agricultural cooperatives, women represent 15.7%. They also account for 15.9 per cent of the total 
number of persons engaged in agricultural, livestock and forestry activities. In rural areas, women are the 
majority in services such as education and public health, which together account for more than half of the 
State's public employment
3.  
 
In the Cuban context from a gender perspective, while significant achievements have been made, there 
are still numerous gaps and inequities, especially at the level of collective and individual subjectivities and 
practices, traditional gender conceptions and stereotypes typical of patriarchal culture. On the other hand, some of the social changes experienced by women and men fail to completely counteract the beliefs and myths of this hegemonic culture, manifesting themselves then in different spaces, where asymmetrical power relations are still perpetuated, which have an impact on the ills experienced by men and women. In this sense, Cuban reality reveals contradictions that demonstrate that gender relations in different social spheres are undergoing process es of change, both in their values and in certain social and 
cultural behaviours.  
 The objective of this analysis is to help identify multiple causes of vulnerability, including gender inequality 
in the context of climate change and agro -biodiversity, and to take advantage of the diverse knowledge 
and capacities within communities/households that can be used to make them more resilient to climate -
related risks and impacts.  
 
2The information referred to in this paragraph was taken from the National Survey of Gender Equality in Cuba, 
2016.  
3Analysis carried out according to the cr ossing of information from the tables of the Statistical Yearbook of Cuba 
2016, edition 2017. Specifically, the tables referring to Employment and Population.


---
*Page 112*
---

4 
  
1.1 Basic Stat istics at country level4 
 
Although women in Cuba are recognized and taken into account at the social level and have reached the 
public space, inequalities still persist in the opportunities and conditions in which they access public 
positions and positions of greater recognition and remuneration.  It is necessary to emphasize th at the 
conditions of women in Cuba still reflect a social structure conditioned by a macho and discriminatory culture; this is especially evident in rural areas. of the country where cultural and social stereotypes are less heterogeneous and more conservat ive with respect to cities.  
 
At the same time, the most common family structure in the country has a tendency for the majority of 
the work in the home to be carried out by women; added to the fact that the social welfare and health structures (existing an d insufficient) make women more responsible than men for the care of children, 
the sick and the disabled.  
 According to the Statistical Yearbook of Cuba of 2016, of the total number of people employed in agricultural cooperatives, women represent 15.7%, t wo percentage points less than that reported in the 
same report of 2015 (17.05%). They also account for 15.9 per cent of the total number of persons engaged 
in agricultural, livestock and forestry activities. Between 2010 and 2013, more than 50,000 women lost 
their formal link with the state agricultural system in Cuba. In addition, in 30 years, more than 400,000 people will have emigrated from rural areas to the cities.  
 The largest percentage of emigration from the countryside is concentrated in men; and  those who remain 
still concentrate representation in paid agricultural jobs. By 2030, more than half of all households in Cuba 
will be headed by women, including households in rural areas.  The Cuban context from a gender 
perspective while showing some ac hievements, these survive and are confronted with countless gaps and 
inequities.  
 
Maternal 
Mortality Rate  Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)  
 Indirect  Direct  Total  
Villa Clara( central  zone ) 13.6 13.6 27.2 
Matanzas ( central zone ) 27.6 27.6 55.1 
Las Tunas(2015) ( Eastern Zone ) 45.3 30.2 75.5 
National  14.5 27.4 41.9 
 
Infant mortality 
rate (per 1000 live 
births) 5  
Municipalities of the project . Source  2015  
Zone  Municipio  Tasa  
Eastern Zone  Amancio  4.0 
Colombia  2.4 
Jobabo  1.7 
Central Zone  Los Arabos  2.6 
Corralillo  4.3 
 
4The tables referred to below were prepared by the author of the document, based on information t aken from the 
Statistical Yearbook of Cuba 2016, chapter Health and Social Assistance.  
5The available sources consulted do not show these figures broken down by sex. Data source: Chapter on Health 
and Social Assistance of Statistical Yearbook 2016, edition  2017 and Statistical Yearbook 2017, edition 2018.


---
*Page 113*
---

5 
 Quemado de Güines  5.7 
Santo Domingo  4.0 
 
 
 
Infant mortality  Mortality in children under 5 years of age 6 
Año At national 
level  Total 
National  Total in 
Villa 
Clara 
province  Total in 
Tunas 
province  Total in 
Matanzas 
province  
2015  4.3 5.7 4.8 6.5 6.4 
2016  4.3 5.5 3.5 4.7 5.8 
2017  4.0 5.5 5.6 4.9 7.5 
The official statistics consulted are not disaggregated by sex.  
Educational level 
of girls and boys  Female enrolment by 2015:  
• Primary education 48.7 per cent  
• Secondary education 50.0%.  
• University education 59. 6% 
The difference in percentages with respect to 100% corresponds to male 
enrolment, which is evidence that fewer girls than boys were enrolled in 
primary education (from pre -school  at age 5 to grade 6 at age 11) and more 
young women than men were enrolled in university (between the ages of 18 
and 24). This is due to the difference of sexes in births.  
 
Graduation from the 2014 -15 academic year:  
• Women graduating from technical and vocational education 33.5 per cent  of the total of people graduated in that category.  
• Women graduating from higher education 55 .4 per cent of the total of 
people graduated in that category.  
The above data show that in that course there were m ore women graduates 
at the higher level and less in vocational technical education  with respects to 
men , which could be read as a higher educational level in women than in men 
(highlighting some careers that were traditionally male) and a lower level in professional technical education. At this level, men are the majority, and 
therefore have a more immediate insertion into the labor market and the acquisition of income, but not the highest level of specialization. This could 
highlight a gap in terms of inco rporation into employment, since men 
generally prefer to start working earlier, in order to obtain more income, and 
women prefer to dedicate themselves to greater  educational  improvement 
before starting their employment (as paid work).  
Apparently there is no gender gap in higher education and technical studies, 
however, although women achieve higher levels of education they are not 
necessarily inserted in better paid jobs, or linked to decision making.  
Educational level of the economically active population  by sex  
 
6 Data taken from the Territorial Panorama of Cuba 2016.


---
*Page 114*
---

6 
  Of 1 090700 people with a higher level, 622300 are women, 57.5% and 
468400 are men, 42.5%.  Here there may be a gender gap for women because 
not necessarily more study means better employment and more earnings.  
 
School enrolment is 99.8% in primary  school, with no data disaggregated by 
sex. 
Adult literacy rate 
(disaggregated by 
sex) 100% women (UNESCO)  
100% men (UNESCO)  
This denotes that apparently there are no educational gaps in terms of literacy 
rate.  However, although women have the same conditions and opportunities 
as men for study and insertion into the labour market, there may be a gap in 
the type of employment to which men and women have access.  
Labour force 
participation rate 
(disaggregated by 
sex)7 Of the 4,713 thousand workers in 2015, 37% were women. The largest 
percentage of the population is located in the category of technicians and 
operators, where women occupy less than 50%. (33%) being different (with a greater presence),   
In categories  such as Administrative (63.7%) and Technical (62.7%)  with 
respect to the total number of employees in each category . In the Services  
women represent 42.7% ; of Directors women represent 36. 5 %;  and among 
Operators 15.8 %.  In 2015 Women working as professi onals and technicians 
of the total civil state sector 67.2%8. 
 
Employment rate 
(disaggregated by 
sex)9 In general, at the country level, the total number of women employed in the 
economy has remained in the order of 37%, with differences between the State Sector (45.3%) a nd the Non -
State Sector (17.4%).  In both cases, these 
percentages are with respect to the total persons employed in each sector (state 3262.1 thousand workers and non -state 1329). These f igures are below 
100%, given that a large part  of men are the ones with the greatest occupation 
in the recognized paid work in both sectors. The presence of women, according to the different types of economic activity ranges from sectors with a high 
female presence such as Health and Social Assistance  (68.5%) and Education 
(66.3%) to those with a lower presence such as: Mining and quarrying (17.7%), 
Agriculture, livestock, forestry (15.9% of the total persons employed in this sector , 820.9 thousand ), Fishing (14.4% of the total persons employed in this  
sector , 27.0 thousand ) and finally, Construction (11.3%).
 A gender gap may be 
considered the smaller number of women employed in the above -mentioned 
sectors, since it may generally refer to the persistence of gender stereotypes and traditionally masculinized jobs.  
 
Occupation Cuba. Statistical Yearbook 2016 (in thousands of working 
personnel)  
In the categories of occupation, whether state or non -state, the data in the 
table below, evidence that there are more men employed than women; which 
may be the reaso n for several direct or indirect causes.  
 
7 Data taken from the Reports generated by the National Statistics and Information Office (ONEI), 2016.  
8Statistics in the military sector are not public, only civil sector figures are issued.  
9Data taken from the results of the 2016 Nat ional Survey on Gender Equality and Statistical Yearbook 2017.


---
*Page 115*
---

7 
  
 total  Women  Men  % 
Women   % Men  
Total employed  4 591 .1 1 709 .6 2881 .5 37.2 62.8 
State  3 262 .0  1 478 . 8 1783 .2 45.3 54.7 
Non State  1329 .1 230.7 1098 .4 17.4 82.6 
     Cooperatives  189.9 29.8 160.1 15.7 84.3 
• Agricultural  178.5 27.6 150.9 15.4 84.6 
• Non -
Agricultural   
•      Private  11.3 2.2 9.1 19.4 80.6 
     Private  1 139 . 2 200.9 938.3 17.6 83.4 
• Of it: on its 
own  540.8 174.8 366.0 32.3 67.7 
 
Unemployment 
rate  According to Statistical Yearbook 2017  
• Women  16% 
• Men 1 .7% 
Land tenure  Although progress is being made in the process of handing over land in usufruct 
and the Cuban peasant organization (ANAP) has had a Gender Strategy since 
2005, women's land tenure in the sector has not exceeded 17.4 per cent. 
Likewise, they represent 10.9% of the total number of applications granted to 
obtain land in usufruct. In the national statistics consulted, there is no 
breakdown by sex of this indicator.  
Access to tangible 
and intangible 
assets  There are no national statistics disaggregated by sex on access to and holding 
of tangible and intangible assets. Women have equal rights of access, but their 
participation is commensurate with the low level of presence in th e agricultural 
sector. There is no known specific policy for women's access.  
Life expectancy 
(disaggregated by 
sex) Women : 81.8 (2016 , world bank)  
Men : 77.7 (2016, world bank)  
 1.2 General information at country level  
 
Legal Status of Women 
Cuban women are protected within the framework of laws and public policies, in which their rights are 
recognized. Some of them have specific articles in favor of women's rights (whether they are subjects of 
the law and with rights recognized according to r oles) such as they are:  
- The Constitution of the Republic (2019), which, among other elements, declares the State's 
protection of the family, maternity and marriage and explicitly enshrines the rights and equality 
between women and men in articles 43, 20 5 and 207.   
- The Family Code, which came into force in 1975, establishes the absolute legal equality of women 
and men in marriage (art. 24), abolishes the distinction between natural and legitimate children


---
*Page 116*
---

8 
 and defines equal rights (art. 65) and duties o f spouses towards children and in the development 
of the home (art. 26).  
- The Civil Status Registration Act and the Civil Code Act: Articles 517 and 518: widows, like male 
widowers, inherit by will the property rights over their hereditary portion. In the absence of a will, 
he enjoys a privileged position to access the inherit ance, corresponding to a portion equal to that 
of the descendants or ascendants of the deceased and, if these do not exist, receives the entire inheritance.  
- The National Plan of Action for Follow -up to the Beijing Conference, an important document 
promu lgated with the force of law, for the development of policies that favour the development 
and advancement of women in all spheres of work and in their working and family life, as well as the continuity and development of gender equality. It includes measur es or actions under the 
responsibility of each state agency to promote women's empowerment and equal opportunities.  
- The General Law on Housing, which contains regulations on the legal status of personally -owned 
housing; multifamily buildings; rural hous ing; housing located in areas of high significance for 
tourism; the Land Registry of Housing and procedures for resolving claims, declarations of rights 
and disputes concerning such property. In the case of divorced women who are co -owners of the 
matrimonial dwelling, they have full rights over it. In the absence of an agreement with the ex -
spouse, the dwelling will remain the property of both. In the absence of an agreement with the ex -
spouse, the dwelling will continue to be the property of both parties.  
- The Public Prosecutor's Office Act and the Criminal Code Act, which address the issue of gender-
based violence and its criminalization.  
- The Labour Code: which establishes the labour discipline of workers, strengthens the role of 
administrations, prov ides for acts of injustice in employee -employer relations and consolidates the 
role of trade unions in productive efficiency, women workers in the non -State sector have the right 
to demand from those who employ them an 8 -hour working day that, in accordanc e with current 
legislation, on certain days of the week may include an additional hour, provided it does not exceed 
the limit of 44 hours per week , the rights of work and social security that are conferred on the 
worker, to protect her maternity and facilitate her medical care, the pre and postnatal rest and 
care of minor children, also includes the right to men in the latter points  
- Worker's Maternity Law Decree, Paternity Law, Social Security Law: (protects working women or 
working men from their rights  in the care of infants).  
It is officially recognized that fathers can take paternity leave for the care of their children, and that this 
role does not fall solely on the responsibility of women. Since 2003, according to Decree Law 234 on the maternity of working women, not only the mother can take leave for the care of her children, but also the 
father after the first 3 months of breastfeeding. This legal norm allows the mother and father to mutually


---
*Page 117*
---

9 
 agree which of them will take care of the child until th e first year of life. Men are given the same right to 
enjoy the same advantages as working mothers.  
At the same time, there is the Federation of Cuban Women (FMC), made up of all Cuban women over the 
age of 14, from a structural point of view, with represe ntation from each constituency to the national 
level, which, since its foundation in 1960, has been and continues to be the main defender of women's 
rights and promoter of public policies in favour of their advancement and more equitable gender relations. This organization is recognized as the National Mechanism for the Advancement of Women and, 
as such, has fostered positive changes in different social spheres, encouraging greater participation in the country's development as protagonists and beneficiaries .  
The system of the Ministry of Agriculture has a gender strategy, which is merely a management tool for working towards a priority for the agricultural, forestry and tobacco sectors: the full realization and 
enjoyment of the rights, won by the Cuban revo lutionary process, for women and men. It has 6 strategic 
lines
10, some of which are progressing less quickly than others. For example: the issue of masculinities and 
follow -up, monitoring and evaluation.  
Cuban women have free access to all services that pro tect their general health. They are the ones who 
decide the number of children and their spacing, due to a wide knowledge and access to contraceptive 
methods and the right to interrupt their pregnancy, elements that grant them autonomy and allow them to ma ke decisions regarding their personal development. Special attention is currently being paid to 
reducing indicators of teenage pregnancy and maternal mortality
11.  
 Educational and health policies have ensured important achievements in sexual and reproducti ve health 
(specific programmes for women's health). Cuban women are guaranteed the right to abortion.  
 Common beliefs, perceptions and stereotypes linked to gender
12 
There is a persistence of gender stereotypes: reproduction of machista sociocultural patte rns and pre -
established gender roles (greater responsibility of women in domestic work and care of infants and older 
adults); double and triple paid and unpaid workdays for women.  
In characterizing the position and condition of women and men in rural areas of Cuba, research conducted by various specialists has shown that, in addition to the gaps and stereotypes mentioned above, there are 
some modes of functioning in the relations between them.  
 
10 1 Creation and strengthening of capacities, 2 Communication, knowledge management, innovation, 3 
Articulation, cultural incidence in communities, 4 Working conditions, health and family/work conciliation, 5 
Incidence in institutional management policies, 6 Follow -up, monitoring, evaluation and recognition, 7 Women, 
participation, leadership and empowerment and 8 Masculinities for gender equality.  
11Taken from the 2016 National Gender Equality Survey.  
12 The response elements to this question were taken from the 2016 National Gender Equality Survey and the 
Preliminary Gender Study conducted in the interventio n area.


---
*Page 118*
---

10 
 Subjectivities and collective and individual practices, tradit ional gender conceptions and stereotypes, 
characteristic of the patriarchal culture, are maintained in society, and in some cases asymmetric power 
relations are perpetuated, which have an impact on discomforts experienced by men and women. In this 
sense, t he Cuban reality reveals contradictions that demonstrate that gender relations, in different social 
spheres, are going through processes of change, both in their values and in certain social and cultural 
behaviors . 
For men, "gender equality" is promoted th rough courtesy actions towards women, the celebration of 
dates such as International Women's Day or Mother's Day, the existence of flexible schedules and 
understanding of the "situations" presented by women associated with the care of children and the elde rly. 
 
Division of labour between men and women  
 Overburdened with domestic roles limits the adequate insertion of women in the labour market, access 
to more recognized positions, better paid and/or managerial positions. The predominance of “machista” attit udes and precepts at the labor, community, and family levels hinder women's insertion, participation, 
and permanence in the labor market in the agricultural sector. All of this reproduces gender gaps in the territories analyzed.  
 The majority of women do not receive remuneration for their work in support of food production. Their participation in agricultural work is sometimes undervalued, as it is related to a part of the productive 
process, determined in accordance with the sexua l division of labour and qualified as: less effort. This 
allows them to place their work in a condition of "help", thus determining limits on their participation, 
decision -making and income generation.  Women are recognized as those who control inputs, buy  food 
and collaborate in productive activities (raising backyard animals, cleaning milking utensils, making food 
for workers, in addition to domestic work).  Sometimes they are in a subordinate relationship, which 
implies the situation referred to above as  a gender gap.  
 The division of labour is considered a gender gap, since women do not insert themselves equally with men 
and are overburdened with household tasks. For example, women are over -represented in unpaid 
domestic work (27.7% women and 0.9% men).  
 The highest levels of participation in the unpaid activities of men and women are concentrated, firstly, in the activities that integrate domestic work, which represents 63.21% (52.37% declared by men and 74.07% declared by women according to data in the results of the 2016 National Survey on Gender 
Equality) followed by care for dependent persons with 19.02 % for the total number of persons 
interviewed.  
 
There are inequalities in the use of time, as women are more overburdened in domestic and care work, which could be an obstacle to equal access to paid work. There are also gaps (expressed in hours) between 
men and women within unpaid work, in terms of caring activities. There is a difference in income between women and men: horizontal and vertical occupat ional segregation. In this sense, female participation 
(25.78%) prevails over male participation (12.26%) in all activities related to the care and accompaniment of people who require it, whether children, older adults, or people with temporary or permanen t 
disabilities. Women employed in relation to men have a difference of almost 10 hours in the time allotted 
to unpaid work, which means that even in conditions of participation in economic activity, they maintain


---
*Page 119*
---

11 
 the domestic burden, which shows the double  workday they face. This difference between men and 
women with respect to unpaid work time is intensified in the unemployed population, since women spend 
around 18 hours per week more than men on this type of work. Within unpaid work, the gap between men a nd women, expressed in hours, is also wide in terms of caring activities. Women devote 8:29 hours 
per week to the care of children, adults and older adults, the sick or persons with some type of disability 
and other members of the family. Their male peers devote 3:38 hours per week to this same type of 
activity. In households, women spend more time caring for household members under the age of 14 (5:41 hours per week) . Within these tasks, it is precisely the school support to which they dedicate the most 
time. This could be evidencing a greater female burden due to the still widespread consideration that 
women are ultimately responsible for the education and care of minor children.  
 
 1.3 General information at the Zone of influence of the Project  
 
Situation of men and women in the zone of influence of the Project
 13 
 
The information gathered showed, first of all, that in the areas where the project will be implemented, most of which are rural (47% of women in Villa Clara/Matanzas and 45% in Las Tunas of the rural population), all the gaps and inequities that were previously presented as characteristics of the current Cuban reality in terms of gender are present.  
 
At the psychological level, women in rural areas show limitations in the way they express the mselves; 
some show withdrawal and signs of damaged self- esteem. In the dialogue between men and women who 
work together, it is appreciated that they include them when they say we, while they speak of women 
placed in a position of subordination.  
 
In both ar eas of the project there are a total of 29 ,458 housewives
14, who sometimes perform invisible 
productive work. Territorial diagnoses carried out in these zones show as causes the high number of 
housewives, the lack of preparation, that is to say the lack of completion of secondary or professional 
studies; the motivation and the subordination to the demands of their spouses. It also refers to the lack of employment in the communities, insufficient transportation to move to other areas that offer the possibilit y of employment outside the home.  
 With respect to violence against women, the people interviewed in the preliminary evaluations recognize that in these areas and with greater incidence in the rural areas of the municipality, there are expressions of gende r-based violence (either by husbands or children). Within the main gender gaps identified in these 
territories are found:  
 
Analysis dimension  Identified gap  
Sexual division of labour  Women are over -represented in unpaid domestic work. Of 
the total hours worked by women, 63% are unpaid.  
 
13 Information taken from the gender characterization carried out in the in tervention zone of project 2018 . 
14 Data taken from the field study: Report on gender characterization and action plan in the project 
implementation zones.


---
*Page 120*
---

12 
 Family and social co -
responsibility  There is no reconciliation between work and family life. Of 
the total hours of unpaid work, men dedicate 9% and 
women 91%.  
Use of time  Women, on average, spend less time recreating than men, 
and when they do so within the home and simultaneously 
with other activities (e.g., listening to the radio and feeding 
animals), men recreate outside the home.  
 
Anticipated differences between men's and women's vulnerability and adapt ive capacity to climate 
change  
 
There are unanimous perceptions in these territories that women are in greater conditions of vulnerability than men due to the persistence of machista practices that perpetuate stereotypes and traditional roles of women that  put them at a disadvantage.  
 The scarce availability of water and its storage capacity is the main problem of rural women in these territories; for this reason it is an explicit basic need.  
 
Although there is no explicit differentiation of vulnerability  and risk in the people interviewed, during the 
meetings they recognize that women are more vulnerable to drought and the effects of hurricanes.  
 People do not directly recognize the relationship between gender and Climate Change, that is to say, there is no differentiated recognition between men and women in these territories, in terms of their 
vulnerability and capacity to adapt to climate change, nor which are the affects or impacts for one sex or 
the other.  
 
Gender inequalities that may be exacerbated by the impacts of climate change
15 
 Climate change can increase migration processes that involve men more (see footnote) but confine 
women to remain in communities cared for by the elderly, children and the disabled, but address 
aggravated envir onmental problems such as drought and lack of water.  
In the implementation municipalities, a ratio of masculinity (men per thousand women) is reported of 1,002 in the Central zone (Villa Clara and Matanzas) and 1,033 in the Eastern zone (Tunas).  
 
Harvest  losses and low yields due to the impact of severe climatic events and increased expression of 
pests and diseases, accentuated by climate change, reduce household incomes and living standards, 
thereby worsening the situation and increasing women's working time at home and reducing their employability; as women stay at home with care tasks and men migrate in search of higher incomes
16.  
 
 
15 According to information taken from ENIG, 2016; for all those surveyed, the 3 main problems for women today 
are: low income (72.8%), housing shortage (35.2%) and transport problems (31.8%).  Fourthly, domestic overload is 
recognised by the population as a problem for women (30 % of the population). The three main problems most 
frequently identified for men are: low income (80.4%), diffic ulties in obtaining food (38%) and housing shortage 
(36%), followed by employment and transport problems, both with 35.1%.  
16According to the Statistical Yearbook of the National Information Office 2017, internal migration behaves as 
follows in the province s of implementation: in Matanzas 1,882 men and women migrate, in Villa Clara 1,977 
women and 2,030 men and in Tunas 2,308 women and 2,340 men.


---
*Page 121*
---

13 
 In the life projects the women in the intervention area, their aspirations reflect, for the most part, an 
improvement in living conditions (construction of houses, reinforcement of transportation, sufficient water supply, others), and in the rural communities few reflect joining the work activity outside the home, prefer to work from home. They also refer to the need for seeds , the feet of young animals, credits, 
instruments to incorporate into production because there are lands. Productive planning (and 
management in general) operates vertically, without taking into account differentiated criteria of women 
and men, nor the pos sible limitations of infrastructure and technology required to achieve a specific 
productive goal. This does not favor the real participation of producers and their entities. The mechanisms of contractual agreement with MINAG (at different levels) are unsafe for both women and men, but the 
majority of those who manage to contract their productions for sale are male producers (they are the 
owners of the land and machinery).  
 However, it was not found that there is a differentiated perception of impact for me n and women of the 
effects of climate change risks and vulnerabilities. Nevertheless, they recognize that when there is a 
climatic event such as hurricanes, women are recharged because they are in charge of picking up the 
family's things and preparing the conditions for shelter. In the communities it is thought that women are more affected by drought and lack of water because they have the responsibility for domestic tasks (very dependent on water), which generates stress, while the responsibility for men ends with carrying. Inequalities with respect to the basic needs differentiated between men and women, as well as the improvement of living conditions, are some of the elements that can be increased by the impacts of climate change.  
 Although there are no f ormal restrictions on women's leadership, there are sometimes inequalities. Many 
women do not assume it because of limitations imposed by their personal relationships (marriage), or 
because of the overload of work in the home that demands a lot of time.  
From the interviews and data collected, in all the municipalities there is a greater vulnerability among 
women in the most rural areas of each territory and in those more vulnerable settlements located in areas 
affected by the CC or with imminent risks of affectations. In the diagnostic stage, no inequalities referring 
to other social groups other than those involving women were detected.  However, in addition to the 
above -mentioned inequalities, gender -based violence could also affect people's ability to adapt to climate 
change.  
 1.4 Expected roles of women and men in the context of the project  
 
Equal participation of women and men in the project is aspired to. The specific tasks will be determined 
by the will, aptitudes and aspiration of each person.  The project plans to create jobs that traditionally 
result from women's preference such as seedling management and grafting in nurseries of forest and fruit 
species, activities in mini- industries, management of collected milk and quality assessment, as well as  in 
laboratories that will be strengthened to ensure essential services to support agricultural and livestock production, among others.  It is possible that jobs may also arise for women who are traditionally male, and that they feel interest and empowerment to assume them or vice versa.  
Some elements that can be valued as roles to be played by women in the project can be linked to the recovery of the reproduction of vegetable fibers, and the women who live in the settlements can count 
on sufficient raw mat erial to develop the handicraft, be able to market it and thus improve their quality 
of life. There would also be potential in improving the capacity and working conditions in a CREE 
(Entomophagous and Entomopathogenic Reproduction Center), in linking them  to the breeding of rams, 
chickens and rabbits, condiment plants, as well as medicinal plants to be distributed to pharmacies in forest areas or in small mini- industries to favor their use in the processing and conservation of different


---
*Page 122*
---

14 
 productions such as  tomato, cucumber and some fruits such as guava and mango that develop well in 
these municipalities.  
 
The individual commitments of participation of the producers in terms of time and activities to be carried 
out have not yet been determined, but it is exp ected that a high percentage of them will work full time, 
in correspondence with the established working day (8 hours per day) during the entire duration of the 
project. Some people will surely commit their time partially in proportion to the number of are as involved 
in the project in relation to the total land they manage. However, in the detailed planning, the conciliation between paid and unpaid work will be taken into account, in order to avoid overburdening women.  
 
The project will contemplate a gender -sensitive communication strategy and will act in the restorative 
transformation of the same agro -ecosystems where the producers work, including the idle areas invaded 
by species such as marabou, therefore, they are not expected to have to move to other pl aces outside 
their current work space. So they will not have to spend additional time on mobility.  
  
Both the work time and the time destined to reach the work site cannot constitute impediments or limitations for the participation of people in the project . This element will be taken into account in the 
planning of activities with a gender perspective, in order to facilitate the incorporation of women.  
 Resources available for women and men (economic, financial, physical, natural)  
 
Inputs and some implements and means of work can be purchased freely in a network of state stores of 
the Ministry of Agriculture, but in limited lines and quantities, usually at high prices. Another way is through  cooperatives, which establish supply contracts with marketing companies and then distribute 
them to member producers. Direct access is determined by ability to pay (men generally have greater capacity) and by their role in land management (mostly men).  
 The cooperatives manage the common funds, but the producers also have their own funds for investment 
and payment of inputs and services for the crops. Credits are managed through the Banco de Crédito y Comercio (BANDEC), which has an equal granting policy, but in dependence on the payment and support capacity, which is more favorable for men.  
 As for liquid money, women who are not salaried receive what their husbands allocate to household expenses and may or may not receive a smaller percentage for personal expenses. Some women have a 
share in the destination of income, but most do not decide what is done with the economic results of 
production. In some cases, women are the ones without decision -making power.  
 Land is accessed by inheritance or is granted in usufruct for up to 20 years, by personal request, in legal 
processes determined by territorial governments and the representations of the Ministry of Agriculture. However, in the 7 municipalities of the project, only about 1000 women are usufructuaries ( 0.86%) and 
just over 500 are owners (0.46%
17).  This makes it difficult to make production decisions. This is a gender 
gap to work on in the project.   
  
 
 
17 In these percentages there could be some bias because they were calculated on the basis of the total number of 
women resident in each municipality, whether they are of working age or not, employed or not.


---
*Page 123*
---

15 
 Municipality  Resident 
women  Owners  Usufructuaries  Presidents of cooperatives  
Corralillo  12,855  31 24 0 
Q. de Güines  10,509  8 2 4 
Santo Domingo  24,766  51 70 0 
Los Arabos  11,919  103 211 - 
Amancio R.  18,780  - 51 2 
Colombia  15,892  61 246 - 
Jobabo  20,685  274 393 1 
Total  115,406  528 997 7 
 
 
Information and opportunities necessary to participate in the project  
 
Women and men have equal access to information and opportunities to participate in and benefit from 
the project, there are no educational gaps between women and men that prevent access to understanding and access to project information Most of the beneficiaries belong to cooperatives that have an internal government system that obliges them to discuss and report on project issues in member assemblies, decisions are taken collectively, and participation follows voluntary principles. This process has already occurred in its initial stage, and should be ratified during the implementation of the project.  
The project will seek to develop a gender -sensitive communication strategy or a broad, robust and 
inclusive information and dissemination system that in a special way helps to make visible the successful experiences of men and women in the territories and to reduce some information gap that can be 
identified during implementation.  
 
 Access to education, technical knowledge, services and technologies  
 According to the policies and provisions, especially of the cooperative agricultural sector (of the National Association of Small Farmers), access to education, technical knowledge and / or updating of skills is equal.  
But in practice the participation of women in professional improvement or training once they get married is limited, mainly due to lack of time, because they are assigned to perform tasks in the home and family that overload them, becoming more difficult when they have to travel or spend the night away from home to receive training. This is a result of the lack of family co -responsibility and the (perhaps unplanned) 
distribution of responsibilities in household tasks for all members, with the understanding  that the 
responsibility belongs to all, so that all can overcome and acquire new knowledge.  
 The project has taken note of this aspect and proposes to plan the development of the majority of its 
training actions in situ, on the farms, developed by extensionists and leading producers T he services and 
technologies provided by the project will be available and accessible to both women and men on equal 
terms. They will be provided according to the capacities, needs and abilities of each of the beneficiary 
pers onnel, and special consideration will be given to the traditional disadvantageous condition of women 
in decision making for their granting and distribution, taking into account roles in the project and other factors. Gender gaps will be considered in the d istribution of technologies and access to services  
 Women's decision -making capacity depends on their position regarding land tenure, and women 
usufructuaries have the power to decide everything regarding land management, other means of


---
*Page 124*
---

16 
 production and crop s.  In cases where this is not the case, the decision -making capacity depends on their 
position in the chains of command in the cooperatives, and within the farms in dependence on relations 
with their husbands and male relatives, with limitations due to ma chismo traits that still persist.  
 
There are no political restrictions on women's active participation; however, economic restrictions can be 
seen conditioned on the payment capacities and incomes that are more favorable for men (since they are 
the ones th at are mostly employed according to employment figures referred to in previous pages of the 
document). Depending on the category of occupation at work, women and men receive equal pay for the same work, product or service.  
 
There is potential for growth in  female leadership, and the necessary actions will be carried out in the 
territory with the support of the Gender Committee of the beneficiary provinces or municipalities, in favour of increasing the level of participation of women in management positions in the cooperative 
system.  
In the project areas of a total of 197 co -operatives studied in the initial diagnostic phase, only seven 
women are presidents of co -operatives (3.6%). being under -represented, as they are 15% of the 
membership of co -operatives.  
 
There are no formal restrictions for female leadership, the limitations are those imposed by their personal relationships (matrimonial) and the limitations by the workload in the home that demands a lot of time. The policies of the peasant organizations aim to favor the promotion of women to management positions 
and through the project, spaces will be provided that contribute to this.   
This will have a positive impact on their leadership within the peasant sector, which could lead to 
promotions in the man agement positions of the cooperatives.  
 The initiatives of the peasant association (ANAP) and its gender strategy to reconcile actions to promote female leadership will be considered.  
 
Needs/priorities of women and men in the context of the project  
 
Priorities/needs were identified in a general sense, and only in some cases differentiated for men and women. For example: access to water (it is known that water is deficient, the selected areas are impacted by recurrent drought processes and in some areas the re are difficulties for access), employment (the 
sources of employment are limited to agriculture and this situation is aggravated by the inutilization of 
areas by the invasion of marabou (invasive species), and training (the remoteness of the specialized 
entities of education and training makes access difficult, processes of specialization in specific topics are 
necessary).  
 
Difficulties with access to water are identified as one of the fundamental problems of the inhabitants of 
the project areas, especially sensitive for women. To this end, the project will support measures aimed at collecting water and improving access to identified sources, such as installing water pumps for their extraction. The project will address training needs, recognizing d ifferentiated skills and knowledge for 
men and women.  
 
It will contribute to meet the needs of new jobs and aims to create some that will be affordable and the 
preference of women (example in nurseries and mini- industries). The project will plan actions to  address 
identified differentiated priorities.


---
*Page 125*
---

17 
 After the crossing of the four fundamental climatic threats that affect the Central and Eastern Zone (strong 
winds, flooding by intense rains and penetration of the sea and drought). The proposal of direct beneficiaries focuses on those Popular Councils, households and population with greater vulnerabilities 
(such as children, elderly and women) to the phenomena mentioned above. Of the total 55 Popular 
Councils (CP) (29 CP in the Central Zone and 26 in the Eas tern Zone), 10 CP are in the category of very 
vulnerable, 18 CP in the category of vulnerable and in average vulnerability 12 C P. All the foregoing defines 
34,346 vulnerable households in both zones as direct be neficiaries and thus places 102, 938 persons, 49 
per cent of whom are women, in the condition of vulnerable population.  
 
No intersectional evaluations have been carried out, an aspect that should be resolved in the initial stages 
of the project and solutions adopted depending on the results obtained. In other words, the needs or gaps of specific and vulnerable subgroups (e.g. Afro -Cuban populations) should be identified in the first stage, 
with a more specific diagnosis.  
 
The project has recognized some vulnerabilities, and has developed responses to c over them. However, 
at the beginning of the formulation, the GED approach has been used to analyze, design and implement 
proposals that generate equitable and sustainable development. In the initial stages, the problems, needs and priorities faced by women , men and specific groups for the development of response strategies, risk 
management and adaptation to the vulnerabilities to which they are subjected will be reviewed in greater depth.  
 
The project will take advantage of the experiences of men and women in key aspects such as the 
management and conservation of local seeds for the implementation of modules of agroforestry systems 
that include fruit trees and crops.  It also happens with the management of the postures in the nurseries, 
the grafting wo rk and the operation of the laboratories whose operation the project will support (for soil 
evaluation among others).  
 
The project will contribute to the reduction of stereotypes through the acquisition of means of production 
for production personnel, will  provide technologies, will ensure training processes and will generate 
traditionally female jobs to which men could have access, or will have an impact on traditional male jobs 
in which women will be able to take part, after training processes or affirmat ive actions aimed at this end. 
Gender vulnerability will also be considered and equitable access will be sought, with emphasis on support for women. An example of this are the 6 technified nurseries that will be able to provide female jobs in the nurseries  to more than 30 women.  
  
Part II: Gender Action Plan.  
 Gender mainstreaming requires not only a change of culture in inter and intra- gender relations, but also 
a political and structural scaffolding that promotes equity at all levels, as a clear message o f the priority 
given to the equal exercise of human rights for sustainable development.  
 Gender mainstreaming in territorial processes aimed at improving the quality of life and addressing vulnerabilities in the face of climate change requires a change of awareness and the articulation of key 
actors who can promote a substantive movement for gender equality in the territories.  
The idea is to propose, from the ideological to the structural and operational, a process of reorganization, development, improveme nt and evaluation of the decision -making processes, which will make it possible


---
*Page 126*
---

18 
 to respond to the differentiated needs -  basic and strategic -  of women and men. This process would 
translate into changes in the working methods of all institutions, at all le vels, with emphasis on the 
formulation of gender- sensitive policies, and based on a gender analysis within the framework of 
adaptability and resilience strategies.  
 
It is essential to guarantee the political participation of the Federation of Cuban Women (FMC) in these 
processes, as an allied organization that is able to resume its role in proposing agendas that position 
women's rights in at least four key dimensions:   
 
- Economic and labor rights, access and control of resources.  
- Prevention of gender -based violence  
- Social co -responsibility of care  
 This concerted agenda must move towards planning and programming with a gender perspective.  
 
The institutionaliza tion of this perspective, through dynamic structures, with commitments in the work 
for gender equality, such as gender committees, focal points, FMC -  ANAP brigades, is essential for 
sustainability. It is necessary that these structures have systematic spa ces for strengthening their 
capacities to promote management processes oriented towards gender equality.  
This transit, denunciation (of a problem that affects justice) -  demand (change actions) -  proposal (taking 
sides, acting, rendering accounts), must b e accompanied by the improvement of the information and 
statistical system, so that it is sensitive to gender and generational differences. This will in principle provide a baseline and provide inputs for monitoring changes and formulating policies. A comm unication 
strategy with a gender perspective will support the change in social imaginaries and practices that sustain 
gender inequalities.  
 
The project promotes social sustainability based on the need to generate tangible results for its participants with a criterion of promoting equity, which means that the results are distributed equitably 
among the participants and favor mainly disadvantaged groups.  
 The project is coherent with national policies, territorial development strategies and the interests of l ocal 
populations, aligned with social development objectives, especially with the Development Strategy of the Ministry of Agriculture until 2030 which includes a transversal treatment of gender, as well as supports the local implementation of the Gender Strategy of the Ministry of Agriculture.  
 Local and agricultural authorities in particular have identified the need to improve the conditions of the 
project's impact areas, their productive entities, social services and living conditions in many of the socially 
disadvantaged communities and rural areas.  
 An important route  that will be stimulated by the project, will be the stimulation of actions for productive 
improvement and optimal use of land that will lead to an improvement in community living conditio ns, 
associated with the generation of jobs and income in a sustainable manner, greater access to locally produced food, and the strengthening of community activities around the care and sustainable 
management of natural resources and biodiversity.  
 
The pr oject will assume an equity approach to achieve gender equality, according to the gaps identified 
in the area of intervention, from the positioning of disadvantaged groups in better conditions to generate their development, enabling their access to work, k nowledge and information, decision making, better


---
*Page 127*
---

19 
 living and working conditions. At the same time that climate resilience is improved, the solution to social 
problems is facilitated with an equity approach, since the intention is to include, from the very selection of areas, those communities with a certain level of social and economic vulnerability, and among the beneficiaries, priority is given to women for access to training activities and productive resources that 
generate income. In all areas, direct actions in the area of production -processing and commercialization - 
of food and forest resources have as direct beneficiaries small- scale family agriculture producers. Linking 
this with FAO's Gender Equality Policy (2013), which provides the framework and g uidelines for 
mainstreaming the issue in projects, recognizing the ability to articulate the needs, priorities, skills and 
knowledge of women in each of the areas, will be an important element in the project's action, so that 
each person can better face th eir situations of vulnerability before the impacts of climate change.  
 
The reduction of existing gender equity gaps is approached from a fair and equitable treatment of access to information and training, and preferential access to productive resources an d jobs generated by the 
project, from the recognition of the disadvantaged position in which women find themselves.  
 A gender specialist (consultat ) will be recruited to coordinate the implementation of the action plan and 
ensure  the mainstreaming  of gende r throughout the project.


---
*Page 128*
---

20 18Specify the increase in the baseline with respect to the goal.  
19 Baseline (BL)  Gender Action Plan  
Impact statement:  
The project will contribute to increasing resilience to climate change and sustainable development through innovation and financial incentives 
to ensure critical ecosystem services of restored productive landscapes in seven municipalities in Cuba selected for their vu lnerability to 
climate change, directly benefiting 15,968 producers of selected agricultural and livestock entities initially engaged, including 3 ,123 women. 
The direct beneficiaries, especially women, will be more resilient to climate change because they will have greater access to  means of 
production, financial resources and technologies (including renewable ene rgies), in addition to being trained and participate directly in the 
sustainable and restorative transformation of agroforestry landscapes by improving their livelihoods, access and availability  of better quality 
water, as well as greater local production of food, jobs and income.  
To
 ensure gender parity during implementation, gender equality measures will be developed for the entire project team and at all levels.  
Ou
tcome 1.0 Increased resilience and improved livelihoods and living conditions of the most  vulnerable people in communities and regions   
Indicator: Number of men and women benefiting from climate -resilient livelihood options ( BL: 0    Target: 100% of beneficiaries: 50% of them 
are women)  
Output 2.2.3: Producers trained in the restoration and management of productive landscapes for climate -resilient agriculture with gender 
equity.   
Indicator: Number of men and women benefiting from  training processes for climate resilient agriculture with gender equity18 (BL19: 0    
Target: 100% o f beneficiaries trained: 50% of them are women).  
Gaps 
according to 
gender 
evaluation Activities  Indicators and targets  Execution time Responsible  
party Year 
1 Year 
2 Year 
3 Year 
4 Year 
5 Year 
6 Year 
7 
Over 
representation of women in 
unpaid work  Implementation  with 
gender sensitivity of the 6 modules of the Project in 37,734 hectares (Outcome  1) 
-Construct
small -scale% of women attending areas 
benefited by sustainable practices that increase climate resilience ( BL: 0   Target: 90%)  x x x x x x x FAO project - 
Project Team -Ministry of
Agriculture


---
*Page 129*
---

21 W
omen are 
more affected 
by drought and lack of water because they have the 
responsibility 
for domestic tasks. 
W
omen’s 
aspirations 
reflect an 
improvement in living conditions (construction of houses, reinforcement of water security 
systems (storage facilities)  
-Improvementof access
condition s o
f
w
omen’ s
t
ransportation
(road s)Number of  women beneficed 
for small-scale water security 
system ( BL: 0   Target: 896)  
% o
f women benefitting from  
the improvement of access conditions ( BL: 0    Target: at 
least 50%)  
Establishment of 6 
nurseries of “tubetes” (1 per municipality) for the production of forest and fruit postures. (outcome 1)  
-Developmen t
o
f mini-
industries% of new jobs generated by the 
project occupied by women and men (broken down by type of employment: nurseries, mini -
industries, production, marketing and along the value 
chains). ( BL: 0  Target: at least 
50% of women)  x x x x x x 
FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture.  
Acquisition of 
productive technologies for climate resilience 
(outcome 1)  % of women benefited with 
productive resources for climate resilience in relation to total beneficiaries ( BL: 0   Target: at 
least 50%)  x x x FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture  
Design and 
implementation of a gender -sensitive 
communication and dissemination 
program or strategy.  
It will be included 
women’s life stories 
and reviews to make 1 developed gender -sensitive 
internal and external communication plan for the project  
Mid-term and completion 
report including the results of the implementation of the 
gender action plan, including x x x x x x x 
FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of 
Agriculture


---
*Page 130*
---

22 transportation
, sufficient 
water supply, others)  visible theirs 
contributions 
 (outcome 2 and 3)  the gender sensitive  
communication and dissemination program or 
strategy  
Creation or 
improvement of working conditions for the incorporation of 
women into the 
agricultural work of the modules to be implemented. (e.g. gender differentiated toilets will be created, and the conditions of existing toilets will be improved)   
Discus sion spaces / 
workshops with local managers of the agricultural sphere, local alternatives for child and elderly care such as flexible schedules (both sexes) and nursing homes will be incorporated  
(outcome 1)  Number of gender 
differentiated toilets created or 
improved.  ( BL: 120    Target: 
240) All work spaces have on e
for men and another for
women, with do or, sink, water,
lighting, etc.x x x x x x x FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture  
Gender diagnosis and 
the mainstreaming of this approach in all the stages and actions of the intervention of the Report of gender diagnosis and 
reviewed gender action plan.  
Mid-term and completion 
report including the gender 
diagnosis and the results of the x x x x FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture


---
*Page 131*
---

23 No 
intersectional evaluations have been carried out, an 
aspect that 
should be resolved in the initial stages of the project  project, showing 
concrete results.  
Alliances with local institutions and actors 
for the economic and social empowerment 
of women  implementation of the gender 
action plan   (indicators, 
methodologies, work teams, budget, communication and evaluation)  
Articulation of the 
institutions and the members of the Gender Committees or local working groups that follow up the actions of the project at the level of each benefited entity 
(outcome 3)  Number of members of Gender 
Committees created or strengthened (BL : 3  Target: 6) 
at least 3 members in the second semester of the year (one in each zone)  x x x x x x x FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture  
Ensure the presence 
of representatives of 
gender committees or 
local groups working on the issue in the project governance teams at each level. 
(outcome 3)  Representative of the gender 
committees in the National 
coordination team and in each Provincial team.  ( BL:  Target: At 
least 1 in each one)  x x x x x x x FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture  
Elaboration and 
implementation of gender action plans at the level of each beneficiary entity that 
take into account the 
basic and strategic needs, knowledge and 
skills of the Gender Action Plan document 
for each benefited entity in the 2 zones. ( BL: 0 target: at least 
85) 
M
id-term and 1 completion 
report including 1 Gender Action Plan implemented for x x FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture


---
*Page 132*
---

24 communities, 
especially women. 
(outcome 3)  each benefited entity in the 2 
zones. ( BL:  target: at least 85)  
The link 
between 
gender disadvantages and climate 
change is not 
recognized. (weak preparation of beneficiaries on gender issues and relations between 
gender and 
resilience, CC, vulnerability, etc.)  
There is no  
perception in the difference between 
vulnerability and risk, mainly by 
women  Design and 
implementation of a training, sensitization or knowledge management program 
for technical 
producers, extension 
workers  and 
beneficiary personnel in general, focused on the differentiated needs of men and women (possible topics to be included): 
Gender and CC, 
Resilience with a 
gender perspective, gender violence, masculinities) (outcome 2)  % of women that participate in 
the capacity building program. (BL: 0     Target: 100% (7,774 
women)  
% o
f the women who 
participate, that it have risk perceptio n and knowledge 
about CC ( BL: 0 Target: 90%)  
%
 of women trained who 
indicate they use at least one of the practices learned on their own forms.  ( BL: 0     Target: 
80% )  x x x x x x x FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture  
The high 
number of 
housewives Identification of a map 
of key actors working 
on gender in each 1 Mapping of key actors report  
with recommendations for the x FAO - Project 
Team -


---
*Page 133*
---

25 with lack of 
preparation.  zone to establish 
strategic alliances and 
joint actions. 
(outcome 3)  gender  action plan for each 
zone  Ministry of 
Agriculture  
Only 7 women 
are presidents of co -
operatives 
(3.6%)  Carry out a women`s 
leadership training 
workshop to promote women's exercise of 
leadership, taking into 
account their knowledge, skills and experiences, to meet their basic and strategic needs. (with the women leaders’ s participation of ANAP and MINAG) (outcome 
3) Women`s leadership training 
workshop report ( BL: 0 Target: 
At least 1 in every one)  
Q
uantity of women that  are 
leaders  ( BL: 7     Target: 14)  x x x x x x x FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture  
The women 
needs access to resources (seeds, the 
feet of young animals, credits, instruments productive) to incorporate into 
production  
 (women have 
less access 
than men to Procurement and 
investment of the 
project with a gender focus (i.e. purchases must be made according to the needs and differentiated conditions of men and women).  Prioritize the delivery of productive resources to women   
(outcome1) % of resources that are for 
women ( BL: 0   Target: at least 
50%)  
%
 of women benefiting  from  
resources  provided  (BL: 0   
Target: at least 80%)  x x x x x x x FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture


---
*Page 134*
---

26 W
omen's empowerment activities are linked to the delivery and access that the project will give to productive resources, the delivery of knowledg e 
through courses, awareness workshops and training for a better development of cognitive abilities, including leadership issue s (and empowerment 
in every way). In addition, the creation or strengths of inter- institutional or intersectoral alliances in the locality or municipality are included.  
____
________  productive 
resources)  
There are not 
national 
statistics disaggregated by sex in several 
subjects  The data and statistics 
generated by the 
project (whether productive or not) recognize needs, skills, 
knowledge and 
contributions 
differentiated by sex 
(outcome 1, 2 y 3)  100% of the information 
collection instruments are disaggregated by sex.  x x x x x x x FAO - Project 
Team - 
Ministry of Agriculture